E859B R226421 42475022 151124
blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROIT
AN Abridgment OF THE STATUTES IN FORCE and USE, MADE In the 16th, 17th, and 18th years of the Reign of K. CHARLES the FIRST, AND In the 12th, 13th, and 14th years of the Reign of K. CHARLES II. Faithfully extracted out of the said Statutes, and digested under proper Heads, With an Alphabetical Table. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1663. Cum Privilegio.
The Table. A ANniversary Fast pag. 8 Anniversary Thanks∣giving 7 Assessments 206, 207, 208, 231 Accompts of persons except∣ed in the Act of Oblivion 1 Acts confirmed 202, 203 Arrears of Excise vested in the King 3, 63 Attainder of Persons 36 Abuses in Customs 42 Accompts of Sheriffs 4 Advowsons restored 183 B BAy making 9 Benevolence 14 Bone-lace, Bandstrings, Buttons 53 Bankrupts 11 Butter 12 Books seditious, &c. 173 C COmmissioners for causes Ecclesiastical 8, 30 Clerk of the Market 21 Commissioners of Sewers 189 Confirming Judicial Pro∣ceedings 93 Customs and Subsidies 38, 42, 50, 54, 225 Covent-Garden Parochial 132 Carriages for King 17, 18 Colledge Leases 96 Corporations 228 Collectors 1, 27 Cornwal Leases 100 Coaches 23 Cavaliers 125 Chymnies 185 Cardwire 56 Cloath Woollen 109 D DEar Stealing, and kil∣ling 21 Dover Harbour 58 Drapery 109 E EXcise 57, 58, 63
F FOrests 65 Fullers earth 54, 226 Fishing 64 G GƲn-Powder 67 H HIgh Commission Court 30 Hospital Leases 96 Highways 70, 79 Hides raw 50 Hearths and Stoves 185 I IReland 85, 90, 91, 92 Judicial Proceedings 92, 93 Indemnity 135 Interest of money 220 Impositions on Beer and Ale 58 Imbroydery & Fringes 53 Iron Wire 56 Impropriations nestored 183 K KNight-Hood 95 Kings birth-day 7 Knights service 25 Kings safety and Preserva∣tion 33 L LEases 96, 100 Law Suits 204 Leather 50 M MInisters 118 Militia 117, 237 Monies and Goods vested in the King 1 Marriages 116 Master of Rolls to let leases 100 Manufactures 102, 107, 114 Money distributed 125 Merchants assurance 115 Madder 57 Melting of money 114 N NAvy orders 136 Norwich Stufs 102 Needle-work 53 Navy and Ordnance 18 O OBlivion 135 Officers assessed 125 P PArliament 147, 225 Privy Councel 28 Process continued. 92 Poll-money 155, 159 Pardon 135 Purveyance 180 Petitions 154 Pains and penalties on ex∣cepted persons 129 Prices of Wines 224 Post-Office 169 Poor Officers and Soldiers 161
Poor 163 Prize goods 2 Packing of Butter 12 Pilchard fishing 64 Printing and Printers 173 Q QƲakers 182 R REbels in Ireland 85, 90, 91, 92 Revenue of King 1, 58, 185 Regulating Corporations 228 Relief of Collectors 27 Restoring Advowsons, Re∣ctories, Impropriations, &c. 183 S STatutes continued 246 Star-Chamber 28 Statute Eliz. repealed 30 Ship-money 190 Stannary Courts 31 Salt-Peter 67 Sewers 189 Shipping and Navigation 190, 196 Soldiers to set up tra 15 Statute against Bis re∣pealed 184 Statutes confirmed 202, 203 Suits and Arrests 204 Streets London 70 Stuffs Norfolk 102 Soldiers poor 161 Silk throwing 107 Sheep 54, 226 Sheriffs 4 Straffords attainder 184 Silver coyn 114 T TErm 209 Tonnage & Poundage 38, 58 Taxes 206, 207, 208, 231 Tenures in Capite 25 Treasonable attempts 33 Tumults 154 Treason 36 Tobacco 211 Tobocco-pipe clay 54 Theft and rapine 209 U USury 220 Voluntary present to the King 14 Uniformity 212 W WEights and Mea∣sures 21 Wards and Liveries 25 Wines 221 Wooll, Woolfels, 54, 226 Wooll-cards 56 Y YArn 94, 226 York-shire Cloth 109
AN EXACT ABRIDGEMENT Of all the STATUTES In Force and Ʋse, made in the 16, 17, and 18 years of the Reign of K. Charles the first, and in the 12, 13, and 14 years of the Reign of King Charles the Second. Accompts and Accomptants. 1. Enacted, ANno 13. Car. 2. Cap. 3. All and every sums of Money, Goods, Plate, Jew∣els, Horses, Arms, Ammunition, and other things whatsoever, levied, received, or taken, since the 30. of January, 1642. by any of the late pretended Authorities, or by pretence or colour of any power, or Authority derived from them, or any of them, for any publick use, not pardoned by the Act of Obli∣vion; not vested in the King: And all Bonds, Obligations and Securities entred in for the same, are vested hereby in the King, his Heirs and Successors, and His Majesty, &c. may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have, demand, and sue for the same of all and every person and persons, their Heirs,
Executors, &c. who are accomptable for the same, or in whose hands or possessions the same were or are, as if they had been leyied or taken in His Majesties name, or to His use. II. All and every person or persons, which have received any of the aforesaid sum or sums from any Treasurers, or Receiver for publick use, by way of Imprest, to be accompted for, not discharged as aforesaid, shall be liable to accompt, and called to accompt, in such manner and form as if they had received the same out of His Majesties Exchequer, or other publick Trea∣sury; particularly, those persons who have received or collected the Revenues of any Churches, or Territories in Wales, or in the County of Monmouth, since 1648. III. That His Majesty, His Heirs, &c. shall and may from time to time issue forth such and so many Commissions, to such persons as His Majesty shall think fit, under the Great Seal, or Seal of the Exchequer, for the better discovering, levying, recei∣ving, and discharging the same. That all persons accomptable to His Majesty, shall have power and authority to sue for, levy, and recover from the par∣ties from whom the same was, and is due, and for which they are hereby accomptable, all sums of money and Arrears, as they might have recovered and levied the same, when they first grew due. Provided, This Act not to extend to call any person to ac∣compt, or question any person for goods, or other things remain∣ing in his hands, which shall not be called to accompt on some information against him, either in the Exchequer, or Courts to be appointed as aforesaid before the 24 of June 1662. the said Information to be prosecuted with effect, within twelve moneths after the exhibiting thereof. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. cap. 14. That all and every Col∣lectors, Treasurers, sub-Collectors, and under-Treasurers, and all and every other Casheers, Officers, Deputies, Receivers; And all and every Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Captains of ships, Officers and Mariners, and other person or persons whatsoever, to whom Prizes were delivered, or to whose hands they came, since the 30. of January 1642. and before the 29. of May 1660. or that did surprize or receive to and for the publick use, or by pretence thereof, any Ships, Plate, Jewels, Bullion, Money, Sil∣ver, Gold, Arms, Ammunition, Wares, Merchandises, or any manner of Goods, seized, or taken for prize, within the times aforesaid, and have not yet truly accompted for, and paid in the
same, or the just provenues, or values thereof: And all persons by whom, or to, or for whose use the same, or any of them were sold, and are still behind, and have not paid the moneys contracted for due upon such sales, or any of them; And all securities given by them, or any of them, for their just dealing in their offices, or places, for any thing concerning the said Prizes, shall be chargeable to his Majesty for the premises in the Court of Admiralty, and in His Majesties name, and to His Majesties use, be sued in the Court of Admiralty, and either called to accompt, or be sued, or prosecuted there in due course, according to their respective cases, for all and every the said Prizes, Goods, Moneys, and premises received, or had by them, and still in arrear. And the Court of Admiralty is authorized to proceed thereupon, according to the Laws & course of the Court, and to do right and justice therein: and to give sentences and final Decrees, as by the rules of Justice ought to be, and to levy all and every the sum or sums, and whatsoever shall be adjudged, or condemned according to the course of Executions in the said Court without any manner of let, hinderance, obstruction, or impediment whatsoever. II. That all such Rights as (during the reign of your Majesties Father, or your Majesties reign) appertained to the Lord High Admiral of England, or Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports for the time being, and have been since the year 1648. usurped, possessed, or seised by any person, Body Politick or Corporate, and not having accompted for the same, to any Authority or pretended Authority, and not pardoned by the Act of Oblivion; All and every such person, Body Politick, &c. shall accompt, and pay the same to his Highness James Duke of York, Lord High Admiral of England, or Warden of the Cinque-Ports, up∣on suit for the same in the Court of Admiralty. Provided, and Enacted, That in case of defect of Jurisdiction in the Court of Admiralty for the recovering of any such Prizes, Goods, matters and things, Then upon Certificate thereof made from the said Court of Admiralty, to His Majesties Court of Exchequer, speedy course shall be had in the Exchequer for the recovering and levying the said Prizes, Goods, and things, ac∣cording to Law and Justice. Enacted, 13 Car. 2. cap. All and every sum and sums of mo∣ney, from or by any person or persons whatsoever, for or touching the Imposition called the Excise; heretofore imposed and made payable upon Beer, Ale, or any other Commodities,
by any Laws, or pretended Laws or Ordinances, and all Debts therefore owing, by Obligation or Accompt from Farmers of Excise, or other Persons whatsoever, or any of their Securities, not pardoned by the Act of Pardon and Oblivion, be, and are vested in the King, His Heirs and Successors, and he, or they, may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have, de∣mand, sue for, and recover the same, of all and every person and persons, their Heirs, Executors, &c. having Assets, who are not any way accomptable for the same, and from his or their respective sureties and securities, as if the same duty of Excise had been lawfully assessed, imposed, and collected, and as if the said pretended Acts, Orders, and Ordinances had been good, true, legal, and effectual Acts of Parliament, and had granted all and every the said Duties; and as if the Obligations and Re∣cognizances entred into by the respective Sureties had at the time of the entring into the same been taken in His Majesties name, according to the Statute of the 33. year of King Henry the eighth. Provided 1. All and every person and persons accomptable by this Act, shall have all such due allowance in his or their accompts, as such persons, whose accompts are excepted (in the Act entituled, An Act of free and general Pardon and Obli∣vion) have and ought to have. No person shall be questioned or molested for any the Duties herein, or hereby vested in His Majesty, unless he be sued, or prosecuted with effect before the 25. of December, 1662. 2 All persons accomptable to His Majesty by this Act, shall have power and authority, and are enabled to sue for, levy and recover from any person or persons who stand indebted unto them in any sum of money for the Duty or Impost of Excise, for which they are hereby accomptable, all sums and arrears unsatisfied, as they might have received and levied the same, when they first grew due. Accompts of Sheriffs. 1. Enacted. ANno 14 Car. 2. cap. 21. No Sheriff, or Sheriffs for the year 1661. nor any to be hereafter made, or appointed within the Kingdom of England, shall be charged on Accompt to answer any illeviable seizure, Farm-rent, or Debt, or other seizure, or thing whatsoever, which was
not Writ in process to them to be levied, wherein the persons of whom, or the Lands and Tenements out of which, together with the cause for which the same shall be so levied, shall be plainly and particularly expressed; but shall be thereof wholly discharged, without petition, plea, or other trouble or charge whatsoever. II. All seizures heretofore made before the first year of the reign of the late King James, now remaining in the Accompts of the Sheriffs; and all seizures and debts which are pardoned, shall be and are hereby discharged, and shall be hereafter left out of Sheriffs Accompts: and no Process shall from henceforth be written forth to any Sheriff for levying of the same, nor for any other Rent, or Farm, which cannot be explained by setting forth the particulars thereof, or which hath been unanswered for the space of forty years past: And all other dead Farms and Seizures, and all desperate, illeviable, and unintelligeable debts shall be removed out of the annual Roll into the Exannal Roll, there to remain till they shall be revived and made an∣swerable. III. That the several Remembrancers do forthwith enroll, and certifie to the Ingrosser of the great Roll, all such debts as any Sheriffs of this Realm are, or shall be charged withall, ei∣ther by vertue of their respective Returns made to the Barons of the Exchequer, upon Writs of Fieri facias, Levari facias, Capias, or other process: And also of all Fines and Amerce∣ments which are or shall be imposed by the Court of Exche∣quer upon any Sheriffs for their contempts: viz. All such Debts, Fines, and Amercements as are now returned, or impo∣sed upon any the said Offices, shall be delivered as aforesaid be∣fore the first of February next ensuing; and all Fines, Debts and Amercements as hereafter shall be returned in any of the said Offices, shall be delivered the first day of the next Term after such Returns made, or such Fines and Amercements imposed, upon pain that every Officer or Officers in the Exchequer, who shall in any thing offend contrary to this Court, shall forfeit the sum of forty pounds for every offence, one moyety to the King, His Heirs, the other moiety to the party aggrieved, to be reco∣vered by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of the Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed. IV. When any Sheriff within the Kingdom of England or Wales upon passing their Accompts shall have their Quietus est:
then such Sheriff, their Heirs, Executors, &c. Lands, Tene∣ments, Goods, Chattels, &c. shall be thereby absolutely dis∣charged of all manner of such sums of money whatsoever by them levied and received, notwithstanding any pretence that the same were not accompted for, or other pretence whatsoever, unless such Sheriff shall be called in question, and Judgment given against him for the same within four years after such Ac∣compt, or Quietus est. And every Officer by whom or by whose default any Writ, or Process contrary to this Act shall be sent out, shall incur the like forfeitures and penalty to be recovered and inflicted by such persons, and in such manner, as by this Act is provided. Provided. 1. This Act not to extend to the Counties of Chester, Lancaster, Durham, or the Counties of Wales, being County Palatines, as to the manner of their accompting, but the Sheriffs therein shall accompt as formerly, before the respe∣ctive Auditors, and not elsewhere. 2. Not extend to enjoyn either of the Remembrancers to transcribe or deliver to the Ingrosser of the great Roll, or any In∣quisitions, or Seizers, but such as have been formerly charged in the foraign Accompts of the Sheriffs. But for all Inquisitions up∣on Attainder, or forfeitures to the Crown, the same shall be put in charge as formerly they have been. 3. Not extend to exclude His Majesties Remembrancer of or from the writing forth Process for or upon any of His Maje∣sties Debts, Duties, Outlawries, Or Process of Levari facias, or if the prosecution of any person to levy the Issues or profits of any lands, &c. seized or to be seized into the Kings hands, or process of Venditione exponas for Goods seized, or to be seized upon any debt to the King, &c. Or upon any Outlawry: Or to alter or change the pleadings, or other proceedings accustomed in the said Office, touching the said Debts, Duties, and seizures, or any of them. 4. That no Duty, Fine, Amercement, or seizure whatsoever which shall be charged in the great Roll of the Pipe, upon any person, by, or from any Record had, made, filed, or recor∣ded in the Office of the Kings Remembrance, nor any proceed∣ing had, or to be had thereupon, shall be respited, stayed, com∣pounded, or otherwise discharged, but by Order, Warrant, or Judgement made or entred in the said Office of Kings Remem∣brancer, where the original of such Debt or Charge is and re∣maineth.
Not to extend, nor construed to be prejudicial to the Kings Remembrancer in the Exchequer, in any just, ancient, and law∣ful Fees by him claimed, belonging, or incident to his Office, and usually had and levied by him and his Predecessors. This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and no longer. Anniversary Thanksgiving. ANno 12. Car. 2. Cap. 14. Forasmuch as Almighty God, hath by his providence and power, demonstrated to the view of all the world, his mercy, love, and graciousness to∣wards his Majesty, and all his loyal subjects, by His Majestie's wonderful, peaceable and joyful restauration to the actual possession and exercise of His hereditary and legal Authority over His subjects, without opposition, or effusion of bloud, through the unanimous, cordial, and loyal votes of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, which blessing was compleated the 29. day of May last past; Enacted. 1. That all and singular Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, in every Church, Chappel, and place of Di∣vine service and publick prayer, which were, are, or here∣after shall be, within the Realm of England, and the respective Dominions thereof, and their Successors, shall in all succeeding ages, annually celebrate the 29. of May, by rendring their hearty thanks and publick prayers unto Almighty God, for the before mentioned extraordinary blessings and acts done there∣on, and declare the same to all the people assembled, and the generations yet to come, so as they may for ever praise the Lord for the same. 2. That all and every person and persons, inhabiting within this Kingdom and the Dominions thereof, shall upon the said day annually resort with diligence and devotion, to some usual Church, Chappel, or place where such praises to God shall be rendred, and there orderly abide during the said publick thanksgiving, prayers, praying, and other services there to be used and administred. 3. Every Minister shall give notice to his parishioners pub∣lickly in the Church at morning prayers, the Lords day next before the 29. day of May, for the due observation of the said day, and shall then read this present Act to the people.
Anniversary Fasts. Anno 12 Car. 2. Cap. 30. Whereas the horrible and execra∣ble Murther of His Majesties Royal Father, King Charles the first, hath been committed by a party of wretched men, desperately wicked, by which action the Protestant Religion hath received great reproach, and the people of England the most insupportable shame and infamy; forasmuch as His Maje∣sties dutiful and loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, do renounce, abominate and protest a∣gainst that impious act, execrable Murther, and unparallel'd Treason, against the sacred person and life of the said King Charles the first, committed the 30 of January, 1648; Enacted, That every 30. day of January, unless it falls out upon the Lords day, and then the day next after following, shall be for ever hereafter set apart to be kept and observed in the Churches and Chappels of His Majesties Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey; and all other his Majesties Dominions, as an anniversary day of fasting and hu∣miliation, to implore the mercy of God, that neither the guilt of that sacred and innocent bloud, nor those other sins by which God was provoked to deliver up the said late King in∣to the hands of cruel and unreasonable men, may at any time hereafter be visited upon the people of England, or their poste∣rity. Arch-Bishops and Bishops. Enacted. 13 Car. 2▪ Cap. 12. That an Act made in the 17. year of King Charles the first, Entituled, An Act for Re∣peal of a Branch of the Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning Commissi∣ons for Causes Ecclesiastical, be repealed: and that neither the said Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall take away any ordinary power or authority from the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, or other persons named in the said Act; but that they, and every of them exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may execute and exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all Censures appertaining to the same, in all causes and matters
belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, according to the Eccle∣siastical Laws, in as ample manner as they might have done be∣fore the said Act. Provided, 1. That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend, or be construed to revive or give force to the said Branch of the Statute of 1 Eliz. but that the Branch of the said Statute made 1 Eliz. shall stand and be repealed in such sort. 2. That it shall not be lawful for any Arch-Bishop, Bishop, Vicar-general, Commissary, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, Offi∣cer or Minister, or any other having spiritual Jurisdiction, to tender, or administer to any person whatsoever, the Oath ex Officio, or any other Oath, whereby such person may be char∣ged or compelled to confess, or accuse, or purge themselves of any criminal matter or thing, whereby they may be liable to any censure or punishment. 3. This Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not ex∣tend, nor be construed to extend to give unto any Arch-Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or person aforesaid, any power or authority, to exercise, execute, inflict, or determine any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, censure, or coertion which they might not have done before the year of our Lord, 1634. nor to abridge or diminish the Kings Majesties Supremacy in Ecclesi∣astical matters. Nor to confirm Canons made in the year 1640. nor any other Ecclesiastical Laws or Canons not formerly con∣firmed, or enacted by Parliament. Bays-making. Enacted. 12 Car. 2. Cap. 19. 1. The Governours of the Dutch Hall in Colchester, and the Dutch people there living, may exercise the free trade of making Bays, Says and foreign Draperies within Colchester, and govern the said trade in their Assemblies, with all such liberties and priviledges, as they en∣joyed by any grant or toleration made to them, by Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the first, or any of them. 2. If any person, &c. whatsoever, after 25 September, 1661. shall weave, or cause to be woven in Colchester, or the liberties thereof, any Bays called fifties, sixties, eighty-eights and hundred Bays, and not within two days after such weaving, carry them to the Dutch Hall called the Raw Hall, there to be search∣ed,
that it may appear, they are substantially wrought be∣fore they shall be carried to be scoured and thicked; or if any Fuller, Thicker shall receive such Bay to be fulled or thick∣ed before it shall be stamped and marked in the said Hall, for every such offence, shall forfeit Forty shillings, to be levyed by distress and sale of the offenders goods. And if such Bays be made by an English Master-maker, the same to be paid to the Mayor of the Town for the benefit of the poor there; and if made by a Dutch Master, to be disposed of by the Gover∣nours of the Dutch Bay-Hall, for the benefit of the Dutch Con∣gregation: the second offence to be 4 l. and for the third of∣fence to be disabled to work within the Town, or Liberties thereof. 2. If any person, &c. shall buy any such Bays, or carry them out of the said Town of Colchester, before they have been viewed, surveyed, stamped, sealed and measured as afore∣said, by the sworn Officers of the Dutch Hall; the Bay so brought or carried shall be confiscated, one moyety to them that shall seize the same, the other to the poor of the Parish where it shall be seized. 4. If any person, &c. after 20. September, 1660. shall coun∣terfeit any of the seals used by the Congregation of the said Dutch Bay-Hall, and not being an Officer there, by them ap∣pointed, affix them to any such Bays, &c. whether counter∣feited, or not counterfeited; for the first offence he shall for∣feit and pay to the use of the said Governour of the said Dutch Hall, 20l. to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Reve∣nue, or in the Town-Court of Colchester, by an Action of debt, Bill, Plaint, &c. and for the second offence being convicted, stand upon the Pillory the space of an hour: and for the third offence, being convicted, shall suffer as a Fellon; and if any Bays be taken carrying or carried out of Colchester, without the Mark of the Maker, the same shall be forfeited. 5. The Governours of the said Dutch Bay-Hall, or their Officers, in the day time may search any Cart, Wagon, Pack, wherein they suspect such Bays to be; and may from time to time with a Constable, make search in any house, shop, or ware-house where they are informed any deceitful Bays to be, may seize and carry away the same to the said Dutch Hall, and so seized and carried, shall be confiscate, to be disposed of in such manner as the forfeitures before mentioned of the Wea∣vers and Fullers are limited and appointed. For the better
regulating the said Trade of making Bays, the Governours of the said Dutch Hall, from time to time, may make and con∣stitute such Orders and By-Laws as to them shall be meet. Provided no such Orders, By-Laws, &c. be either in diminution of the Kings Prerogative, or the Laws of the Kingdom, be used or executed, till the same be examined and approved by the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, or Justices of either Bench, or three of them, or before the Justices of Assize in their Circuit of the County of Essex, upon pain of 20 l. for every time they shall do the contrary. Bankrupts. I. Enacted. 14 Car. 2. Cap. 23. That no persons whatso∣ever, who have adventured, or put in, or shall hereafter adven∣ture or put in any sum or sums of money into the East-India Company, or Guiney Company, or into any joynt stock or stocks of money by them or either of them made or raised, or to be made or raised for or towards the maintaining or carrying on the Trade of the said East-India or Guiney Company, ma∣naged or to be managed: Or who have formerly, or shall here∣after adventure or put in any sum of money, or any stock or stocks of money for the carrying on of the Fishing-Trade, called the Royal Fishing-Trade, and shall receive his or their part, or dividend of Fish, Goods, or Merchandises in specie, and shall sell or exchange the same, shall for or by reason of any such adven∣ture, or for or by reason of the receiving or taking of such Fish, Goods or Merchandizes, or exchanging the same, be esteemed, taken, or adjudged a Merchant or Trader, within any Statute for Bankrupts, or liable to the same. Provided and declared, Every person, &c. who shall Trade or Merchandize in any other way or manner than the Royal Fishing-Trade, or in the Trade managed by the East-India Company, or Guiney Company, shall by reason of his Trading and Merchandizing, be liable to Commissions against Bank∣rupts, as fully as if this Act had not been made. II. That a Verdict and Judgement on a Replevin had or given in Easter-Term, in the Kings Bench between Phineas Andrews Plaintiff, Richard Woolward and William Moggs De∣fendants, whereby Sir John Wolstenholme Knight, and Adventu∣rer in the East-India Company was adjudged liable to a Com∣mission
of Bankrupts, only for or by reason he had a share in the joynt stock of the said Company, and a pretended selling for money part of the Return which he had in specie for his Ad∣venture, is hereby declared, and is hereby reversed and made void. III. That no Act, Sale of, Disposition of any the Lands, Te∣nements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Debts or Credits of the said Sir John Wolstenholme, or any distribution of the same, or of any money made or done by the Commissioners of Bank∣rupts, or any claiming under them by vertue or colour of any Commission taken out against the said Sir John Wolstenholme; and whereof any person is by vertue or colour of, or under any such Act, Sale, or Disposition actually seized or possessed, shall be impeached or hereafter frustrated; but the same shall be enjoy∣ed for and towards such portion of the debts for which the same have been disposed or distributed. Butter. Enacted. 14 Car. 2. Cap. 26. After 1. of June, 1662. Eve∣ry Kilderkin of Butter shall contain 112 pounds neat, or above, every pound containing 16 ounces besides the Tare of the Cask, and not less of Merchantable Butter; Every Firkin shall con∣tain 56 pound neat, or above, besides the weight of the Cask, of good and Merchantable Butter: Every Pot of Butter fourteen pound Neat, or above, besides the weight of the Pot, of good and Merchantable Butter; and no Butter which is old, or cor∣rupt, shall be mixed, or packed up in any Kilderkin, Firkin, or Pot or Vessel with any Butter which is new and sound; nor any Whay-butter packed or mixed with Butter which is made of Cream; but every respective sort of Butter shall be packed up apart by themselves, and not mixed with another. No Butter shall be salted with great Salt, but with small Salt, nor more Salt with it than is necessary for the preservation of it, upon pain every Owner or Packer of Butter, not putting up in each Vessel as aforesaid to be sold, or put to sale, such quantities as a∣foresaid, or offending as aforesaid, shall for every offence for∣feit the value of the Butter so packed up; and for every offence where any Kilderkin, Firkin, &c. shall be found to contain a lesser quantity, six times the quantity that shall be wanting in every Cak, Pot, &c.
II. Every Chees-monger or other person, &c. which shall sell to any person, &c. any Kilderkin, Firkin, Pot, or other Cask of Butter made after 1 June 1662. shall deliver in any such Kilderkin, Firkin, &c. respectively the full quantity and due quality appointed by the Act, and not less. Or in default thereof shall be liable to make satisfaction to him or them, shall buy the same for what is wanting according to the price for which the same was sold. III. From and after 1 June, 1662. No Chees-monger or other person shall repack for sale any Butter in any Kilderkin, Firkin, Pot, or other Cask, upon pain every person, &c. which shall repack any Butter in any Kilderkin, Firkin, Cask, &c. to sell the same again, shall for every Firkin, Cask, &c. so packed forfeit the double of the value of such Butter. IV. That every Farmer and other person packing up Butter in Kilderkins, Firkins, &c. for sale, do after the 1 June, 1662. pack up his Butter into good and sufficient Casks made of dry, sound, and serviceable Timber, and shall set upon every Firkin and Cask whatsoever, when it is fully seasoned in water a vi∣sible mark of the just weight of the empty Cask: and when every Cask, &c. is filled with Butter, set upon every Cask, &c. his or their Christian name at length, or Surname with an iron brand; upon penalty every person offending either in not put∣ting on the mark of the weight, or not setting his name upon every Cask, &c. shall for every offence forfeit 10. s. for every hundred weight of Butter, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity that shall be in every Cask, &c. V. Every Potter shall set upon every Pot which he shall sell for packing up of Butter the just weight of every such Pot when it is burnt, with the Letter of his Christian or Surname at length, upon pain he shall forfeit and pay for every Pot which he shall not so do, and shall expose to sale for the use aforesaid, whereon he hath not set the just weight and his name 12. d. And no Farmer or other shall expose to sale any Butter packed up in any other Pot than aforesaid marked by the Potter, upon penalty of 2. s. for every pot of Butter which he shall expose to sale as is not so marked. The said offences to be enquired, sued for, heard and determined in the Sessions of Peace for the Coun∣ty, or in the Court of Record of the City, Borough, Town, or Liberty where the offence shall be committed, by Debt, Indict∣ment, Information, wherein no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed, one half of the Forfeitures to the use of the poor people inha∣biting
in the parish where the offence shall be committed; the other to him who shall sue for the same, besides his double Costs: Provided, the suit be commenced within four moneths after the sale of such Butter. Benevolence. 1. Enacted, 13 Car. 2. cap. 4. That the Kings Majesty may issue out such, and so many Commissions under the Great Seal of England into the several Counties, Cities, Towns corporate, and other places in England, & Wales, & Berwick upon Tweed, to such persons, as His Majesty shall think fit, for the receiving of such Subscriptions as the good Subjects shall voluntarily offer for the supply of His Majesties pressing occasions; and such Commissions as His Majesty shall think fit, for collecting and receiving the money so subscribed: the Acquittances of the re∣spective Receivers, to be made, shall be an absolute discharge of the sum so subscribed; and if any such Subscriptions shall be returned into the Exchequer, the payment thereof shall be likewise returned. 1. No Process shall issue out against any person so subscri∣bing, but within two years next after the passing the Act. The said Commissioners are enjoyned with convenient speed, after the receit of the respective Commissions, to meet at the usual place of meeting, within every of the said Counties, Cities and Towns, and so many of them as shall be present at the first general meeting, or the major part of them, may by their consents, sever themselves into Hundreds, Rapes, Wards, and other places within their respective limits, and give notice of their respective times of places and meetings, that the persons, Bodies politick, or corporate, may resort to them, and make such Offers or Present to His Majesty as their hearts shall prompt them to. No person, not being a Peer of the Realm, shall in such Offer exceed the sum of 200. l. nor any Peer the sum of 400. l. No Commissions issued by this Act shall be of force, as to the receiving of any moneys, or subscriptions for moneys, after the Feast of St. John the Baptist, 1662. 2. That no Commissions, or Aids of this nature, can be issued out, or levied, but by authority of Parliament; and this Act not to be drawn into example for the time to come.
Captains, Soldiers and Militia. 1. Enacted, 13 Car. 2. cap. 6. That the Militia and Land-forces of this Kingdom and the Dominions thereof, now under the power of Lieutenants or their Deputies, shall be exer∣cised, ordered, or managed, until the 25. day of March next ensuing, in such manner as the same now is exercised, ordered and managed, according to such instructions as they have, or from time to time shall have from His Majesty. 2. Whereas since 4. of June, 1660. there have been Insur∣rections, by occasion of which divers of his Majesties good subjects have been murdred, for the security of the peace of the Nation, and preventing further disorders; Enacted. That all and every person, or persons who have, or shall have acted, or done any thing in execution of any Commissions of Lieute∣nancy, issued by His Majesty, or by colour of them, or any of them, shall and are hereby saved harmless and indempnified; and all Magistrates, Justices of peace, Ministers of Justice, and all persons that have acted by and under them since the 4. of June, 1660. as to any arresting, imprisoning any person, su∣spected to be a Sectary, or disturber of the Peace, shall and are by this Act saved harmless and indempnified. Provided. 1. Neither this Act, nor any thing therein con∣tained, shall after the 25. of March next, be prejudicial to any County, City, or place within this Kingdom, which are charged with men and arms beyond their ancient proportion. 2. Not to be construed, to the giving or declining of any po∣wer for the transporting of any subjects of this Realm, or any way compelling them to march out of the Kingdom, otherwise than by the Laws ought to be done. Enacted 12 Car. 2. 1. All such Officers and Souldiers, who were under the command of his Excellency George Duke of Albemarl, Capt. General of His Majesties Armies, in the Kings Majesties service, the 25. day of April, 1660. and have not since deserted the service, or refused to take the Oath of Supre∣macy and Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs, &c. and have used heretofore any trade, though they did not serve all the time of their Apprentiship: Or any person under the com∣mand of the said General, apt and able to practise any trade, may set up and exercise such several and respective trades,
Mysteries and occupations, whereunto they have been Appren∣tice, and served any part of their time; Or any handycraft or other trade exercised about Manufactures, though he was ne∣ver bound Apprentice to the same, and shall have and enjoy all the immunities as they should have had and enjoyed if they had served out their terms and times. 2. All others of the said Officers and Soldiers, may set up and exercise such trades they are apt and able for, within the respective Counties wherein they were born, without any suit or molestation of any person, or persons whatsoever, and if any such shall be impleaded or indicted in any Court with∣in this Kingdom for the using and exercising any such trade, making it appear, they have served under the command of the said Captain General, and have taken the Oath of Allegi∣ance and Supremacy, shall upon the general Issue pleaded, be found not guilty, in any Plaint, Information, or Indictment; and such persons, who notwithstanding this Act, shall prosecute their Suit against them, or be non-suit, shall pay to such Of∣ficers or Soldiers double Costs, to be recovered, as in other Cases at Common Law may be recovered. Provided, 1. No Officer or Soldier shall have the benefit of this Act, that shall not prove hss Service, either by a Certificate under the hand and Seal of some Field Officer, or two Com∣mission-Officers of the Regiment wherein he served; or some General of the Army certifying his knowledge of the service, the Certificate proved to be true by one witness at the least. 2. If any person or persons, pretending themselves to have been Officers or Soldiers as aforesaid, shall procure a false Certificate to have the benefit of the Act, and be thereof con∣victed, by confession, or other proof, he shall suffer six moneths imprisonment and lose the benefit of the Act. 3. That the Officers, Soldiers and other persons in this Act mentioned, exercising any trade, or profession in any City, or Corporation, shall be liable to bear Offices in any the said re∣spective Cities and Corporations they shall be elected unto, and submit to such Orders for the well and true making of their Manufactures as others free of the said Corporation, &c. are subject unto.
Carriages. Anno 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. Whereas, the clause contained in an Act of Parliament, made in the 12. year of his Majesties Reign, Entituled, An Act for the taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Tenures in Capite, may prove very prejudicial and inconvenient to His Majesty in His Royal Pro∣gresses upon necessary occasions; 1. Enacted, That the Clerk, or chief Officer of his Majesties Carriages, three days before his Majesties arrival, by warrant from the Greencloth, shall give notice in writing to two Justi∣ces of the Peace adjoyning, to provide such a number of Carts and Carriages from the place next adjoyning, as His Majesty shall have present use of, expressing the time and place where the said Carts and Carriages are to attend; the Carriages to con∣sist of four able Horses, or four Oxen and two Horses, for each of which Cart, or Carriage, the respective Owners shall re∣ceive 6. d. for every mile they shall go laden. II. That in case his Majesties subjects shall not provide & fur∣nish his Majesty, his Queen, or his, or her Houshold, in their progress, or removals, with such necessary Carriages, for their Wardrobe, or other necessaries, for ready money tendred to them, or refuse to appear with their Carts or Carriages; upon due proof of such neglect and refusal, by conviction by the Oath of the Constable, or other Officers, or two witnesses, be∣fore the said Justices of the Peace of the County, shall for such his refusal and neglect, forfeit the sum of 40. s. to his Majesty, to be levyed by distress and sale of his goods, returning unto the party the overplus. Provided. That no Horses, Oxen, Cart, or Wain, shall be en∣forced to travel above one days journey from the place where they receive their lading, and that ready payment be made in hand for the Carriages at the place of lading, according to the Rates aforesaid. III. If any Justice of Peace, Officer, or Constable, shall take any gift or reward, to spare any person from making such Carriage, or shall impress more Carriages than shall be directed from the Greencloth, upon due proof and conviction hereof, the party offending shall forfeit the sum of 10. l. to be recovered by Action of Debt, in any of His Majesties Courts of Record,
wherein no protection, essoin, or wager of Law shall be allowed. And if any person shall take upon him to im∣press any Horses, Oxen, Carts, Carriages, other than the persons impowered as aforesaid, upon conviction of the of∣fence, shall suffer the punishment contained in the recited Act. 4. None of His Majesties servants shall be compelled to pay above 12. d. by the night for every bed they shall use for themselves, and not above 6. d. for every bed for their servants, and in all such houses, where any of his Maje∣sties servants shall pay for their dyet, or for Hay and Provender for their Horses, convenient lodging shall be provided for their selves and their servants, without paying any thing for the same. 5. Two Justices of the Peace near adjoyning to the Road, through which His Majesty is to pass, immediatly after notice from the Greencloth, or Avenor under their hands and seals, shall appoint such reasonable rates and prices to be paid during his abode there, both for Hay, Oats, and other accommodati∣ons for Horses as they shall think meet, which Rates one day at least before his Majesties coming to the place, the said Justices shall cause to be proclaimed in the Market Town next to the said place, to the end notice may be taken of such Rates and Prices; and if any person shall take any other sum, than which is or shall be so limited, either for lodging, horse-meat, stable-room or other accommodations; and be thereof convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit to the party grieved the sum of 40. s. to be levyed by distress, by warrant from the said Justices, and sale of the parties goods, returning the overplus to the par∣tie. This Act to continue till the end of the first Session of the next Parlianient, and no longer. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. cap. 20. That from and after the 24. of June, 1662. as often as His Majesties Navy, or Ordnance shall require any Carriages within the Kingdom of England and Wales by land, upon notice in writing, by warrant from the Lord High Admiral for the time being, or under the Hands and Seals of two principal Officers, or Governours of the Navy: or under the Hand and Seal of the Master of His Majesties Ordnance, or of his Lieutenant, for pro∣viding Carriages for the respective service of the Navy, or Ordnance, to two Justices of the Peace near the place where the
Carriages shall be required, The Justices shall issue forth their Warrants to such Parishes, Hundreds, or Divisions, as they shall think fit, within their Counties, not being above twelve miles distant from the place of lading, for sending to a certain place, at certain times, such number of Carriages, with Horses, Oxen for the service, as the Lord Admiral for the time being, or the Master of the Ordnance, or Commissioners of the Navy shall require; The Owners of which Carriages, or their ser∣vants, shall receive for every load of Timber, 12. d. per mile, and for every Tun of other commodities, 8. d. per mile. II. It shall be lawful for the Lord Admiral, Master of the Ord∣nance, Commissioners of the Navy, and persons in the prece∣dent clause mentioned, by warrants under their Hands and Seals, as often as His Majesties Navy and Ordnance shall re∣quire any Carriage by water, to appoint such persons as they shall think fitting, to impress, and take up any Ships, Hoys, Lighters or Boats, as shall be necessary for the accommoda∣tion of the said service: The owners of which Ships, &c. or such as they shall appoint for the hire of every such Ship, Hoy, Lighter, or other vessel, per Tun, according to the usual Rates paid by Merchants, and in case the owners of the Ships, &c. shall not agree on the said Rates, the same to be setled by the Brother-hood of the Trinity house of Dept∣ford-Strand. III. If any of his Majesties subjects of the Realm, shall refuse or wilfully neglect to make their appearance with such Carri∣ages by Land, or to fit, provide and furnish the Ships, &c. for the service of his Majesties Navy and Ordnance, or after they have undertaken such service, shall delay the same; upon due proof and conviction by credible oath as aforesaid, by credi∣ble witnesses, as aforesaid for the Land-carriages, and for the Water-carriages, by the oath of such persons as shall be ap∣pointed by the Lord Admiral, Commissioners of the Kings Na∣vy, or other two credible Witnesses before the principal Of∣ficers or Commissioners of His Majesties Navy (authorized to administer such oath) shall forfeit 20. s. for the Land service; and for the carriage by Water treble the freight of the Ship, or Vessel, &c. not exceeding 50. l. in the whole to the Kings use: to be levied upon default of payment upon demand, by di∣stress and sale of the parties Goods, by warrant from the Ju∣stices of Peace, principal Officers, or Commissioners of his Majesties Navy, or of his Majesties Ordnance respectively,
rendring to the party the overplus, the charge of distraining deducted. Provided. 1. No Horses, Oxen, Cart, Wain, or Land-carriage shall be enforced to travel more days journey from the place they receive their lading, or continue longer in the em∣ployment, than shall be appointed by order of the said Justices of Peace. And ready payment shall be made in hand for the said Carriages at the place of lading, according to the Rates aforesaid. Provided. If any Justice of Peace, Officer, Constable, person, or persons appointed by the Lord Admiral, principal Officer, Commissioner of the Navy, Master of the Ordnance, &c. respe∣ctively shall take any gift, or reward, to spare any person or per∣sons, for making such Carriage by Land or Water, or shall injure or grieve any person, &c. through envy or evil will, who ought not make such Carriage, or shall impress more Car∣riages than the necessity of the service shall require; upon due proof and conviction thereof, the party offending shall forfeit 10. l. to the party grieved, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed. And if any person shall take upon him to impress any Horses, Oxen, Wains or Carriages for Land, or any Ships, Hoys, &c. for the service of his Majesty, other than the persons so impowered, upon conviction, they shall incur and suffer the punishment in the Act of taking away the Court of Wards. 4. No Ship, Hoy, Bark or Vessel whatsoever, that shall be really & bona fide freighted by Charter-party (if there be other Vessels in the Port fitting for service) nor any Vessel quarter laden with any goods, or Merchandise outward bound, shall be liable to be impressed for any the services aforesaid. Provided. 1. It shall be lawful for the Justices of Peace, who shall summon the Carts and Carriages within the County of South-Hampton, to have power (as to the carriages of Timber) only to allow to the owners of such Carts and Carriages, not ex∣ceeding 4 d. per mile, for so many miles as any Cart or Carriage so summoned shall go empty to the place of lading. 2. That this Act and the powers therein contained, shall continue and be in forre until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and no longer.
Coursing, Hunting and killing of Deer. I. Enacted, 13 Car. 2. cap. 10. If any person or persons, from and after the first of August next, unlawfully Course, Kill, Hunt, or carry away any Red or Fallow Deer, in any Forrest, Chase, Purliew, Wood, Park, or other ground, where Deer are, or have usually been kept within the Realm of Eng∣land or Wales, without the consent of the Owners, or party chiefly trusted with the custody thereof, or be aiding or assist∣ing therein, and shall be convicted thereof, either by con∣fession of the party, or the oath of one or more credible Wit∣nesses, before one or more Justices of the Peace, (who are impowered hereby to administer such oath) being prosecu∣ted for such offence within six moneths after the offence done; shall forfeit for every such offence 20. l. to be levyed by distress, upon the Goods and Chattels of every such Offender, one moye∣ty to the Informer, the other to the Owner of the Deer; and for want of distress, the offender to be committed to the house of Correction for six moneths, and there put to labour, or to the Common Gaol for one whole year, at the discretion of the Justices before whom the Conviction shall be, and not discharg∣ed from thence, till sufficient Sureties be given for their good behaviour. Provided. 1. Where any shall be punished by this Act, he shall not be prosecuted, nor incur the penalty of any other Law, or Statute for the same offence. Clerk of the Market. I. Enacted, 17 Car. 1. cap. 19. That from henceforth, there shall be one Weight, one Measure and one Yard, according to the standard of the Exchequer throughout all the Realm, as well in places priviledged as without, and that every Measure of corn shall be striked without heap; and whosoever shall keep any other Weight, Measure or Yard, whereby any corn, grain, or other thing is bought or sold, after six moneths after the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall forfeit for every offence 5. s. being thereof convicted by the oath of one Witness, before any Justice of Peace, or head Officer of the
City, Town or place, &c. to be levyed by the Church-War∣dens or Overseers of the poor of the Parish where the offence is committed, to the use of the poor of the same Parish, by distress and sale of the offenders Goods, and for want of di∣stress, the party to be imprisoned till he pay the same, with∣out Bail or Mainprize. II. No Clerk of the Market of the Kings House, which is, or shall be, or of the Prince, his Heirs or Successors, which is or shall be, Duke of Cornwal, his Heirs or Deputies, shall ex∣ercise his or their Office in any part of the Kingdom, but only within the Verge of the Kings Court, where it shall reside for the time being; and it shall be lawful for any Mayor, head Officer of any City or Town Corporate, or any other Lord of Liberties, or Franchises, his or their Deputies to execute the said offices respectively, as they might have done before the ma∣king of this Act. III. If any Clerk of the Market within the Verge, or any Mayor, or other Officer shall seal or give allowance unto any other Weights or Measures, than according to the standard of the Exchequer; or shall refuse to seal or give allowance to Weights and Measures according to the said standard, paying the accustomed Fees allowed for the same, he or they shall forfeit for every offence 5. l. to be levyed to the use of the poor where the offence is, or shall be committed. IV. If any Clerk of the Market within the Verge, Mayor or other Officer, or Lords of Liberties, their Deputies, or their Agents, shall take or receive of any of his Majesties subjects, by colour of his said office, any common Fine, or Fees, other than formerly allowed by the Statute, Statutes or ancient custom in that behalf, made or used: Or take any Fee, sum of money or reward, for the making, signing, or examination of any Weights or Measures which have been formerly marked or sealed, or impose any fine, or amercement without a due or legal tryal of the Officers, for which such fine, or amerce∣ment shall be imposed: Or shall otherwise misdemean him∣self in the execution of his office, and thereof be lawfully con∣victed, for the first offence he shall forfeit 5. l. for the second offence 10. l. and for the third and other offence afterwards 20. l. to be levyed as aforesaid to the use of the poor of the Parish where such offence shall be committed. And whosoever shall be fined or amerced by vertue of this Act, shall not be again fined, or amerced for the same offence, by vertue of any for∣mer Law or Statute.
1. Provided. This Act not to extend to the Rents, Farms, or Lands, or any corn or grain due or payable to any Lord or Lords: or any Colledges, Houses, or other Societies, by vertue of any lease or leases, or other Covenant or agreement, but that during the continuation of such Lease, Leases or agreement, the same shall be paid and performed in such measure and form as the same have used to be paid before the Act: and that the measure commonly called water-measure, in all Ports, Towns, and other places, shall be used and continued, as formerly the same hath been, any thing in this Statute notwithstanding. 2. No Justice of Peace, Mayor, Bailiff or other Officer, Churchwarden, Overseer, or other authorized by this Act, shall be sued, or otherwise impeached, for doing or executing their said offices respectively; and if any suit shall be brought against them, or any of them, they may plead the general issue, and give this Statute in evidence; and if the Defendant be not found guilty, he shall recover treble costs for his unjust vexation. Coaches. I. Enacted. 14 Car. 2. Cap. 8. After the 1. of May, 1662. No person or persons shall presume to drive (excepting Stage-Coaches) or let to hire by the hour or day, any Hackney-Coaches, or Coach-horses, within London or Westminster, or Parishes within the Bills of Mortality; without license from Commissioners appointed by His Majesty, under the great Seal, for the licensing and regulating of Hackney-Coaches; accord∣ing to provisions and limitations. No horse, gelding, or mare to be used with such Coaches, shall be under the cise of 14 hand∣fuls; and the number of the Coaches shall not exceed 400. to be licensed, and shall have a mark of distinction, to the end they may be known if any complaint be made of them. No person shall be licensed to keep above two Coaches, which shall have several marks of distinction, as if belonging to several persons; and none shall put the same mark or fi∣gure upon his Coach, which is appointed for another Coach, under the forfeiture of 5 l. for such offence, one moyety to the Informer, the other to the Commissioners appointed for pave∣ment of the Streets. The Commissioners not to license any person to keep any Hackney-Coach, that useth any other trade or occupation, and first to license ancient Coachmen, or such as have suffered for
their service to his late Majesty, or the widows of such as have Coaches of their own: And if the Commissioners license more than 400 Coaches, every Commissioner so licensing, shall forfeit 100 l. for every Coach so licensed, one moyety to the In∣former, the other moyety to the Commissioners appointed for pavement of the streets. II. No Hackney-Coachman licensed, shall take for his hire, in or about the City of London and Westminster, above 10 s. for a day, reckoning 12 hours to the day, and not above 18 d. for the first hour, and 12 d. for every hour after: and no Gent. or other person shall pay from any of the Inns of Courts, or thereabouts, to any part of St. James's or Westminster, above 12 d. and the same rates to the same places or thereabouts, back again: and from any of the said Inns of Courts, or thereabouts, to the Royal Exchange 12 d. To the Tower of London, Bishops-gate-street, Algate, or thereabouts, 18 d. and so from the said places to the Inns of Courts; and the like rates from and to a∣ny place of like distance: and if any Coachman shall refuse to go, act, or exact more for his hire than hereby limited, he shall for every offence forfeit 10 s. III. Every Coach licensed shall pay to the Commissioners for licensing Hackney-Coaches, the yearly rent of 5 l. and no more; whereof 5 s. to be paid before the 26 of May, 1662. 25 s. at March next after, and 25 s. at the birth of our Lord God; and from thenceforward to be paid quarterly by equal porti∣ons, viz. the four usual Feasts; the Annunciation of the Virgin, St. John the Baptist, St. Michael the Angel, and birth of our Lord God; which sums of moneys the Commissioners for Hackney-Coaches shall from time to time pay, or cause to be paid to the Commissioners appointed for paving and mending of the Streets, or to such Treasurers as they shall appoint; and the Commissioners for Hackney-Coaches shall certifie to the other Commissioners the names and dwellings of all such persons as they shall license to drive or keep Hackney-Coaches, with the marks of distinction appointed, and to be fixed to the several Coaches, for the discovery of abuses which shall be committed; and the Commissioners for the paving and mending of the Streets, shall be enabled to call the Commissioners for the Hackney-Coaches to account: and if any part of the moneys for the paving and mending of the Streets shall be, such over∣plus shall be imployed towards the enlargement of such Streets as are to be enlarged by this Act.
IV. All Fines, Rents, Forfeitures and Penalties as shall grow due and payable to the Commissioners by this Act, shall be le∣vied by distress, by Warrant under the hands and Seals of the Commissioners, or any five of them, which shall be forth with∣in fourteen days, and for default of distress, or not payment, the party so offending or neglecting to pay, shall lie in Prison with∣out bail or mainprize till he have paid such Rent, Fine, For∣feiture or Penalty, as was due from him or them. Court of Wards. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24. The Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries, Primer-seisins, and all Ouster le Maynes, values and forfeitures of marriages, by reason of any tenure of the King, or of any other by Knights service, and all mean rates and other gifts, grants, charges incident or a∣rising, for or by reason of any the premises, are taken away and discharged from the 24 day of February, 1645. any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. All Fines for Alienations, Seizures and Pardons of Aliena∣tions, Tenure by Homage, and all charges incident or arising by reason of Wardship, Liveries, Primer-seisin, or Ouster le Mayne, or Tenure by Knight-service, escuage, Aide pur file mar∣rier, et pur faier fitz Chevalier, and all charges thereunto inci∣dent, be taken and discharged from the said 24 of February, 1645. any Statute, Law, &c. notwithstanding. All Tenures by Knight-service of the King, or of any other person, Knight-service in Capite, or soccage in Capite of the King, and the fruits and consequents thereof, happened, or which shall or may happen or arise thereupon, or thereby, are taken away and discharged; any Statute, Law, &c. notwithstanding. All Tenures of Houses, Mannors, Lands, Tenements or Here∣ditaments, or any estate of inheritance at the common Law, held either of the King or of any other person, &c. from and after the said 24 of February, 1645. shall be construed, adjudged and decided for ever, there also to be turned into free and com∣mon soccage, any Law, Statute, &c. heretofore notwith∣standing. II. That one Act of Parliament in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, Entituled, An Act for the establishment of the Court of the Kings Wards, and one Act made in the 33 year of the
Reign of the said King Henry the eighth, concerning the Offi∣cers of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and every clause, ar∣ticle and matter in the said Acts, from henceforth be repealed and utterly void. III. That all Tenures hereafter to be created by the King, his heir, or successors upon any gifts or grants of Mannors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments of any estate of inheritance at the common Law, shall be in free and common soccage only, and not by Knight-service, or in Capite; and shall be dischar∣ged of all Wardship, value, and forfeiture of Marriage, Livery, Primer-Seisin, Ouster le Mayn, Aide pur fair fitz Chevalier, and pur file Marrier, any Law, Statute, or reservation to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. 1. Provided, This Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not be construed to take away any Rents certain, Heriots, or suits of Court belonging to any former Tenure now taken away, or altered by this Act, or other services belonging to Tenure in common soccage, due or to grow due to the King, mean Lord, or other private person, or the fealty and distresses inci∣dent thereunto; and such relief shall be paid in respect of such Rents, as is paid in case of death of a tenant in common soccage. 2. Not extend, or construed to extend to take away any fines for alienations, due by particular customs, of particular Mannors and places, other than fines for alienation of lands, holden immediately of the King in Capite. 3. Not to take away, or construed to take away, any Te∣nures in Frank-Almoigne, nor to alter or change any Tenure by copy of Court-Roll, or any services incident thereunto, nor any honorary services of grand Sergeantry, other than Ward∣ship, marriage, forfeiture of marriage, and other than the Aides aforesaid. 4. Where any person hath, or shall have any child or chil∣dren under the age of 21 years, and not married at the time of his death; it shall be lawful for the father of such child, or children, whether born at the time of the decease of the fa∣ther, or at that time in ventre sa mere, or whether such fa∣ther be within the age of 21 years, or of full age, by Deed ex∣ecuted in his life time, or by his last will and testament in writing, in the presence of two, or more credible Witnesses, to dispose of the custody and tuition of such child or children, for and during the time he or they shall remain under the age of 21 years, or any lesser time, to any person or persons in pos∣session
or remainder, other then Popish Recusants: and such disposition of such child or children since the 24 of February, 1645. or hereafter to be made, shall be good against all and every person or persons, claiming such child or children; as Guardian in soccage, or otherwise, and such person, &c. to whom such children shall be disposed or devised, shall and may maintain an action of ravishment of Ward, or trespass a∣gainst any person which shall wrongfully take away, or detain such child or children, for the recovery of them, and recover damages for the same in such action, for the use of such child or children. 5. That such person or persons, to whom the custody of such child or children shall be so disposed or devised, shall and may take into his or their custody, to the use of such child or children, the profits of all the lands, tenements, hereditaments, of such child or children, and the custody and management of their goods, chattels and personal estate, until the respective ages of 21 years, or less time, according to such disposition a∣foresaid, and may bring any action in pursuance thereof, as by Law a Guardian in soccage might do. 1. Provided, This Act, nor any thing therein, shall extend to alter or prejudice the custom of the City of London, or any other City or Town Corporate, or the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, concerning Orphans, or to discharge any Ap∣prentice from their Apprentiship. 2. This Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall infringe or hurt any title of honour, feodal or other, by which any person hath, or may have right to sit in the Lords House of Parlia∣ment, and the priviledge belonging to them as Peers, any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Collectors. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. cap. 17. All Collectors and other per∣sons who have levied or collected, or shall levy or collect any sum of money, or other act done, or shall do, in order to the same, by vertue of any Act of Parliament in force, or of any o∣ther Act, Order, or Ordinance allowed to be put in execution by any such Act of Parliament, and who is, or shall be sued for, or concerning the same, by any other than the King, his heirs, &c. may plead the general issue, and give the special
matter in evidence for his justification. And all persons alrea∣dy sued or impleaded for any the causes aforesaid, may, not∣withstanding any plea or demurrer already made by such De∣fendant, change his plea, and plead the general issue. Provided, This Act not to extend to authorize the levying of any sum or sums of money which are pardoned by the Act of free and general Pardon, Indempnity and Oblivion. Courts and Jurisdictions. I. Enected, 17 Car. 1. Cap. That the Court commonly called the Star-chamber, and all Jurisdiction, power, and au∣thority belonging unto, or exercised in the same Court, by any the Judges, Officers, or Ministers thereof, be, from and after the first day of August, 1641. clearly and absolutely dissolved, and taken away and determined; and from and after the said first day of August, 1641. neither the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, President of the Council, nor any Bishop, Tem∣poral Lord, Privy Councellor, Judge or Justice whatsoever, shall have any power or authority, to hear, examine, or determine any matter or thing whatsoever, or make, pronounce or deliver any Judgement, Sentence, Order, or Decree, or do any Judicial or Ministerial Act in the said Court. II. That all and every Act and Acts of Parliament, and all and every article, clause and sentence in them and every of them, for any proceeding to be had or made in the said Court of Star-chamber, or for any matter to be examined or deter∣mined there, be, from the said 1. day of August 1641. repealed, and absolutely revoked and made void. III. That the Jurisdiction exercised in the Court before the President and Councel in the Marches of Wales, and also in the Court before the President and Councel in the Northern parts: and also in the Court commonly called The Dutchy of Lancaster, held before the Chancellor and Councel of the Court, and also in the Court of Exchequer of the County Palatine of Chester held before the Chamberlain and Councel of that Court, shall from and after the said first day of August, 1641. be repealed, absolutely revoked and made void; any Law, Prescription, Custom, Usage, or the Statute made in the third year of King
Henry the 7. or the Statute made in the 21 year of King Henry the 8. or any Act or Acts of Parliament heretofore had or made to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. IV. That neither His Majesty, nor His Privy Councel have, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, power, or authority by En∣glish Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel, or any other arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine, draw in question, determine or dis∣pose, of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chat∣tels of any of the Subjects of this Kingdom, but the same ought to be tried and determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, by the ordinary course of Law. V. That if any person shall be committed, restrained of his liberty, or suffer imprisonment by the Order or Decree of the Court of Star-Chamber; or of the Courts holden before the President of the Marches of Wales, Courts of the Duchy of Lan∣caster; Court of Exchequer of the County Palatine of Chester; or by the command or Warrant of the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, in his, or their own persons; or by command or Warrant from the Council board; or by any of the Lords, or otherwise, of His Majesties Privy Council: In every such case the person committed or restrained of his liberty, or suffering imprisonment, upon demand, or motion of his Coun∣sel, or other imployed by him, unto the Judges of the Court of Kings-Bench, or Common-Pleas, in open Court without delay shall have a Writ of Habeas corpus directed to all and every She∣riff, Gaoler, or other person, in whose custody the party com∣mitted, or restrained shall be, and the said Sheriffs, Gaoler, or other person in whose custody the party so committed or restrain∣ed shall be, shall at the return of the said Writ, upon due, or convenient notice thereof, at the charge of the party who pro∣cureth such Writ, and upon security of his own Bond of carrying back the prisoner, if he shall be remanded by the Court to which he shall be brought, bring, or cause to be brought, the body of the said party so committed, &c. before the Judge, or Ju∣stices of the said Court from whom the Writ shall issue forth: and thereupon the Court within three days after such return made and delivered in open Court, shall proceed to examine and determine, whether the cause of commitment be just and legal or not, and thereupon shall do what to Justice shall ap∣pertain. 1. Provided, That this Act, and the several clauses therein, to extend only to the said Court of Star-Chamber, Courts of the
Marches of Wales, Court of the President of the Northern parts, Courts of the Duchy of Lancaster, and Court of Ex∣chequer of the County Palatine of Chester, and to the Warrants, Directions and Commitments before mentioned, and every of them. 2 Provided, That no person shall be sued, impleaded, mo∣lested, or troubled for any offence against this present Act, un∣less the party supposed to have offended shall be sued, or implea∣ded for the same, within two years at the most after such time wherein the said offence shall be committed. Enacted, 17 Car. 1. Cap. Whereas in the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. there is a clause to this effect, viz. That the Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors should have power and authority by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to assign, name, and authorize such Person and persons, being natural born Subjects to her Highness, as she, her Heirs and Successours should think meet▪ to exercise, use, and execute under her, her Heirs or Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, priviledges and prehemi∣nences touching or concerning spiritual Jurisdiction within her Realms of England and Ireland, or any her Highness Dominions or Countries: and to use, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all Errors, Heresies, Schisms, abuses, offences, contempts and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner Spiritual or Ec∣clesiastical power, authority, or Jurisdiction, can, or may be law∣fully reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amen∣ded: and that such persons so to be assigned, named, authorized, and appointed by and after the Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered, should have full power and authority by ver∣tuc of that Act, and of the said Letters Patents to exercise, use, and execute all the premisses, according to the tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents. Repealed by Act 13 Car. 2. Cap. 12. 1. Enacted, That the said Branch, Clause, Article, or Sen∣tence contained in the said Act, and every word, matter and thing contained in the said Branch, Clause, Article, or Sen∣tence shall from henceforth be repealed, revoked, annulled and utterly made void for ever, any thing in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding: II. That no Arch-Bishop, Bishop, Vicar-General, Chan∣cellor or Official; nor Commissary of any Arch-Bishop, Bi∣shop, or Vicar-General: or any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister
exercising any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical powers by any grant, li∣cense or Commission from the King, his Heirs, or Successours, shall from and after the first day of August, 1641. Award, im∣pose, or inflict any pain, penalty, fine, amercement, imprison∣ment, or other corporal punishment, upon any of the Kings sub∣jects, for any contempt, misdemeanour, crime, matter, or thing whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; Or shall, Ex officio, or otherwise, tender, give or minister unto any Church-warden, Sideman, or any other person whatsoever, any corporal Oath, to make any presentment of any crime or offence; or to confess or accuse himself of any crime, or offence, delinquency, or misdemeanour, whereby, or by reason whereof, he or they may be liable to any pain, penalty, or punishment whatsoever: upon pain to forfeit to every party so grieved, treble damages, and an 100 l. to him that shall first demand, or sue for the same; The said treble damages, and an 100 l. to be demand∣ed and recovered by action of debt in any Court of Record; wherein no Priviledge, Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed the Defendant. And every person who shall be once convicted of any act or offence, prohibited by this Statute, shall be disabled to continue in any office or employment of Justice, or to execute any authority, by force of any Commission, or Let∣ters Patents of the King, his Heirs or Successors. III. That after the first day of August, 1641. No new Court shall be erected, ordained, or appointed within the Realm of Eng∣land and Dominion of Wales, that shall have the like power, ju∣risdiction or authority, as the High Commission Court hath, or pretendeth to have: But that all Letters Patents, Commissions and Grants made, or to be made by the King, his Heirs or Suc∣cessors; and all powers and authorities granted, mentioned to be given thereby, and all Acts, Sentences and Decrees made by vertue, or colour thereof, shall be utterly void. Courts and Jurisdictions. Stannary Court. Whereas King Edward the first by his several Charters grant∣ed divers Liberties and Franchises to the Tinners within the several Counties of Devon and Cornwal, as to be quit of Tolls, Aides, and other customs in Vills, Ports, Fairs and Markets; which of right belong only to making Tinners; working with∣out
fraud in the several Stannaries within the said Counties; and not to any other elsewhere working: And whereas sundry Inhabitants within the said Counties, and others so entitle them∣selves to the said Liberties by fraud; and for small or no consi∣deration, have acquired, and do acquire to themselves decayed Tin-works, and small and inconsiderable parties in the same, which abuses are done to enable the said false or feigned Tinners, to search and sue their neighbours in the Stannary Courts where for the most part the Defendant is debarred his costs; and also the Jurisdiction of the said Stannaries, contrary to the said Charter, hath been endeavoured to be extended out of the places where the Tinners do work; by reason of which abuses the In∣habitants of the said Counties, are vexed, oppressed and impri∣soned, His Majesty is defrauded of his Aids, Customs; Lords and Owners of Fairs and Markets, of their Tolls and Duties; the Government of the Country confounded and eluded, the said false Tinners, claiming when they list to be Tinners, and when Foraigners. 1. Enacted, That the Declaration in the several Charters, be henceforth duly held and observed, with this, that the words in the said Declarations, viz. (in locis ubi operantur) be expoun∣ded to extend to the Vill, Tything and Hamlet, where some Tin-work in work is scituate, and not elsewhere, and no longer then the Tin-work is or shall be in working. II. That if any person or persons which shall be sued in the Stannaries, shall swear or tender his Oath where they shall be sued, that he or they are not, nor is, nor at the time of the suit was not, nor were a Tinner, or Tinners: the Defendant shall be discharged of such suit, unless the Plaintiff forthwith make Oath, that the Plaintiff is a working Tinner without fraud or deceit, and that the cause of his suit in the Stannaries, concern∣eth Tin or Tin-works. III. If any person being not revera, without fraud, a work∣ing and labouring Tinner, in or about some Tin-work, set on work half a year before his suit, shall sue, prosecute and implead any person that is not a Tinner at the time of such suit com∣menced; in such case, the Defendant shall have his action at the Common Law, against such person suing or prosecuting, wherein he shall recover 10 l. and his damages and costs of suit; Provided, the action be brought within two years next after the action or suit brought in the Stannary Court.
IV. In all cases where the Plaintiff or Defendant are to have costs by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, there they shall have like costs in the Stannary Courts, and it shall be lawful to and for any Tinners▪ to sue any Foreigners (if they shall think fit) at the Common Law; any usage, or Charter not∣withstanding. V. That no person or persons be charged, or troubled as surety or sureties, by any return of any Bailiff, or Bailiffs of the Stannaries, unless the person or persons returned surety, or sureties, shall in the presence of two Witnesses subscribe or sign a note in writing, that such person or persons, is become surety or sureties, which note shall mention the names of the Plaintiff and Defendant in the suit, and the sums or damages in demand, and the nature of the Action, and be signed, or sub∣scribed by the said Witnesses, and returned and filed in the Court out of which the Process shall issue; And no Bailiff, or Bailiffs of the Stannaries, shall be admitted a witness to such note. VI. No Defendant shall be condemned upon such return for not appearing, unless also a note under the hand, or sign of the party arrested, and subscribed by two such witnesses as afore∣said, be returned into the Court at or before the day of appea∣rance; and the Bailiff or Bailiffs, shall take but 4. d. for every such note: and none shall be bailed upon arrest there till he give such note; and if the Bailiff, or Bailiffs shall return a rescous against any person, he shall be admitted to traverse the return, and if it be found for him, he shall be no further troubled by reason of such return. Crown, King, Queen. 1. Enacted 13 Car. 2. Cap. 1. If any person or persons what∣soever after 21 June, 1661. during the natural life of the Kings Majesty, shall within the Realm, or without, compass, ima∣gine, devise or intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm tending to death or destruction, maiming, or wounding, im∣prisonment or restraint of the person of the King, or to de∣prive, or depose him from the Style, Honour, or Kingly name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or other his Dominions or Countries: Or levy War against him within this Realm, or without: Or stir any Foreigner with force to invade this
Realm, or any other his Majesties Dominions or Countries under his obeysance: And such compassings, imaginations, in∣ventions, or any of them, shall express, utter, or declare by any Printing, Writing, Preaching, or malicious and advised speeches, be convicted hereof upon the Oaths of two credible Witnesses, or attainted by Course of Law. Every person so offending shall be deemed and adjudged to be Traitors, and shall lose and for∣feit, as in case of High Treason. II. If any person or persons after the 24th of June, 1661. during His Majesties life, shall maliciously and advisedly pub∣lish or affirm the King to be an Heretick, or a Papist, or that he intends to introduce Popery; or shall maliciously and advised∣ly by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other speeches express, publish, or declare any words, or other thing or things to stir up the people to hatred or dislike of the person of His Majesty, or his established government: Every such person, &c. thereof convicted, are disabled to have, or enjoy, and made uncapa∣ble of having, enjoying, or exercising any place, office, or Promotion Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, or other Imploy∣ment in Church or State other then that of his Peerage, and shall be liable to such further and other punishments as by the Laws and Statutes of this kingdom may be inflicted in such cases. III. If any person or persons at any time after the 24th of June, 1661. shall maliciously and advisedly by Writing, Prin∣ting, Preaching, or speaking, publish, declare, or affirm, That the Parliament begun at Westminster, Novemb. 3. 1640. is not dissolved, or not determined; Or that it ought to be in being; Or that there lies any obligation upon him or any other person from any Oath, Covenant, or Engagement, to endeavour a change of Government; Or that both, or either House of Parli∣ament have a Legislative Power without the King, or any words to the same effect. If any such person, &c. so offending, shall incur the danger and penalty of Premunire mentioned in a Sta∣tute made 16 R. 2. IV. Declared, That the Oath usually called, The Solemn League and Covenant was in it self an unlawful Oath, and im∣posed upon the Subjects against the fundamental Laws and Li∣berties of this Kingdom: And all Ordinances or Orders of both or either Houses of Parliament for imposing of Oaths, Cove∣nants, or Engagements, levying of Taxes, raising of Forces, or Arms, to which the Royal assent in person, or by Commission
was not expresly had or given, were, and still are, and shall be taken to be null and void to all intents and purposes. 1. Provided, That all and every person, or Bodies poli∣tick or corporate, who have been, or shall at any time here∣after be questioned for any thing done by colour of any the Orders or Ordinances aforesaid; and are indempnified by an Act, entituled, A free and general Pardon, Indempnity and Oblivion, made in the twelfth year of His Majesties Reign that now is, or shall be indempnified by an Act of Parliament, shall and may make such use of the said Orders and Ordinances, for their indempnity, according to the intent and meaning of the said Act, and no other, as they might have done, if this Act had not been made. 2. No person shall be prosecuted for any of the offences in this Act (other then such as are declared to be High Treason) unless it be by order from the King, his Heirs or Successors, un∣der his or their sign Manual: Or by order of His Majesties, &c. Council Table, directed to the Attorney General, or some o∣ther of the Council learned of His Majesty, his Heirs, &c. Nor shall any person, &c. by vertue of this Act, incur any the pe∣nalties therein, unless he be prosecuted within six moneths after the offence committed; and indicted within three moneths after such prosecution. V. No person or persons shall be Indicted, Arraigned, Con∣demned, Convicted, or Attainted for any the Treasons or Of∣fences aforesaid, unless the Offender, &c. be thereof accused by the testimony and deposition of two credible Witnesses upon Oath: which Witnesses, at the time of the Offenders Arraign∣ment, shall be brought in person before him or them face to face, and shall openly avow upon Oath what they have to say con∣cerning the Treasons, or Offences contained in the Indictment, unless the party arraigned shall without violence confess the same. 1 Provided, This Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to deprive either Houses of Parliament, or any of their Members, of their just, ancient Freedom and priviledge of debating any matters which shall be propounded or debated in either of the said Houses, or at any conferences, or Com∣mittees, of both, or either the said Houses; or touching the al∣teration of any old, or preparing any new Laws, but that the Members of either of the said Houses, and the assistants of the House of Peers, and every of them, shall have the same freedom
of speech, and all other priviledges whatsoever, as they had before the making of this Act. VI. No Peer of the Realm shall be tried for any offence against this Act, but by his Peers: And every Peer after his conviction of any offence against this Act, shall be disabled du∣ring his life to sit in Parliament, unless His Majesty shall be pleased to pardon him; and after such pardon granted to any such Peer or Commoner, the Peer or Commoner so pardoned, shall be restored to all intents and purposes, as if he had never been convicted; any Law or thing to the contrary notwith∣standing. Whereas the horrible and execrable murther of His Majesties Royal Father, King Charls the first, hath been committed by a party of wretched men desperately wicked; 1. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 30. That Oliver Cromwell de∣ceased, Henry Ireton deceased, John Bradshaw deceased, Tho∣mas Pride deceased, be adjudged to be convicted and attaint∣ed of High Treason to all intents and purposes, as if they, and every of them respectively had been attainted in their lives time. II. That John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wauton, and diverse other persons, consisting of 19. persons, in the Act par∣ticularly named, and every of them, stand and be adjudged, con∣victed and attainted of High Treason. III. That all and every the Mannors, Messuages, Lands, Te∣nements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Possessions, Rights, Conditions, Interests, Offices, Fees, Annuities and all other the Hereditaments, Leases for years, Chattels real, and other things of that nature whatsoever they be, of them the said Oli∣ver Cromwel, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, and of other persons particularly named in the said Act, amounting to the number of 52. persons, which they, or any of them, or a∣ny other person or persons, to their, or any of their uses, or in trust had for them, or any of them the 25. day of March, 1646. or at any time since, shall stand and be forfeited to the King, his Heirs and Successors, and shall be vested and adjudged to be in the actual and real possession of the King, without a∣ny Office, or inquisition thereof, hereafter to be taken or found. V. That no conveyance, assurance, grant, bargain, sale, charge, lease, assignment, surrender by copy, estate, interest
trust or limitation of uses, of, or out of any Mannors, Lands, Te∣nements, Hereditaments (not being the lands of the late King, Queen, Prince, or any of the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, nor any Statute, Judgement or Recognizance, had, made, acknowledged or suffered to any person or persons, which before the 24. day of September, 1659. by any of the Offenders in the Act mentioned, or their Heirs, or any other persons, claiming by, from and under them; other then the Wife or Wives, Child or Children, Heir or Heirs, of such per∣son or persons, to any of them) for money bona fide to them or any of them paid or lent, nor any conveyance, grant, or e∣state made before the 25. day of April, 1660. by any person or persons aforesaid in Trust, and for the benefit of any other person or persons not being any of the Offenders aforesaid, shall be impeached, defeated, made void, or frustrated hereby; or by the convictions, or attainders aforesaid, but shall be enjoyed, by the Purchasers, Grantees, Leasees, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns respectively, as if this Act had not been made, so as the said Conveyances, Grants, Assurances, which are and ought to be held and enjoyed as aforesaid, before the first of Ja∣nuary, 1662. be entred and enrolled of Record, in his Majesties Court of Exchequer, and not otherwise. VI. That all and singular the Mannors, Lands, and Heredi∣taments, which heretofore were the Lands, &c, of Henry late Marquess of Worcester, Edward now Marquess of Worcester, and Henry Lord Herbert, Son to the said Edward Marquess of Wor∣cester, whereof the said Oliver Cromwel, or any other person in trust for him, or to his use, or any other the persons attainted by this Act or otherwise, or any other person, &c. in trust for them, or any of them, had at any time before or since the decease of the said Oliver Cromwel, are vested and seized in, and shall be held and enjoyed by the said Marquess of Worcester and Henry Lord Herbert, in such manner, and for such estate, or such pow∣ers and priviledges, as they formerly had in the same, any thing in this Act, or any Act, Conveyance, or Assurance, heretofore made or acknowledged by the said Edward Marquess of Wor∣cester, and Henry Lord Herbert, unto the said, Oliver Cromwel, or any other person in trust for him, or any Act or Conveyance made by the said Oliver, or any in trust for him, to any person whatsoever, saving the estates, rights, titles, &c. of strangers, not derived by and from any the said Offenders, since the 25. day of March, 1646.
1. Provided, That all and every person, &c. which have re∣ceived any of the rents, or mean profits, of, in, or out of any the Lands, &c. Chattels real or possessions of any of the Offen∣ders in this Act mentioned, before the eleventh day of February, 1659. and have paid or accompted for the same before the ele∣venth of February 1659. unto the said Offender, Offenders, or their assigns, or any other person, &c. claiming from or under them, shall be clearly for ever acquitted and discharged of and from the same, against the King his Heirs and Successors, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding. 2. That it shall be lawful for Richard Ingolsby, to retain, keep, sell, or dispose of all the Goods and Chattels formerly be∣longing to Sir Hardress Waller, in the kingdom of Ireland, until 2000 l. for which the said Ingolsby in the year 1658. stood joynt∣ly bounden with the said Hardrcss Waller, unto James Brooks of the City of York Alderman, and was then counter-secured by a Judgement upon his Lands, and since by a Deed of bargain and sale of the said Goods and Chattels in Ireland, be fully paid, together with the Interest thereof. The said Ingolsby paying the overplus to the King. Customs, Subsidies and Impositions upon Goods and Merchandizes, Import∣ed and Exported. 1. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 4. That one Subsidy called Tonnage, be granted to the King, viz. of every Tun of Wine, of the growth of France, or of the Dominions of the French King: that shall come into the Port of London and the Mem∣bers thereof by way of Merchandize by natural born subjects, 4 l. 10 s. English Money: and by Aliens and Strangers 6 l. Brought into other Ports and places of the kingdom by na∣tural born subjects, by way of Merchandize 3 l. and by Aliens 4 l. 10 s. Of every Butt, or Pipe of sweet Wines, of the growth of the Levant, Spain, Portugal, brought into the Port of London, by natural born subjects 45 s. by Strangers and Aliens 3 l. and of overy Butt, or Pipe of the like Wine brought by subjects born into other Ports of England, &c. by way of Merchandize 30 s. by Strangers and Aliens 45 s.
Of every Awm of Rhenish Wine, or wine of the growth of Germany, brought in by natural born subjects 20. s. brought by strangers 25. s. II. Poundage, viz. Of all manner of Goods and Merchandi∣zes of every Merchant, natural born subject, Denizen, or Ali∣en, to be Exported out of the Realm, or Imported by way of Merchandize, of the value of every 20. s. according to the several rates and values, as they are respectively rated at in the book of Rates 12. d. Of every 20. s. value of any native Commodities, or Manu∣factures wrought of such Commodities, to be carried out of this Realm, by any Merchant Alien, 12. d. over and above the 12. d. aforesaid; except out of this all manner of woollen cloths, wrought within the Realm of England, commonly called old Draperies. All manner of Fish, English taken, and brought in by Eng∣lish Bottoms, fresh Fish and Bestial that come into this Realm, and all other Goods and Merchandizes, within the Book of Rates mentioned to be Custom free. III. Subsidie: Of and for every Wollen cloth to be ex∣ported by natural born subjects, called Broad-cloth, not ex∣ceeding 28. yards in length, and 64. pounds in weight, 3. s. 4. d. and of every greater Cloth in length and weight proportio∣nably: of every short Cloth of old Drapery, of lesser length and weight, exported by natural subjects 3. s. 4. d. and by strangers 6. s. 8. d. All the said Subsidies, and every of them to the King, from the 24. day of June, Anno 12. of his Reign for and during his life. IV. If any Wines, Goods, Merchandizes whereof the Sub∣sidies aforesaid shall be due, shall after be shipped, or put into any Boat, or Vessel to be exported; or else be brought from the parts beyond the Seas, into any Port or place of this Realm, by way of Merchandize, and unshipped to be layed on the Land, the Subsidie, Custom, and other duties not paid, or lawfully tendred to the said Collector thereof, with the con∣sent and agreement of the Comptroller, or Surveyor, he or one of them, nor agreed for the same at the Custom-house, Then from the said 24. of June; All the Goods and Merchandizes, shall be forfeit to the King, one moiety thereof to the King, the other moiety unto him who will sue for the same.
V. If any Goods, or Merchandizes, of any Merchant Deni∣zen, after the said 24. of June, hath been, or hereafter during the Kings life, shall be taken by Enemies, or Pirats by Sea, or perished in any Ship that shall be taken, whereof the Subsidies are or shall be duly paid, or agreed for, and that be proved be∣fore the Treasurers of England, or Commissioners of the Trea∣sury, or Barons of the Exchequer, or by the examination of the Merchants, or of their Executors or Administrators if they be dead, or by two credible Witnesses sworn; then the same Merchant, his Executors, &c. may newly ship in the same Port, where the Goods and Merchandizes aforesaid were, so much other Merchandizes, or Goods, as the same Goods and Merchandizes are, or shall be lost, do amount unto in Custom, without paying any thing for the same, the said proof, being allowed, or certified unto the Collectors of the Customs of the Ports, where the same Wares, or Merchandizes are to be new∣ly shipped, without Custom. Provided, It shall be lawful for subjects, at their wills and pleasures, to transport out of the Realm in Ships, or other Vessels of the subjects, all kind of Herrings and other Sea Fish, to be taken on the Sea, by any of the subjects, out of any of the Ports of the Realm, to any place out of the Kings Dominions, without paying any Custom, Subsidy, Poundage for the same, during the Kings life. VI. That the Book of Rates, of the Tonnage, poundage and Subsidies aforesaid in this Act, which is subscribed with the hand of Sir Harbotle Grimston Baronet, Speaker to the House of Commons, and every Article therein contained, shall re∣main during the Kings life as effectual to all intents and purpo∣ses, as if it were included in the body of the Act. VII. That during the continuance of this Act, where the Goods exported or imported, amount to the value of 5. l. or more, the Customers, Collectors, and other officers in the seve∣ral Ports, shall take such fees and no other, as were taken in the fourth year of the Reign of the late King James, until the said Fees shall be otherwise setled by authority of Parliament. 1. Provided, No person who after the 24. of June, 1660. and before the 24. of July the same year, have had, received, or collected any Customs according to the rates used in April, 1660. shall be molested or impeached, for or concerning the same, or any other duties by this Act imposed: and no per∣son that hath Shipped any Goods, since the said 24. of June,
and before the said 24. of July, shall be liable to the payment of any duties, other then such as were used to be paid in the said moneth of April, 1660. VIII. It shall be lawful for any person, from and after the passing of this Act, to carry out of this Kingdom, or any-Port thereof, any of the Commodities, Goods and Merchandizes following, viz. Iron, Arms, Bandeliers, Bridle-bitts, Halbert-heads and Sharps, Holsters, Muskets, Carbines, Fowling-pie∣ces, Pistols, Pike-heads, Sword or Rapier-blades, Sadles, Snaffles, Stirrops, Calves-skins dressed, or undressed, Geldings, Oxen, Sheep-skins dressed without the wooll, and all sort of Manu∣factures made of Leather, paying the rates appointed by the Act, and no other. IX. It shall be lawful for any person, &c. after the passing this Act, to Ship and Transport by way of Merchandize, the sorts of Goods following, viz. Gunpowder, when the same doth not exceed the value of 5. l. per Barrel, Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Mault, Oats, Beef, Pork, Brawn, Butter, Cheese, Candles, when they do not exceed the prices in the Act particularly named, paying the Rates appointed by the Act, and no more. 1. Provided, The King shall be free at any time when he shall see cause, by Proclamation to prohibit the Transporting of Gunpowder, or any sort of Arms or Ammunition into any parts out of this Kingdom. X. That above the Rates in the Act before mentioned, there shall be paid to the King of every Tun of Wine of the growth of France, Germany, Portugal, or Madera, brought into the Port of London, or elsewhere 3. l. within the space of four moneths after the Importing. And of all other Wines import∣ed, 4. l. within the space of nine moneths after the Importing, for the payment of which the Importer shall give good security, and if any of the Wines for which this additional duty is paid, or secured, be Exported within twelve moneths after their Im∣portation, the said additional duty shall be returned, or the se∣curity discharged, as to so much as shall be so Exported. XI. After the said 24. of July, All manner of Wines to be Imported, shall be freed and discharged of and from the Impo∣sition of Excise. Prize-Wines shall not pay Tonnage, or Custom, nor be charged with the payment of any sum of money imposed upon Wines.
I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. c. 11. No Ship or Vessel ariving from the parts beyond the Seas, shall be above three days coming from Graves-end to the place of her discharge (within the River of Thames) without touching at any Wharf, Key, or place (unless apparently hindred by contrary winds, or other just impedi∣ment) as shall be allowed by such as are, or shall be appointed by the King for the managing of the Customs: and then, or be∣fore the Mr. of the Ship, &c. or Purser shall make a true entry up∣on Oath, of the Burthen, Contents and Lading of every Ship, &c. with the marks, numbers, qualities and contents of every parcel of Goods; where and in what Port she took her lading, of what Country built, how manned, who are Masters, or Owners thereof, and to come directly to the place of unlading, making Entries as aforesaid upon penalty of forfeit of 100. l. II. No Captain, Master, Purser, or other, taking charge of any Ship, &c. bound for the parts beyond the Seas, or into the Kingdom of Scotland; shall take in, or suffer to be taken into, or laden aboard any such Ships, &c. any English Goods or Merchandizes to be exported into the parts beyond the Seas, or into the Kingdom of Scotland, until the Captain, Master-purser, &c. shall have entred such Ship, &c. in the book of the Commissioner, Customer, or Collector and Comptroller out∣wards, where he shall load, and take the Goods, together with the names of the Captain, or Master, the burden of the Ship, &c. the number of Guns and Ammunition she carries, to what part she intends to sail, and before he or they shall de∣part with their Ship, &c. out of the Port, shall deliver to the persons appointed for the managing of the Customs, a content in writing, of the names of every Merchant or other person, that have laden and put on board any Goods or Merchandizes, with the marks and numbers of them; and publickly in the Custom-house upon his Oath, have answered to such questi∣ons as shall be demanded of him by the persons appointed for the managing of the Customs, upon pain of forfeit of 100. l. III. No Captain, Master, Purser, or other person taking charge of any Ship, &c. wherein any goods, wares or merchan∣dizes shall have been laden, or brought from the Ports beyond the Seas, or Scotland, shall unload, or put aboard any Ligh∣ter, Boat, &c. or to be laid on land out of any Ship, &c. any goods, wares or merchandizes whatsoever, before the Cap∣tain, Master, Purser, or other persons, &c. shall have declared in writing under their hands, to the Commissioners, &c. ap∣pointed
for the managing of the Customs, &c. where he arri∣veth, the name of every Merchant or Lader of any the Goods aboard the Ship, with the numbers, marks, quantity, and qua∣lity of every parcel of the goods, &c. and shall have answered upon their Oaths to such questions, concerning such goods and merchandizes, as shall be administred to them in the open Custom-house: and shall be liable to all seizures and other rules which Merchants Ships are subject unto (victualling bills and entring excepted) upon pain of forfeit of 100. l. and up∣on refusing to make such entries, as well outwards as inwards, the persons appointed for managing of the Customs, &c. may freely enter, and go aboard every such Ship, &c. and bring from thence on shore into his Majesties Store-house belonging to the Port where the Ship, &c. shall be, all goods and mer∣chandizes prohibited or uncustomed which shall be found aboard any Such Ship, &c. IV. The Commissioners and persons appointed for the ma∣naging of the Customs, &c. are authorized and enabled to en∣ter aboard any Ship, &c. aswel of War, as Merchants Ship, and from thence to bring to shore all prohibited and uncustomed goods, except Jewels, if they be outward bound, and if they be Ships inward bound, to bring to shore to the Kings Store-house, all single parcels of fine goods, or other goods which shall be found in Cabbins, Chests, Trunks, or other small pack∣age, or in any other place in or out of the Ship, which may occasion the ware intended to be fraudently conveyed away; and all other goods for which Tonnage, and Poundage were not paid, or compounded for; to remain in the Store-house, until his Majesties duties be fully satisfied. V. If any Master, Purser, or Boatswain taking charge of any Ship, &c. shall suffer any Truss, Bale, Pack, Fardel, Cask, or other Package, to be opened aboard the Ship, and the goods therein be embezeled, carried away, or put into any other package after the Ship comes into the Port of her discharge; in every such case, the Master, Purser, Boatswain, &c. shall forfeit 100. l. VI. That in case after the clearing of any Ship, &c. by the persons appointed for the managing of the Customs, &c. and discharging the Watch-men, or Tides-men from attendance thereupon, there shall be sound on board such Ship, &c. any goods, wares or merchandizes concealed from the knowledge of the persons, &c. appointed to the managing of the Customs,
for which the Customs, subsidy, or other Duties upon the Im∣portation thereof hath not been paid: Then the Master, Purser, or other person taking charge of the Ship, &c. shall forfeit the sum of 100. l. VII. That it shall be lawful for any person authorized by writ of Assistance under the Seal of the Court of Exchequer, to take any Constable, Headborough, or other publick Officer inha∣biting neer the place, in the day time, to go into any House, Shop, Cellar, Ware-house, Room or other place; and in case of resistance to break open Doors, Chests, Trunks, or other Package to seize, and from thence to bring any kind of goods or Merchandizes prohibited and uncustomed, and to put and secure the same in the Kings Store-house in the Port next to the place where such seizures shall be made. VIII. Where any Officer or Officers shall be by any person or persons armed with Club, or any other weapon, forcibly hindered, abused, beaten or wounded either on board any Ship, &c. or upon the Land or Water, in the due execution of their Office, all and every such person or persons so resisting, abusing, beating or wounding the said Officer or Officers, or their Deputies, or such as shall act in their Assistance, shall be by the next Justice of Peace committed to Prison; and the Justices of the Peace at their next Quarter Sessions are impower∣ed to punish the Offender by Fine, not exceeding 100. l. and the Offender to remain in Prison till he be discharged of the Ex∣chequer, both of the Fine and Imprisonment, or discover the Person who set him on work, to the end he may be legally pre∣ceeded against. IX. If any Wharfinger, Keeper of any Wharf, Crane, or Key, or any of their servants shall take up, or land, or suffer to be taken up, or landed, or shall Ship off from any of their Wharfs, Cranes or Keys, any Goods, Wares, or Merchandizes prohibited, or whereof any Custom, Subsidy, or Duty are due and payable to the King, without the presence of some of the Officers of the Customs thereunto appointed; in every such case, all and every Wharfinger, keeper of Wharf, Crane, Key, &c. shall forfeit and pay 100. l. and if any goods, &c. shall be laden in or taken from the Shore, in any Barque, Hoy, Ligh∣ter, Barge, Wherry, &c. to be carried aboard any Ship, &c. outward bound for the parts beyond the Seas: Or laden, or taken in from or out of any Ship coming in, and arriving from Forreign parts without a warrant, and the presence of one Of∣ficer
of the Customs; such Barque, Hoy, Lighter, Barge, &c. shall be forfeited, and the Master of the Ship, Purser, Boatswain, or other Mariner knowing and consenting thereunto, shall for∣feit the value of the goods so unshipped. X. If any Carman, Porter, Waterman, or other person, shall assist in taking up, landing, or carrying away any goods or merchandizes, such common Porter, &c. so assisting, being apprehended by Warrant from a Justice of the Peace of the County, Place, Borough, &c. and the same being proved by oath by two witnesses, the Offenders may be by the Justice, &c. committed to the next Gaol till he find Sureties to be of the good behaviour, till he shall thereof be discharged by the Lord Treasurer, or Barons of the Exchequer, &c. And in case they shall afterward offend in the like kind, shall be committed to the Gaol, and remain there two moneths without Bail or Main-prize, until he shall pay to the Sheriff of the County 5 l. for the use of the King, and be by the Lord Treasurer, &c. thence discharged. XI. If any Goods or Merchandizes shall be shipped, &c. to be carried forth to Sea from any Port, Creek, &c. in Eng∣land, &c. to be landed at any place of this Realm without a Sufferance or Warrant from the persons appointed for the ma∣naging of the Customs, &c. all such Goods, Merchandizes, &c. shall be forfeited. XII. That the Master of every Ship, &c. that shall take in Goods or Merchandizes in any Port, &c. within the Kingdom of England, &c. to be discharged in some other Port, Creek, &c. of the said Kingdom, &c. shall before the Ship be carried out of the Port, take out a Cocquet, and be bound to the King in good security to the value of the goods, &c. for discharge thereof in the Port or place for which the same shall be entred, or within some other Port, &c. within the Kingdom of Eng∣land, &c. and to return a Certificate within six moneths after the date of the Cocquet, under the hands and seals of some of the Kings Officers, and signed also by some of the persons ap∣pointed for the managing of the Customs, that such goods or Merchandizes were there landed, upon penalty of forfeiture of the bond and security. XIII. If any Officer of any Port, Creek, &c. shall grant, or make any false Certificate of any Goods or Merchandizes which should have been landed out of any Ship, &c. Such Officer shall lose the employment, and forfeit 50 l. suffer one years
Imprisonment without bail, &c. and be uncapable of serving the King in any place of trust concerning his Customs: And if any person whatsoever shall counterfeit, raise, or falsifie any Cocquet, Certificate, or any other Custom-house-warrant, he shall forfet 100 l. and the Cocquet, &c. shall be invalid, and of none effect: and if any Goods, Merchandizes, brought into any port, Creek, &c. within the Kingdom of England, &c. from any other Port, Creek, &c. within the Kingdom of Eng∣land, &c. in any Ship, &c. shall be landed before such Coc∣quet, &c. to such persons, &c. which are appointed for the managing of the Customs. Then, &c. XIV. If any Goods or Merchandizes for which the duties of Custom or Subsidy are payable to the King, shall be secretly conveyed on board of any Ship, &c. before the Custom and subsidy be answered and paid, and escape the discovery of the Officers of the Customs, and be carried beyond the Seas, the Owners or Proprietors of the Goods or Merchandizes so ship∣ped, or persons who have caused them to be so shipped and transported, shall forfeit the double value of the Goods, &c. Except for Coal so secretly exported, which shall pay but the double Custom to be levied, as by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage is directed. XV. Every Merchant or other passing any Goods or Mer∣chandizes Inwards or Outwards, shall by himself, his Factor, or Agent, subscribe one of the Bills of every Entry, with the Marks, Number, and Customs of every parcel of such Goods; without which the Officers of the Customs shall not suffer any Entry to pass. And no children of Aliens under the age of twenty one years, shall be permitted to be Traders, or any Goods entred in their names. XVI. Upon any Actions, Suits or Informations brought, or entred upon any Law or Statute concerning the Kings Subsi∣dies of Tonnage or Poundage, or Ships of Goods to be forfeited for unlawful Importation or Exportation, there shall not be any party-Jury, but such only as are natural born Subjects of the King, his Heirs, &c. XVII. All Goods or Merchandizes that shall be brought out of, or carried into Scotland by land, into or out of the Kingdom of England, Wales, &c. shall pass by and through Berwick or Carlisle, and then and there pay the Duties and Subsidies grant∣ed by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage: And if any Goods prohibited or uncustomed, coming or going shall pass by, or
beyond the Towns aforesaid, without entry and payment of the Customs; all such goods, &c. or the value thereof shall be for∣feited and lost. XVIII. No Ships, &c. Goods, Wares or Merchandizes shall be seized as forfeited by reason of unlawful Importation or Exportation, into or out of the Kingdom of England, Wales, &c. or other the Ports or Creeks thereof, for not payment of any Customs or Subsidies, but by the persons who are or shall be appointed to mannage the Customs, Officers of the Customs, or such persons as shall be deputed and authorized thereunto by Warrant from the Lord Treasurer, or by a special Commis∣sion from the King under the Privy Seal; and if any seisure be made by any other person whatsoever, for any the causes afore∣said, it shall be void and of none effect. XIX. In every Action, Suit, Indictment, Information, wherein, or whereby the persons which are or shall be ap∣pointed for the managing of the Customs, Officers of his Maje∣sties Customs, or other Officers authorized to put in execution the Act for increasing and encouraging Navigation, or any o∣ther acting in aid of them, are or shall be sued, indicted, mo∣lested or prosecuted; it shall be lawful for all and every of them, their heirs, Executors, &c. to plead the general issue, and to give this, or the aforesaid Acts relating to the Customs, in evidence, in any of his Majesties Courts of Justice where the matter shall be depending: and the Justices are enjoyned to admit the same, and to acquit them of and from all seizures, indictments, Informations and prosecutions, for or concerning any thing done in the necessary performance of their trusts and imployments therein. XX. If any Seizer, Informer, or Officer shall not prosecute to effect for bringing to trial and condemnation, the Ships, Goods, and Merchandizes by them seized or informed against; it shall be lawful for any of the persons appointed to manage the Cu∣stoms, or others deputed by them, or authorized by the Lord Treasurer, to make seizure, or inform against such Goods and Merchandize, or bring action for the same, and such shall be adjudged as the first Informers or Seizers, any Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding. XXI. No Informer or Officer shall be suffered to com∣pound, under one third of the appraised value, upon loss of his Office.
XXII. If any of the Kings Officers, or others appointed for the managing the Customs, Searchers, Waiters, or other per∣sons, or other person deputed by or under them, or any other authority imployed in the affairs of the Customs, shall directly or indirectly take any bribe, recompense, or reward, in any kind whatsoever, or connive at any false entry of any Goods or Merchandizes, whereby the King shall be defrauded in or of his Customs, or Goods prohibited to be imported or exported out of the Kingdom of England, &c. the persons therein offend∣ing shall forfeit 100 l. and be ever after incapable of imploy∣ment under the King, his Heirs, &c. As also the Merchant, or other persons whatsoever, who shall give or pay such bribe, recompense or reward, shall forfeit 50 l. XXIII. All Foreign Goods and Merchandizes which are, or shall be appointed by the persons for the managing of the Customs, Customer, Collector and Comptroller to be permit∣ted to be taken up by Bills at sight, Bills at view, or sufferance, shall be landed at the most convenient Keys or Wharfs, where the person so to be appointed, or Collector shall appoint, and not elsewhere, and there, or in the Kings Storehouse of the Port, shall be measured, weighed, and numbred, by and in the presence of the Officers particularly appointed, which Of∣ficers shall perfect the entry, and subscribe their names, and the next day following shall give account, and make report of every such respective entry to the persons appointed to manage the Customs, Customer, Collector and Comptroller, or in default thereof, shall forfeit 100 l. XXIV. No Ship, Vessel, Boat, employed ordinarily for the carriage of Letters or Packets (unless appointed by persons appointed to manage the Customs, and in cases by them al∣lowed) shall Import or Export any Goods or Merchandizes into, or out of the parts beyond the Seas, upon forfeiture of 100 l. to be paid by the Master of the Vessel or Boat, with the loss of his place, and all the Goods and Merchandizes shall be found aboard such Vessel. XXV. No sort of Wines (other than Rhenish) No sort of Spicery, Grocery, Tobacco, Pot-ashes, Pitch, Tarr, Salt, Ro∣zen, Deal-boards, Firr, Timber, or Oyl-Olive, shall be im∣ported into England, Wales, &c. from the Netherlands, or Germany, upon any pretence whatsoever, in any sort of Ships or Vessels whatsoever, upon loss of all the Goods, as also of the Ships and Furniture.
XXVI. If any Ship or Vessel belonging to any of the Sub∣jects of the King of France, shall come into any Port, Creek, or Harbour of England, Ireland, Wales, &c. upon which by the Act for the encouraging of Shipping and Navigation, an Imposition of 5 s. per Tun of Goods, &c. is payable, shall ei∣ther put on shore, or put over into any Boat, any Goods or Passengers without payment of Custom or Tonnage, at any time returning into any Port of England or Ireland, shall not only pay the former duties, but forfeit 10 l. And whatsoever Pilot, Waterman, or Boatman, which shall from any Harbour, Port, or Creek, go out, and bring any Goods from aboard any such Ships, Vessel, &c. shall not only pay the duty of Tonnage, which the said Ship, &c. should have paid, but forfeit the sum of 40 l. XXVII. The Statutes of 23 Eliz. and 39 Eliz. for Log∣wood, or Blockwood are repealed, and from and after the first of February, 1661. any person, &c. may freely Import into the Kingdom of England, &c. any quantity of Logwood, or Block∣wood, and freely use the same in dying, or colouring any sorts of Goods or Manufactures; any Law, Statute, &c. notwith∣standing. XXVIII. All Actions, Suits, Informations, to be brought upon the Acts of encouragement of Navigation, of Tonnage and Poundage, or other Acts concerning Importation of Goods or Merchandizes from beyond Seas, if the property thereof be claimed by any person of the Importer, Onus importandi shall lie upon the Owner or Claimer. Provided, That if the Seizure or Information be upon the Act of Navigation, the Defendant may have a Commission out of the Chancery to examine Witnesses beyond the Seas, and have convenient time for return thereof, and their Deposures shall be admitted for Evidence at Law, as if given viva voce in Court. XXIX. All Officers belonging to the Admiralty, Captains of Ship-forces, Castles, Blockhouses, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bayliffs, and all the Kings Officers and Subjects, whom it may concern, shall be aiding and assisting to every person appointed to manage the Customs, and the Officers of the Customs, and their Deputies, in the due execution of every act and thing enjoyned by this Act, and shall be saved harmless therein by the Act. XXX. All Deputies, Clerks or Servants, which have any place in or about the Customs, &c, shall before the first day
of June next, take their Oaths for the faithful execution of their several trusts and employments committed to their char∣ges: and no person shall be employed or put in trust in the bu∣siness of the Customs, till he hath taken the Oath as afore∣said. XXXI. All and every Merchant or other person that shall after the 29 September, 1662. Export any Goods or Merchandi∣zes from any Port of this Kingdom capable of a Ship of 200 Tun, upon a full Sea, to any Port of the Mediterranean Sea, beyond the Port of Malaga, or import any Merchandizes from the Ports aforesaid, in any Ship that hath not two decks, and doth carry less than sixteen pieces of Ordnance, with men and Ammunition proportionable, shall pay to the King for all their Merchandizes so Exported or Imported, one per Cent. over and above the duties of Tonnage and Poundage. XXXII. Provided, The Kings subjects may Export Fish, in∣to any the Ports of the Mediterranean Sea, in any English Ves∣sel, the moyety of her lading consisting of Fish only, and may Import any Wares in the same Ship for that Voyage, paying the rates accustomed, of Tonnage and Poundage for the same. XXXIII. All and every person that within seven years after 25. of March, 1662. shall build or cause to be built within the Kings Dominions, any Ship, &c. of three Decks, two Decks and an half, mounted with 30 pieces of Ordnance, and other Ammu∣nition proportionable, shall for the two first Voyages, which the said Ships shall make from the Kings Dominions to any foreign parts, have to their own use the benefit of the tenth part of the Customs for such goods as shall be Exported or Imported in the same Ship or Ships, and the Officers of the Customs are to pay the same to the Owners of the said Ships accordingly. XXXIV. All Salt brought out of Scotland after the 24 of June, 1662. into England or Wales, shall pay to the King ob. upon every gallon of such Imported salt of Winchester measure, at the lading thereof. I. Enacted, Anno 14 Car. 2. Cap. 7. From and after the first of May next, no person whatsoever shall carry or transport out of England into Scotland, Ireland, or any Isles belonging to this Kingdom, or to any parts beyond the Seas, the Skins or Hides tanned or untanned, of any Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow, or Calf, in other manner than is directed by the Act. II. None of the Skins taken from any of the Beasts aforesaid, within any Island belonging to England, shall be transported
out of that Island to any other place but into the Kingdom of England, upon pain of forfeiture of the double value of the skins so transported; the forfeiture to be sued for as by the Act is directed. III. All red tanned Leather of any the skins of the beasts a∣foresaid, shall be bought in the open and common Fair or Mar∣ket used for sale of Leather, and not in any House, Yard, or Shop, upon pain the persons that shall not do the same accordingly, shall for every such offence forfeit the Leather, or the value there∣of, and the contract to be void; all such Leather shall be searched by the Searchers and Sealers appointed, before it be put to sale, and a true Entry made thereof, of the names of the buyer and sel∣ler, and of the places of their abode, upon penalty of forfeiture of the same Leather, or value thereof. IV. If any person, &c. shall be found guilty of Transporta∣tion of any Leather or Hides of the Beasts aforesaid, Exporting such Calve-skins and Sheep-skins dressed without the wooll, he shall be disabled to trade or deal in Leather for the future, and for every offence forfeit 500 l. to be disposed as in the Act is di∣rected. The Act not to extend to the prohibiting the Transporting of Leather made into Boots or Shoes. V. It shall be lawful for the respective Masters and Wardens of Cordwainers, Sadlers, Girdlers and Curriers of London, and their Deputies. And all Customers, Comptrollers, Farmers of Customs, Supervisors, and other Officers of the Customs: all Ju∣stices of Peace, Mayors, chief Officers of Corporations within England, Wales; &c. from time to time, by land or by water, to search for and try all raw Hides, wrought or unwrought, pack'd up or unpack'd, intended to be transported by any per∣son, &c. into the parts beyond the Seas, or Scotland, other than Calve-skins or Sheep-skins. VI. All Tanners who do shave, cut and rake their upper-leather-hides all over, and the necks of their backs and butts, after 20 September, 1662. shall forfeit all the Leather, Backs, Butts, or Calve-skins so shaven, &c. and it shall be lawful for the searchers and sealers to seize the same. VII All penalties, forfeitures, and sums of money for any of the offences mentioned in the Act, shall be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint, Information, brought in any of the Courts at Westminster, or in any Court of Record in the City, County, or place where the offence shall be committed, wherein no
wager of Law, &c. shall be allowed, nor the same be remo∣ved out of the County, City, Town-corporate, &c. One moye∣ty to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other moyety to the Infor∣mer, &c. that shall sue for the same. VIII. All Exportation or Transportation of any Hides or Leather contrary to this Act, is adjudged to be a common and publick Nusance. 1. Provided, This Act not to be construed to extend to prohibit or convey any such Hides or Leather which shall be used or em∣ployed for the necessary use of any Ship or Vessel in any voyage be∣yond the Seas, and which shall not be sold in foreign parts, so as the number exceed not six raw Hides, and three Tanned Hides. IX. All and every Artificer dealing and cutting of Leather, and other person whatsoever which shall hereafter buy any red tanned Leather within London, or three miles thereof, shall before the next Market-day in the place for sale of Leather, give notice to one of the Company of Curriers, exercising the mystery of a Currier in London, or within three miles thereof; and within three weeks after such notice, shall deliver the said Leather so bought (except such part as shall be used for soals) unto the said Currier to whom such notice was given, that the same may be curried, tallowed or dressed, as by an Act made 1 Jacob. 1. Cap. 2. upon penalty of forfeiture of 6 s. 8 d. for every Back, Butt, or Calf-skin so bought. X. The Master and Wardens of the Company of Curriers for the time being, or such as they shall assign, shall at all sea∣sonable times in the day-time enter into any Ware-house, Shop, Cellar, within the City of London, and three miles of the same, belonging to any of the said Cordwainers, Sadlers, Girdlers, or other persons being Artificers, and dealing and cutting of Leather, and to search for, and to seize all such Leather inten∣ded to be prohibited in the Clause or Articles aforesaid. And also for all such Wares made of Leather, and if any such per∣son, Artificer or Dealer shall oppose, or refuse to permit the said Master and Wardens of the said Company of Curriers, or other person, &c. to make any search or seizure as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such offence, 20 l. And if any the Artifi∣cers and Dealers in the cutting of Leather do refuse to be pre∣sent with the searchers when the same shall be desired by the Master and Wardens of the Company of Curriers, or persons thereunto assigned: For every offence the person so refusing,
shall forfeit 10 l. for the uses, and to be recovered as afore∣said. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 13. No person or persons whatsoever shall after the 24 June, 1662. sell, or offer to sale within the Kingdom of England or Wales; Or Export any fo∣reign Bone-lace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needle-work made of Threed, Silk, or any or either of them made in the parts beyond the Seas, or import, bring in, send or convey, or cause to be brought in, sent, &c. into the Kingdom of England or Wales, any such foreign Bone-lace, Cut-work, Fringe, &c. made of Threed or Silk, either from the parts beyond the Seas, after the first of May, 1662. upon pain every such person who shall sell, or offer to sale, any such foreign Bone-lace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, &c. shall for every offence by him com∣mitted, forfeit the sum of 50 l. and the whole Bone-lace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe, &c. so sold or offered to sale. II. That all and every person, &c. who shall import, bring in, send or convey, or cause to be sent or conveyed into this Kingdom of England or Wales, any such Bone-lace, Cut-work, Imbroideries, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needle-work, shall forfeit for every offence by him committed 100 l. and the whole Bone-lace, Cut-work, Imbroideries, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needle-work so imported, sent, or con∣veyed contrary to the Act aforesaid; one moyety to the King, his heirs, &c. the other moyety to them who shall sue for the same in any of the Kings' Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Debt, Information, or otherwise, wherein no Essoign, Pro∣tection, or wager of Law shall be allowed. III. For the preventing the importing of the said Manufa∣ctures, upon complaint and information of the Justices of Peace, or either of them, within the respective Counties, Ci∣ties, Towns-Corporate, he or they are authorized to issue forth their Warrants to the Constables of their respective Cities and Towns, to search for all such Manufactures, in the Shops, being open, Ware-houses and Dwelling-house of such person or persons who shall be suspected to have any such foreign Bone-laces, Imbroideries, Cut-works, Fringes, Band-strings, Buttons and Needle-works, within their respective Counties, Cities, &c. and to seize the same. Provided, 1. All Informations, Actions and Suits that shall be commenced for any offence committed against this Law, shall be
brought within Twelve moneths after the discovery of such of∣fence. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 18. If any person or persons, from and after the first of August, 1662. shall directly or indi∣rectly Export, Transport, Carry, or Convey, or cause to be Exported, Transported, Carried, or Conveyed out of, or from the Kingdom of England or Wales; or after the first of January, 1662. out of the Kingdom of Ireland, into any parts, or places out of the Kingdoms aforesaid, or into the Kingdom of Scotland, any sheep or wooll whatsoever, of the breed or growth of the Kingdoms aforesaid, or any Wool-fels, Mortlings, Wool-flocks, or any Fullers-earth, or Fulling-clay; or shall directly pack, or load, or cause to be packed upon any Horse, Cart, or Carri∣age; or shall load, or lay on board, &c. in any Ship, or other Vessel, in any place within the Kingdom of England, Ireland, or Wales, &c. any such Sheep, Wooll, Wool-fels, Yarn made of Wooll, Fullers-earth, or Fulling-clay, &c. to the intent to Export, &c. or cause the same to be Exported, &c. out of the Kingdom of England or Ireland, Wales, &c. into any foreign parts, every such offence shall be adjudged Felony, and the Offender being convicted, shall forfeit and suffer as in case of Felony. II. Every Owner of any such Ship or Vessel, and every Owner of every Horse, Cart, or Carriage, upon which any Sheep, Wooll, Wool-fels, Yarn made of Wooll, Wool-flocks, ful∣lers-earth, or fulling clay so to be Exported, Transported, &c. to any such intent as aforesaid, knowing hereof, and hereof be∣ing wilfully and willingly aiding, assisting, or consenting thereunto, and the Master of such Ship or Vessel, wherein any such Sheep, Wooll, &c. shall be so Exported or Transported, or Loaden, or laid on board as aforesaid, to any such purpose as aforesaid, and aiding, assisting, or consenting thereunto: And every Factor and Servant whatsoever, Customer, Comptroller, Water-searcher, or other Officer or person whatsoever, know∣ing hereof, and willingly assisting or consenting thereunto, shall be adjudged and taken to be a Felon, and every Offender therein duly convicted, shall suffer and forfeit as in case of Felony. III. Every offence done or committed contrary to this Act, shall be enquired of, heard, tryed and determined in the Coun∣ty where such Sheep, Wooll, Wool-fels, &c. respectively shall be packed, laden, or laid on board as aforesaid: Or else in the
County where such offender shall happen to be apprehended, or arrested for such offence, in such manner, or to such effect, to all intents and purposes, as if the said offence had been wholly done and committed in the same County. Provided, 1. Every Baron and other Peer of the Realm which shall be indicted or accused as Principall or Accessary in, or to any Offence made Felony by this Act, shall have his, her, or their Tryal by their Peers, as in Cases of Felony by the Common Law. 2. No person whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be im∣peached for any Offence made Felony by this Act, unless the person be thereof indicted within the space of one year next ensuing the Offence committed. IV. From and after the first of August, 1662. No person, &c. shall press together, with any scrues, presses, or other engines, into any Sack, Pack, or Bag, or shall stean any woollen cloth, yarn made of wooll, into any But, Pipe, Hogshead, or other Cask, or Vessel upon any pretence, or shall carry, or lay at, or near the shoar, Coasts of the Sea, or navigable River, or any place near adjoyning thereunto, any such wooll, wooll-flocks, or yarn made of wooll, to Export, Transport, or carry away the same out of the Kingdom of England or Ireland, into Scot∣land, or any foraign parts; upon penalty of loss of all such wooll, wooll-flocks, yarn made of wooll, so packed, pressed, layed into any Cask, or carried on land near the sea shoar, or the value thereof. V. No Tobacco-Pipe Clay, shall after the first of August, 1662. be Exported, Transported, or conveyed out of the Kingdom of England, &c. Or after the first of January, 1662. out of, or from Ireland or Wales, into the Kingdom of Scotland, or into any foraign parts, under the penalty of 3 s. for every pound of To∣bacco-Pipe Clay, Exported or Transported. VI. After the first of August, 1662. No Packs, Sacks, Bags, or Cask of wooll, wooll-fells, mortlings, shorlings, yarn made of wooll, fullers-earth, fulling-clay, tobacco-pipe-clay, shall be laden on any Horse, Cart, or Carriage, or shall be conveyed by land from any of the places within the kingdom of England. Nor after the first of January, 1662. in Ireland, but in the day time, and from and after the first of March, to the 29th of September yearly, between the hours of four of the clock in the morning, and eight of the clock in the evening, upon pain of forfeiture of all such goods, or the value thereof: One moyety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to him or them that
will sue for the same, by action of debt, bill, plaint, or informa∣tion, &c. 1. Provided, This Act not to be construed to repeal and make void any the penalties in an Act of this Parliament, made against Transportation of wooll, wooll-fells, fullers earth; Or to the prohibiting of the lading on board of any Ship, &c. of any wea∣ther-sheep, wooll, or other goods, that by the said Act is permit∣ted to be laden on board any Ship, &c. for the necessary use of such Ship, &c. 2. If any Owner, Master, or Mariner of any Ship, &c. know∣ing of such Transportation of such sheep, wooll, wooll-fells, (or any of the goods before mentioned) shall within three moneths next after the knowledge thereof, or after his return into the Kingdom of England, or Ireland, Wales, &c. give the first in∣formation, bonafide, before the Barons of either the Courts of Exchequer, in England or Ireland, or before the head Officer of any Port where he shall first arrive, of the number and quan∣tity of the Goods so carried and Transported, and by whom, where, and in what Ship, &c. and shall be ready to justifie, and prove the same; such Owner, Master, or Mariner, shall not be punished for Felony, but yet be subject to all other pe∣nalties contained in the Act, for the offence aforesaid. And all such Exportation and conveying of any Goods, or Commodi∣ties in the Act mentioned, is declared to be a common and pub∣lick Nusance. VII. All Justices of Assize, of Gaol delivery, and Justices of the Peace, shall enquire of all the premisses in their general Quarter Sessions, and hear and determine the same. And all Mayors, Bayliffs, Head-Officers of Cities, Burroughs and Towns, not having Jurisdiction to try Felony, shall enquire of all and every offence within this Act not made Felony: and hear and determine the same. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 19. No foraign Wooll-cards, or foraign Card-wire, or Iron-wire for making of Wooll-cards, be Imported into the kingdom of England, Wales, or any parts thereof, nor used within the same; Nor any Card-wire taken out of old Cards, be from henceforth put into New Leather, new Card-boards, Nor any such Wool-cards be put to sale, upon pain every person, &c. who shall Import any foraign Wool-cards, or foreign Card-wire, for making of Wool-cards into England, Wales, or any parts thereof; or make Wooll-cards of any such old Card-wire, or put the same to sale, shall forfeit
the said Wooll-cards, or the value thereof, if the same be not seized, one half for the King, the other half part to such Persons, &c. who shall first seize, or sue the same; by Action of debt, &c. in any of his Majesties Courts at Westminster; Or within the County, City, or Town corporate, &c. where such offence shall be committed: wherein no essoin, wager of Law, &c. shall be allowed. 1. Provided, This Act not to be extended to hinder the Own∣ers of any Wooll-cards, to cause them to be amended for their own use; Or to Transport or sell any of their overworn Wooll-cards into any parts beyond the Seas, out of the Kings Dominions. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 30. If any person or persons, after 24. of June, 1662. shall Import into the Realm of England, or any parts thereof, any Madder whatsoever, or expose the same to sale, being mixed with sand, or other materials, over and above two pound weight in every hundred weight of Madder, which 100. weight of Madder shall contain 112. pounds. Every such person so offending, shall forfeit and lose all and every such par∣cel of Madder so mingled with sand or other materials; one moyety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other moyety to such per∣sons as shall discover the sand, to be recovered by Action, or Bill of Debt, in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster, where∣in no essoin, wager of Law, &c. shall be allowed. Excise. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 4. The Imposition called Excise shall be collected levied and paid, with all the arrears thereof not pardoned, to the Commissioners and their Deputies, who now collect the same from the 24th of June inclusively 1660. till the 20. day of August the same year, after the rates and pro∣portions, and upon the same Goods and Merchandizes as the same was payable and Collected the 24. of April last past. All sorts of Wines, Oyls, Tobaccoes, of the English Planta∣tions, Silks, Tapes, Inkles, Linnens, Paving tiles, Playing Cards, Girdles of all sorts, Cabinets, Copperis, Hops, and all sorts of Lace and Commodities made of earth or stone, Imported after the 24 of June 1660. shal be thenceforth discharged of the duty of Excise. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 7. The Imposition called Excise shall continue to be collected, levied and paid (with all the
Arrears thereof from Farmers since the 25th of March 1657. and from Merchants, and other persons since the 25th. of March 1658. by, and to Nathaniel Mauton, Edward Parsons, in the Act particularly named, and their Deputies, from the 24th of August 1660. until the 25th of December, the same year, after such Rates and proportions, and upon the same goods, and Merchan∣dizes as the same was collected and payed the 25th of April 1660. And Sir Richard Brown, and other persons particularly named in the Act, are appointed Commissioners for Appeals, and Regulating the Excise, the aforesaid Commissioners, and other Officers under the Regulations and Rates in all matters as it was used and collected the said 25th of April. 1. Provided, All the sorts of Goods and Commodities, in the proviso's of the precedent Act, particularly named, Imported after the 24th of July, 1660. shall be discharged of the duty of Excise. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 15. From and after the 20th of December, 1660. there shall be raised, out of the Kingdom of England, Wales and Berwick, and paid during the Kings life, the several Rates and Impositions, Duties and charges, for Beer, Ale, Syder and other Liquors, in manner following, Viz. For every Barrel of Beer or Ale, above 6 s. the barrel, to be paid by the Brewer, or other person that shall sell or tap out Beer, or Ale, publickly, or privately, 1 s. 3 d. and so pro∣portionably. For every Barrel of 6 s. Beer, or Ale, or under, brewed, or sold as aforesaid, to be paid by the said common-brewer, or persons aforesaid respectively, and so proportionably for a grea∣ter or lesser vessel, 3 d. For all Syder and Perry made and sold by retail, upon every Hogshead to be paid by the the Retaler, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser measure, 1 s. 3 d. For every Gallon of Metheglin, or Mead sold, to be payed by the Maker, ob. For every Barrel of Beer, called Vineger-beer: brewed by a common Brewer, 6 d. For every Gallon of Strong-water, or Aqua vitae, made and sold, to be paid by the Maker thereof, 1 d. For every Barrel of Beer or Ale Imported from beyond the Seas, 3 s.
For every Tun of Syder, or Perry Imported, and so proporti∣onably for a greater or lesser quantity, 5 s. For every Gallon of Spirits, made of Wine, or Syder Impor∣ted, 2 d. For every Gallon of Strong-water perfectly made, Imported from beyond the Seas, 4 d. For every Gallon of Coffee made and sold, to be paid by the Maker, 4 d. For every Gallon of Chocolate, Sherbet, and Tea made and sold, to be paid by the Maker thereof, 8 d. II. The several Rates and Duties of Excise and new Imposts hereby Imposed upon all and every the foraign Liquors which shall be Imported unto all or any of the Ports of the Kingdom, and the Dominions thereof, after the 25th of December next, shall from time to time be paid by the Merchant or Importer in ready Money, upon his entry made before the landing thereof. III. All common Brewers shall once a week make true and particular entries, at the Office of Excise within their Li∣mits, of all Beer or Ale which they shall brew in the week, up∣on penalty of 5 l. Every Inn-keeper shall make the like entry once a Moneth of all Beer, Ale, Syder, Perry, &c. which he retains in that time under penalty of 5 l. Every Alehouse-keeper, Victualler, or other Retaler of Beer, Ale, Syder, Perry, Strong-water or other liquor shall once a moneth make the like entry of what they shall retale within the moneth, upon penalty of 20 s. IV. No such person as aforesaid shall be compelled by Com∣missioners of Excise to travel, to make the Entries ot payment of the said Duties, or for other cause touching the same, if he live in a Market Town, out of the Market Town: if he live out of a Market Town, then to the next Market Town to his habitation in the same County on the Market day. V. The Commissioners appointed for the putting this Act in execution, and their sub-Committees have power to constitute under their hands and seals so many Gagers as they shall find needful; which Gagers, and every of them, as well by night as by day (if by night, in the presence of a Constable, or other Lawful Officer) be permitted upon their request, to enter the house, Brew-house, distilling-house, and all other houses, and places belonging to, or used by any Brewer, Inn-keeper, Victualler, or other Retaler as aforesaid, to Gage all Coppers, Fats, and
vessels in the same, and to take an account of the Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry, Syder, Strong-waters, and other the Liquor afore∣said, in the said houses and places, brewed, made, and stilled, and to make a Return in Writing to the Commissioners, &c. under whose office and limits such Brewer, Retaler, Distiller doth dwell, leaving a true Copy of such Return, with such Brew∣er, Retaler, Distiller, or maker of the Liquor, and such returns of the Gagers, shall be a charge upon the said Brewers, &c. re∣spectively: And if any common Brewer, or Retaler, &c. shall refuse to permit such Gagers, to enter his Brew-house, or other place aforesaid, or to gage, or take accompt of his brewing Ves∣sels, or of any such Beer, or Ale, or other the Liquors aforesaid, such Brewer, Retaler, Distiller, shall forthwith be forbidden by the Gager to sell, carry out, or deliver to any of his Customers, any Beer, Ale, or other the Liquors aforesaid: And if any Brewer, &c. after such warning given, shall sell, carry out, or deliver the same, or any part thereof, not having paid, and clea∣red the duty of Excise, shall besides the forfeiture of double the value, forfeit 5 l. for every offence, to be levied and recovered up∣on his Goods and Chattels, as in the Act is provided. VI. Every 36. Gallons of Beer, taken by the Gage, according to the standard of the Ale-quart (four whereof shall make a Gal∣lon) shall be reckoned, accounted, and returned by the Gager for a Barrel of Beer, and every 32. Gallons of Ale taken by the Gage, according to the standard, shall be reckoned and returned for a Barrel of Ale: and all other the liquors aforesaid according to the Wine-gallon. VII. No Brewer, or Retaler of Beer or Ale, shall take more in the price thereof, upon sale of the same, then according to the usual rates and prices: saving that every common Brewer, may take of all and every person, &c. to whom he shall sell, and deli∣ver any Beer or Ale, the Excise thereupon, over and above the usual Rates. VIII. The Common Brewer, not selling of Beer, or Ale by retale, in consideration of wast by fillings and leakage, shall have and be allowed out of the returns made by the Gagers: these allowances, viz. upon every 23 Barrels of Beer, whether strong or small, returned by the Gager, three Barrels: upon 22. Bar∣rels of Ale, strong or small, two Barrels; which allowances, the Commissioners and their Sub-Committees, are authorized to allow and make. 1 Provided, Where any common Brewer shall willingly
make a false entry, and be convicted before the Commissioners, or two of them, or before such other persons as are appointed by the Act; in such case every Brewer shall forfeit and lose, be∣sides the penalty before mentioned, the allowances to be made for six moneths together. IX. No Beer, or Ale shall be delivered in by any Brewer, or Maker thereof, to any Victualler, or other Retaler, until the Rate which by such Victualler, &c. is to be paid over and above the price of the Beer or Ale, for, or in respect of this duty, be paid by the Victualler, or Retaler, to the Brewer or Maker. 1. Provided, If any person shall brew and sell by retale, any small quantities of Beer or Ale, in any Fair within the Realm, &c. who is not a Common Brewer, or Retaler thereof, and before such selling or retaling, shall pay the duty for the same to the Commissioners, &c. within whose limits the Fair shall be holden, or to their Officers; such person, so brewing and re∣taling the same, for so much and no more, shall be discharged from all penalties and forfeiture imposed by the Act. 2. That it shall be lawful for the Commissioners and Sub-Commissioners, respectively to compound for this duty, with any Inn-keeper, Victualler, Ale-house-keeper, or Retaler of any Beer, Ale, or other the Liquors aforesaid, within their respe∣ctive divisions, or limits, in such manner and form as may be most for the advantage & improvement of the receipts thereof. X. The Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, or such as the King shall appoint, are im∣powered to treat, contract and agree with any person, &c. for the Farming of any the Rates, duties, and charges touching the Liquors in the Act mentioned, as may be best for the greatest advantages of the receipt, so as the same exceed not the term of three years, and every such agreement shall be good and effe∣ctual to all intents and purposes. And the Lord Treasurer, or other persons appointed, shall not within six moneths after the commencement of the Act, treat, or agree with any for the Farm∣ing of this duty, other than with such as by the Justices of the Peace, or the major part of them, at their Quarter Sessions, shall be nominated, who shall have the first refusal thereof, and the said duty shall not be let to any other under the rate that shall be tendred to, and refused by such persons so recommended. XI. All forfeitures & offences committed against this Act, made & committed within the immediat limits of the Excise Office in Lond. shalbe adjudg'd & determin'd by the chief Commiss. of Ex∣cise,
or for Appeals, or the major part of them; and other offences and forfeitures made within all or other the Counties, Cities, or Towns within the Realm, &c. shall be heard and determi∣ned by any two or more Justices of the Peace residing near the place where such forfeitures shall be made, or offences commit∣ted: and in case of neglect or refusal of such Justices, by the space of fourteen days, upon complaint made, and notice thereof given to the Offender, Then the Commissioners or major part of them appointed for such County, City, Town, &c. are im∣powered to hear and determine the same: and if the party find himself aggrieved by the judgement of such Sub-Commissioners, he may appeal to the Justices of the Peace at their next Quar∣ter Sessions, who are to determine the same, whose Judgement shall be final. And the Commissioners for Excise, all Justices of Peace and Sub-Commissioners respectively are strictly requi∣red upon a complaint made, to summon the party, and upon appearance, or contempt, to proceed to examination of the matter, give judgement therein, and issue their Warrants for levying of the penalties upon the Goods of the Offender, and sell the same, returning the overplus, and for want of distress to imprison the party till satisfaction be made. Provided, the said parties are impowered to mitigate the Forfeiture or Fine as they shall think fit, so it be not less than double the value of the duty which should have been paid, be∣sides the charges of the Officers imployed therein: And all the penalties (the charges deducted) shall be imployed, three parts to the King, the fourth part to the Informer. XII. One principal Officer shall be erected and continued in London, and within ten miles thereof, as long as the King shall think fit, for this duty, to which all other Officers for the same shall be subordinate and accomptable; which said Office shall be managed by such as the King shall appoint for the manage∣ment of the Kings Receipt of Excise, and shall fit in some con∣venient place in London, or within ten miles thereof, as the King shall think fit. XIII. No person shall be capable of intermedling with any imployment relating to the Excise, until he shall before two or three Justices of the Peace in the County where his imploy∣ment shall be, or before the Barons of the Exchequer take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, together with this Oath, Viz.
YOU shall swear to exercise the Office of  truly and faithfully, without favour or affection, and shall from time to time give accompt, make, and deliver to such person as his Majesty shall appoint to receive the same, and shall take no Fee or Reward for Execution of the said Office from any other person than His Majestie, or those which He shall appoint in that behalf. And every Justice of Peace shall certifie the taking of such Oath to the next Quarter-Sessions, there to be recorded. XIV. All parts of the City of London, Westminster, the Bo∣rough of Southwark, and the several Suburbs thereof, and Pa∣rishes within the weekly Bills of Mortality, shall be under the immediate care and management of the said Head-Officer; and such, and so many subordinate Commissioners and other Offi∣cers for the execution of the premisses shall be appointed by the King in all and every other the Counties, Cities, Towns, &c. in England and Wales, as the King shall think fit: And in all pla∣ces, the Office shall be open from eight in the morning, till twelve at Noon, and from two till five in the afternoon; and the Com∣missioners or major part of them shall from time to time issue forth and pay such sums of money as shall be received, collect∣ed, or levyed, into his Majesties Receipt of Exchequer. XV. If any person shall be sued or prosecuted for any thing done or executed in pursuance of the Act, he may plead the ge∣neral Issue, and give the Act in Evidence; and if a Verdict pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be Non-suit, the Defen∣dant shall have double costs. 1. Provided, No writs of Certiorari shall supersede Execu∣tion, but that Execution may be had and made, upon any Or∣der, &c. made by the Justices aforesaid, any such Writ or al∣lowance thereof notwithstanding. 2. This Act, nor any thing therein contained shall not be prejudicial to Edward Blackwel Alderman of London, as to the sum amounting in toto to 28450. l. by him advanced upon se∣veral Orders of this Parliament, and charged upon the Excise; which sum, together with the interest at six per cent. shall be paid to the said Edward and his Assigns out of the Excise, as by the said Orders is appointed. 1. Enacted, 13 Car. 2. cap. 13. All and every sum and sums of money any ways due or owing from or by any person, &c. for or touching the duty of Excise heretofore imposed, or pay∣able
upon Beer, Ale, or any other Commodities by any Laws or pretended Laws or Ordinances: and all Debts therefore owing, whether by Obligation, or Action from the Farmers of the Excise, or any other person whatsoever; Or any of their Sureties not pardoned by the King by the Act and Pardon of Oblivion, are hereby vested in the King, his Heirs and Succes∣sors, and the King, his Heirs and Successors may at all times hereafter have, demand, and sue for, and recover the same, of all and every person, &c. their Heirs, Executors, Administra∣tors, having Assets, as if the said duty of Excise or new Impost had been lawfully imposed and collected, and as if the said pretended Acts, Ordinances, &c. imposing the same had been good here, and legal and effectual Acts of Parliament, and had in express words, given all and every the said duties of Excise and new Impost unto the King. II. All and every person, &c. accomptable by this Act, shall have all such due allowances in their accompts, as all such per∣sons whose accompts are excepted in an Act entituled, An Act of free and general Pardon, Indempnity and Oblivion, have or ought to have. Provided, No person, &c. shall be questioned for any the duties herein certainly vested in the King, unless he be sued and prosecuted with effect, before 25. Decemb. 1662. All persons, &c. accomptable to the King, by this Act are enabled to sue for, levy, and recover from any person or per∣sons who do stand indebted unto them in any sum of money for the Excise for which they are hereby accomptable, all sums of money and arrears unsatisfied, in as full manner as they might have received and levyed the same when they first grew due. Fishing. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. cap. 31. From and after 25. of May, 1662. No person or persons shall in any year from the first of June, till the last of November, take Fish in the high Sea, or in any Bay, Port, Creek, or Coast of, or belonging to Corn∣wal or Devon, with any Drift-Net, Trammel, or Stream-Net, or any other Nets of that sort or kind, unless it be at the
distance of one league and a half at least from the respective shoars; upon pain of the forfeiture of the Nets so employed, or value thereof, and one moneths imprisonment. II. If any persons, being neither Owners, Partners, or Adven∣turers in the Craft of Fishing, shall presume after the day be∣fore limited, to make, or cause to be made any Pilchards, or Fumathoes in Cask to be sold or transported, except they shall buy the aforesaid Fish of the respective Owners, Partners, or Adventurers in the Pilchard Craft, or with their express al∣lowance, leave and consent, they shall forfeit all such Pil∣chards and Fumathoes so made, and every Cask thereof, or their full value; one moyety thereof to the King, the other to him who will sue for the same by Bill, Plaint, &c. III. If any Owner, Partner, or Company, or other person whatsoever shall fraudulently purloyn, imbezle, hide, convey, carry away, or expose to sale, or cause to be purloyned, &c. out of the Nets, Boats, or Cellars, any Pilchard-Fish, without the express leave of the proper Owners, and major part of the Company respectively; Every person that shall offend therein, shall pay the treble value to the parties wronged, and be sent to the House of Correction for three moneths. IV. If any idle or suspicious person or persons shall in the night assemble and flock together about the Boats, Nets, or Cellars belonging to the Pilchard Craft, upon any the Coasts of Corn∣wall, or Devon, having no business there to do, and being warn∣ed by the Company or Owner of such Boats or Cellars, to be gone; then upon complaint made to one Justice of the Peace, every person so refusing to do, shall pay 5 s. to the poor of the Parish where such offence was committed, or be set in the stocks for five hours. Forests. 1. Enacted, 17 Car. 1. Cap. 16. From henceforth the meers, metes, limits and bounds of all Forests shall be adjudged and taken to extend no farther then the meers, metes, limits and bounds in the several Counties respectively wherein the said Forests were commonly known, reputed, used, or taken to be in the 20th year of the late King James, and not beyond; any Perambulations, Presentments, Judgements, Surveys, or Decrees, or other matter or thing to the contrary notwithstan∣ding.
And all and every Presentment of any person or persons at any Justice-seat, Swain-mote, or Court of Attachment, for, or by reason or colour of any Acts whatsoever done or com∣mitted in any place without, or beyond the said Metes, Meers, &c. And all and every Fine, Amercement upon, or by reason or colour of such Presentment, shall be adjudged and taken to be utterly void, any Law, Record, or Pretence whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. II. No place within England or Wales, where no such Ju∣stice-seat, Swain-mote, or Court of Attachment hath been held or kept; or where no Verderers have been chosen, nor no regard made within the space of sixty years before the first year of his now Majesties Reign, shall at any time hereafter be taken to be Forest, or within the bounds or metes of any Fo∣rest, but shall be for ever hereafter disafforested and freed from all Forest-Laws, any Swain-mote, Justice-seat, or Court of Attachment held or kept since the beginning of his Majesties Reign, or any Presentment or Act made or done to the con∣trary notwithstanding. III. The Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal for the time being, upon the request of any of the Peers, or Knights and Burgesses, shall grant Commissions to Commissi∣oners by them to be nominated, to enquire by Enquests of good men of the Metes, Meers, Limits and Bounds which were commonly known to be Metes, Meers, &c. in the 20th year of the late King James: and all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Verderers, Fo∣resters, Rangers, and other Officers of Forests, shall be assi∣stant and attendant upon the same Commissioners: and where no such Officers are, or where such Officers be, if they or any of them shall refuse or neglect such assistance or attendance, the Commissioners may proceed without them in the execution of the said Commission. IV. The Forests, whereof the Metes and Bounds shall be so returned, and certified by vertue of any the said Commissi∣oners, from henceforth shall not extend, nor be adjudged to extend any further in any wise, than the Metes, Meers, Limits and Bounds so returned and certified: and all places and terri∣tories without the said Metes, Meers, Bounds, &c. shall be as if the same had never been Forest. 1. Provided, that all and every the Grounds, Territories or Places which have been, or are disafforested, or mentioned to be disafforested, by any Letters Patents, Charter, or other∣wise,
since the 20th year of the Reign of the late King James, shall be left out of the Metes, Meers, and Bounds of the Forests, which are to be enquired of, returned and certified, by vertue of the said Commissioners, or any of them, and are hereby decla∣red to be utterly disafforested, free and exempt to all intents and purposes, as if the same had never been at all Forest. 2. That the Tenants, Owners and Occupiers of Lands and Tenements, which shall be excluded out of the Metes and Bounds returned and certified, shall and may use and enjoy such common and other profits and easements within the Fo∣rest, as anciently and accustomably they have used and enjoy∣ed, any Law, Act, Ordinance, Custom, or Forest-Law notwithstanding. Gunpowder and Salt-Peter. I. Enacted, 17 Car. 1. Cap. 21. It shall and may be lawful to and for all and singular persons, as well strangers as natu∣ral born subjects of this Realm, to import and bring into this Kingdom, any quantities of Gunpowder whatsoever, paying such customs and duties for the same, as by authority of Parli∣ament shall be limited and set down. II. That it shall and may be lawful to and for all and singu∣lar his Majesties subjects of this Realm of England, to make and sell any quantity of Gunpowder, at their wills and pleasures; as also to bring into this Kingdom any quantities of Salt-peter, Brimstone, or other materials necessary or requisite for the making of Gunpowder. III. If any person or persons, after the tenth day of August, 1648. shall put in execution, any Letters Patents, Proclama∣tion Edict, Act, Ordinance, Warrant, Restraint, or Inhibi∣tion whatsoever, whereby the Importation of Gunpowder, Salt-peter, Brimstone, or other materials aforementioned, or any of them, from foreign parts; or the making of Gunpowder within this Realm, shall be any way prohibited or restrained; the said person or persons so offending, shall incur and sustain the pains and forfeitures contained in the Statute of Provision and Premunire, made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of R. 2.
Anno 12. Car. 2. Cap. 4. It shall be free and lawful for his Majesty at any time when he shall see cause so to do, and for such time as shall be therein expressed, by Proclamation to pro∣hibit the Transporting of Gunpowder, or any sort of Arms, or Ammunition, into any parts out of this Kingdom; any thing in the Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Harbours and Havens. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 27. For the repairing of Dover Harbour; From and after 24 of June next ensuing, there shall be paid by the Master or Owner of every Ship, Vessel, or Crayer, whereof any of the Kings subjects shall be Owners, or part-Owners, of the burthen of twenty Tun and upwards, not exceed∣ing the burthen of 250 Tun for every Voyage, Loading, or Dis∣charging within the Realm, or to, or from any foreign Coun∣trey beyond seas, and passing to or from London, or for, from, to, or by Dover, or coming within the Harbour there, not ha∣ving a Cocquet testifying his payment before for that Voyage, towards the repair of Dover Harbour, 3 d. for every Tun of burthen of every such Ship, &c. (except Vessels laden with Sea-coals, Grindstones, Purbeck, or Portland-stone) for every of which shall be paid 1 d. ob. to be paid to the Customer, or Collector of Customs and Subsidies, or their Deputies within such Port, from whence such Ship, &c. shall set forth, or shall arrive, before they unlade the Goods therein. The ac∣count of the Tuns to be made according to the entry of the Goods in every Ship, &c. And no entry to be allowed in the Office of Customs, without information by the Master, Owner, Purser, Shipper of such Ship, &c. concerning the burthen thereof, and payment by him of the sums aforesaid; of which payment, the Master, Shipper, &c. shall have allowance of the Merchants according to the rates of the Goods in the same Ship, &c. by way of average; and the Customer, Collector, or the Deputy, receiving the sums, shall disburse and pay the same from time to time, to the Treasurer of the Harbour, or such as he shall assign to receive the same, to be expended about repair of the Harbour.
II. Every Customer, Comptroller, or their Deputies, that shall make any entries of Customs, &c. of any Goods in the said Ships, &c. before information as aforesaid, concerning the burthen thereof, or payment made of the sums limited by the Act; or make default in not collecting the sums, or not paying the same over to the Treasurer of the Harbour, or such as he shall assign to receive the same; shall forfeit to the use of the reparations of the Harbour 10 l. for every default, to be reco∣vered by action of debt in any Court of Record, by the Warden and Assistants of the Harbour; in which suit, no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed. III. That the Master and Wardens of the Trinity-house of London, for the time being, shall and may appoint such per∣sons as they shall think fit, to inspect and oversee the repairs, and works to be made for the security of the said Harbour, and once every year, during the said term of seven years, require an account of the respective Collectors and Treasurer for the said Harbour, of the moneys by them respectively received, and of the disbursments thereof; and if they shall not within six moneths after the demand, give in the same account; or if it shall appear thereupon that the moneys shall not be duly dis∣bursed in and about the said repairs, or if the said Harbour shall within the said time aforesaid, be sufficiently repaired and secured, then the Master or Wardens shall inform the Lords of the Kings Privy Council thereof, who are thereupon im∣powered to suspend, or cause every further payment by vertue of the Act to cease and determine. IV. That all Ships and Vessels belonging to Waymouth, Mel∣comb-Regis, and Lime-Regis in the County of Dorset, having a Piere and Cob of their own, shall be excempt from contributing or paying any thing to the Harbour of Dover, so as they bring Certificate made upon Oath, before the Mayor of their respe∣ctive Corporations, that the said Vessels, &c. do properly be∣long thereunto, and that the Inhabitants of the said respective Corporations are Owners of the major part of the said Ves∣sels, &c. Provided, This Act not to extend to authorize the Col∣lection of more than the sum of 22000 l. in the whole, and then the Collection to cease.
High-ways, Streets and Bridges. 1. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 2. For the surveying, order∣ing and managing of the Kings Highways, leading unto, and from the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and other places within the weekly Bills of Mortali∣ty, and of the Streets, Alleys, and other Passages within the same, and all things necessary for the repairing, paving, and keeping clean thereof, There be Commissioners nominated un∣der the great Seal by the King, not exceeding the number of 21. besides such other as are appointed by the Act, that shall have their meeting at the Office of his Majesties works in Scot∣land-Yard, or some other place, as the greater number of them shall direct, which Commissioners, five or more of them, shall have power to order and direct the making of any new Vaults, or Sewers, or cut any Sewer already made, or the altering of, enlarging, cleansing, or scouring of any old Vaults, Sinks, or Common-Sewers; or for the altering of any new or old Pave∣ments, taking away of cross-Gutters or Chanels, in all or any the Streets and Places aforesaid, for the removing of all kind of Nusances, or any Encroachments, Sheds, Bulks, Stoops, Posts, or Wall beyond the old foundations into the Streets, in such places which shall be judged inconvenient, and hinder the passage. Provided, such encroachments which have con∣tinued above 30 years past, be not removed till reasonable sa∣tisfaction be given by the Commissioners to the parties that suffer thereby: and if any person shall not accept of such rea∣sonable satisfaction tendred by the Commissioners, then in case of such refusal, the Barons of the Exchequer, upon a Pe∣tition preferred to them by the party grieved, are to adjudge what satisfaction shall be fit for such person, &c. to receive for the removing or pulling down such Nusance or Encroach∣ments. II. The said Commissioners, five or more of them, are to take a view of all such Nusances or Encroachments, and irregular building, which view shall be a good conviction in Law: and every person, &c. having notice of the said view, or conviction, and shall not remove or take down the same within one moneth after notice, shall forfeit 40 s. for every moneth the said Nusance or Encroachment shall afterwards continue.
III. The common High-ways and new Streets afternamed, are thought fit immediately to be repaired, paved or amended, viz. the Street from the end of Petty-France, to Saint James's house, one other Street from Saint James's his house up to the High-way; one Street in St. Jame's fields, called the Pall-Mall; one Street beginning from the Mews up to Pickadilly, and from thence to the Stone-Bridge, to the furthermost building near the Bull at the corner of Air-street. And all and every the per∣sons, Owners, or Inhabitants of all and every the houses built up, or adjoyning to the High-ways, or Streets so adjudged and thought fit to be paved and repaired, shall according to their several Interests and Estates, and in such proportions as the said Commissioners or five of them shall think fit, before the tenth of May, 1662. pay to the Commissioners, five or more of them nominated for the paving of the said ways, or such persons as they shall appoint, such sums of moneys towards the paving of the said Streets and ways, and for buying of new Stones and Gravel, as shall amount to their several proportions, after the rate of 16. d. for every square yard which the ground shall con∣tain, that lies in front before every dwelling house, yards, or gardens belonging to the same, and in the same breadth, extend∣ing to the middle of the High-way or Street, which lies before the said Houses, Gardens, &c. respectively. IV. Every load of Hay, which after the first of May, 1662. shall be brought and stand to be sold upon any of the ways in the Act expressed, adjudged to be fit to be new paved, shall pay 6. d. for every load; and every load of straw to be sold 2. d. which sums shall be paid to the Commissioners appointed for the pa∣ving and amending of the High-ways and Streets, or such as they shall appoint for, and towards the paving of the Streets and ways. V. The Commissioners for the Streets and ways, five or more of them, are to appoint a Treasurer, Collector and Clerk to attend them, or other Officers they shall find necessary for the carrying on of the service with moderate allowances; and if any person shall propose to carry away the ashes, dirt, or filth for all or any the places aforesaid, at less rates than the yearly Raker, or Undertaker can perform the same, the Com∣missioners are to contract with such persons, &c. and for such term as they shall think fit; and are to require an accompt of all Scavengers within the said places, and all other persons that shall receive, or disburse any moneys for the purposes in
the Bill: and shall hear and determine all disputes and differ∣ences concerning the right and duty of paving and keeping clean any of the Streets, Lanes, Allies, or publick yards within the places aforesaid. Provided, The respective Scavengers, Rakers, or other un∣dertakers shall have liberty by the approbation of the Commis∣sioners, five or more of them, to lodge their Ashes, Dust, Dirt, or other Filth in such vacant publick places in or neer the Streets or High-ways, as shall be thought convenient by the Commissioners, for accommodating Country Carts, returning empty: And the Scavengers, Rakers, &c. shall have liberty to pass through all such Wharfs, Docks or Yards, with their Ashes, Dust, dirt, &c. as shall be adjudged by the Commissi∣oners most commodious for the carrying the same by water, they giving satisfaction to the Owners of the Wharf, &c. and in case of unreasonable demands, the Commissioners shall hear, moderate and determine the same according to equity: and if any person shall find himself grieved by such determi∣nation, or by any other acts or proceedings of the Commissio∣ners, the party grieved shall and may have recourse to the Lord Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, to set forth his case by Petition, who have power to hear and determine the matter complained of, and to revoke, make good, or to confirm such acts or proceedings of the said Commissioners. The Court of Exchequer are yearly to call the Commissioners to an account, for all the Rents or Contributions, or sums of moneys, payable, or that shall come to their or any of their hands; and the Commissioners are required at or before every Trinity Term, to deliver a true accompt before the Barons of all their receipts and disbursments for the year, ended at Easter then last past, and in default thereof process of Courts shall be made forth against them by the Clerk of the Extract at the Sealing day, for the said Trinity Term, every year re∣spectively. VI. The Decree made at a Session of Sewers, made at West∣minster-Hall, 8. August, 1661. holden before the Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, and other Commissioners, or Sewers by Au∣thority of his Majesties Commission to them directed for the ma∣king two new Sewers, and enlarging, and amending the old Sewer near Charing-Cross, for the conveying the water away, from an∣noying his Majesties Palace at Whitehall; be ratified and con∣firmed and shall be put in Execution, with full power to levy all
arrears, as by a Commission of Sewers may be done: And all persons imployed, or that have acted therein, are hereby saved harmless from all Suits, and Actions, that shall or may be brought against them for the same. VII. All and every person, &c. Inhabiting within the Cities of London, and Westminster, Suburbs & Liberties thereof and Borough of Southwark, or in any of the said new built Streets, Lanes, or Alleys, shall from 1. May, 1662. Sweep, Cleanse, or cause to be Sweeped, or Cleansed, all the Streets, Lanes, Alleys and publick places, before their respective Houses, Buildings and Walls, twice every week, viz. Every Wednes∣day, and every Saturday; and all the soil, dirt, and other filth, shall cause to be taken up into Baskets, Tubs, or other vessels, ready for the Scavenger, or other Officer to carry away upon pain of 3. s. 4. d. for every offence, or neglect respectively. VIII. No person whatsoever shall throw, cast, or lay, or cause to be thrown, cast, or laid any Sea-coal ashes, dust, dirt, or other filth within the said Cities, or places aforesaid, in any place, Street, Lane, or Alley before his, her, or their own dwelling houses, buildings, or walls, on the penalty of 5. s. and if before the houses, buildings, &c. of any of their Neighbors, or other inhabitants of the said Cities, or places, or before, or against any Church, Church-yard, or any of his Majesties houses, buil∣dings, or Walls, or any other publick houses, buildings, &c. Or cast, lay, or throw, &c. into any common or publick Sink, Vault, Water-course, Common-Sewer, or High-way, within the Cities, or places, &c. or any other private Vault, or Sink, of any of his neighbours, or other inhabitants, any dust, ashes, filth, ordure, or other noysom things whatsoever, but shall keep, or cause the same to be kept in their respective houses, &c. until such time as the Raker, Scavenger, &c. or other Officer do come by or near their houses, or doors, with his Cart, Barrow, or other thing used for cleansing of the Streets, and carrying away thereof; and then shall carry the said ashes, dust, &c. out of their houses, and deliver it to the Raker, Scavenger, or Officer, or otherwise put the same into his Cart, &c. upon pain to forfeit 20. s. for every of∣fence. IX. The respective Church-wardens, House-keepers of White-hall, or other his Majesties houses, House-keeper, or Porters of Noble-mens houses, Ushers, or keepers of the Courts of Justice, and all other publick houses, and places respectively
shall be liable to suffer the like penalties, forfeitures, and punish∣ments for every like forementioned offences done or suffered to be done; or before any Church, or Church-yard, or before any of his Majesties Houses, Noble-mens houses, Buildings, or be∣fore any other publick houses, or places whatsoever respectively. X. From and after the first of May, 1662. No person shall hoop, wash, or cleanse any Pipe, Barrels, or other Casks, or vessels in any the Streets, Lanes, of open Passages aforesaid: Nor set out any empty Coaches to make or mend, or rough Timber, or Stones to be sawn or wrought in the streets upon pain of 20. s. for every offence. XI. The Rakers, Scavengers, and Officers hereunto appoint∣ed every day in the week (Except Sundays and other Holidays) shall bring Carts, Dung-pots, or other fitting Carriages into all the Streets within their respective Wards, Parishes, and Divisi∣ons where such Carts, &c. can pass, and at, and before their approach by a Bell, Clapper, or otherwise, shall make loud noise, and give notice to the Inhabitants of their coming, and so in∣to every Court, Alley, or place where Carts cannot pass, and abide and stay there a convenient time, that all persons concern∣ed may bring forth their respective ashes, dust, &c. to the respe∣ctive Carts, &c. All which the said Raker, Scavenger, or Offi∣cers shall carry away upon pain of 40. s. for every offence or neglect respectively. XII. All the open Streets, Lanes, and Alleys within the Ci∣ties and places aforesaid (Except only the new paving of the said Streets, for which the inhabitants have paid their propor∣tionable parts to the Commissioners) shall be forthwith suffi∣ciently repaired, or paved, and hereafter kept paved and suffi∣ciently repaired at the cost of the Housholders in the said Streets, Lanes, &c. respectively; viz. Every Housholder to repair, and pave, and keep repaired, and paved the Streets, Lanes, &c. before his house unto the Chanel, or middle of the same Street, Lane, &c. upon pain to forfeit 20. s. for every Rod, and after that proportion for a less quantity for every default, and of 20. s. a week for every week after, till it shall be suffi∣ciently paved and amended. Provided, Such ancient Streets, Lanes, &c. within the said Cities, or either of them, the Suburbs or Liberties thereof, as by Custom and Usage have been repaired in other manner, shall be hereafter repaired, paved, and amended in such sort, by such persons as have used to repair, pave, and maintain the same under the penalties aforesaid.
XIII. Every Housholder within the said Cities, and other places aforesaid, whose house adjoyns unto, and is next the Street, from Michaelmas till our Lady day, yearly shall set, or hang out Candles, or lights in Lanthorns, or otherwise in some part of his house next the Street, to enlighten the same for pas∣sengers from such time as it shall grow dark in the Evening, up∣on pain of 1. s. for every default. XIV. Every Justice of either Bench, Barons of the Ex∣chequer, Justices of the said Cities of London and Westminster, or the places within their several limits, shall have power upon his own knowledge or view, confession of the party, or proof of one credible Witness upon oath, to convict any person, &c. of any the offences aforesaid, whereby they shall incur the penalties aforesaid, one Moiety to be imployed towards the repairing, paving, cleansing of the Street or place where the offence is committed; the other Moiety for him that shall discover and prosecute the same: If the conviction be upon the view or knowledge of the Justices, the whole penalty to be imployed towards the repairing, paving, &c. of the said Street or place; and shall be levyed by distress and sale of the goods of the offen∣der by warrant under the hand of such Justice, &c. rendring the overplus to the party, and for default of distress or not pay∣ment within six days after demand, or notice in writing left at the offenders dwelling house by the Constable or other Officer; the offender (not being a Peer of the Realm) shall be commit∣ted to the common Gaol of the County, &c. by warrant of such Justice under his hand and Seal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until payment. XV: Within London and the Liberties thereof, the Scaven∣gers, Rakers, and such like Officers shall be elected, and the Rates and Assessments for them for cleansing the Streets, shall be Rated, Raised and Paid by the Parishioners, and Inhabitants of every Parish and Precinct, according to the ancient Custom and Usage of the City: and all new Messuages, Tenements, and Houses shall be Rated & Assessed, and Pay proportionable with the others. In Westminster the said Officers shall be chosen ac∣cording to the custom of that City, and the Rates paid accord∣ing to the custom of that City: in all other the Parishes and places, upon every Tuesday, or Wednesday in Easter-week; The Constables, Church-wardens, and Overseers for the poor, Surveyors of the High-ways of every Parish aforesaid, giving notice, or calling together such Inhabitants of their Parishes as
have born the like Office, they, or the greater number of them, shall appoint two that are Tradesmen of their Parishes, to be Scavengers for the Streets, &c. of each Ward, for the year next following, which persons being appointed and con∣firmed under the hands of two Justices of the Peace, within their respective divisions and Limits, shall within seven days after their confirmation and notice, take that office upon them, upon pain of 20. l. by every Refuser; and in case of their refusal, other persons shall be chosen within seven days after such refusal, in the place of them do so refuse: and such person shall un∣dergo the like pain in not taking the said office upon them, the penalties to be towards the repairing of the Streets of the same Parish, or Ward, and to be levyed by distress and sale of the Goods of the Offender by warrant under the hand and seal of any Justice of the Peace aforesaid, directed to the Constable, rendring the surplusage to the party; and for want of distress, or not payment within six days after demand, the Offender to be committed to the common Gaol of the County, City, &c. without Bail, &c. until payment. XVI. Within twenty days after the election and confirmation of the Scavengers, the Constables, Church-wardens, and Over∣seers of the Poor and of the High-ways of the said Parishes; calling together such Inhabitants aforesaid, They, or the grea∣ter Number of them, shall set a Rate, according to a Pound Rate, to be imposed upon the inhabitants of the Parish, Ward, &c. for the year following, which being allowed and confirmed by two of the Justices of the Peace of the places aforesaid, re∣spectively, shall be yearly paid by every Inhabitant upon de∣mand thereof made by the Beadle of the Parish, or other Of∣ficers appointed to collect the same; and in case of Refusal, shall by warrant of any two Justices, &c. be levyed by distress and sale of the offenders goods, and for want of distress, by Impri∣sonment of the offender (not being a Peer of the Realm) till payment as aforesaid. XVII. If any Action be brought or prosecuted against any Judge, Commissioner, Justice of Peace, Constable, or other Of∣ficer or person imployed or authorized by the Act, to do or per∣form, as by the Act is directed, for any matter, cause, or thing by them done by vertue of the Act: Then the said Action shall be laid in the proper County where the fact was done, & the defen∣dant may plead the general Issue, and give the special matter in evidence, and if the Jury find for the defendant and the plaintiff
shall be Nonsute or discontinue his action after the defendant hath appeared, the defendant shall have and receive double costs. XVIII. The Lord Mayor of the City of London, the Recor∣der, and Aldermen for the time being, with such other Com∣missioners as the King shall appoint, or any five of them, shall have power to receive subscriptions, payments and contributi∣ons of money, or other endowments, for the amendment, or en∣largement of the Streets hereafter named, or so much of them as they, or five of them, shall judge convenient; Viz. The Street, or passage at or near the Stocks in London: The Street and passage from Fleet-Conduit to St. Pauls Church in London: The pas∣sage through White-hart-Inn from the Strand into Covent-Gar∣den: The Street or passage near Exeter house, obstructed by a Rail and unevenness of the Ground: The passage and streets of St. Martins-Lane, out of the Strand: The passage, or street of Field Lane, commonly called Jack-an-apes-Lanc, going be∣tween Chancery-Lanc and Lincolns-Inn-Fields: The passage and Gate-house of Cheap-side into St. Pauls Church-yard: The pas∣sage against St. Dunstons Church in the West: The Street and passage by and near the West end of the Poultry in London; and the passage at Temple Bar: And they are to treat and agree with the owners and occupiers of such houses, as they shall judge fit to be removed, rebuilt, or pulled down, or any part of them; and upon payment of such sums agreed upon, are to appoint workmen to pull down the said houses, or cause the owners, or occupiers to rebuild accordingly, and the Act shall be sufficient to save harmless the Commissioners and all persons authorized by them, against the heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns of any the owners or occupiers, as if the same had been sold by deed, feoffment, fine, recovery, or other assurance in the Law: And if any persons, bodies corporate, or collegiate, shall refuse to treat or agree as aforesaid, or be disabled thereunto, by Non∣age, Coverture, Intail, or other Impediment; the Commissi∣oners are to issue out Warrants to the Sheriffs of London, to re∣turn a Jury before them, or five of them, which Jury upon their Oaths are to enquire and assess such damage and recompense as they shall judge fit to be awarded to the Owners or Occu∣piers of such houses, or part thereof, for their respective e∣states and interests in the same; and such verdict of the Ju∣ry, and judgement thereupon of the Commissioners, and the legal payment, or tender of the moneys so awarded and adjudged
shall be binding against the parties, their Heirs, Executors, &c. and all others claiming title or interest in the said houses, or in the ground whereupon they stand. XIX. Whereas the houses that remain standing on the o∣ther side of the Streets, or behind the houses that shall be so pulled down, would receive much advantage in the value of their Rents, by a liberty of air, and free recourse of trade by such enlargement; in case of refusal, or incapacity of the Ow∣ners, or Occupiers, of the said houses, to agree, or compound with the Commissioners for the same: a Jury shall be im∣panelled and returned, to judge and assess upon the Owners and Occupiers of such houses, a competent sum of money, or annual rent in consideration of such improvement and melio∣ration, as they in conscience shall judge and think fit, which shall be paid to the Chamberlain of the City of London, and such other Treasurer or Treasurers as shall be appointed by the Commissioners, five or more of them, who are to receive and recover the same by Action at Law; whose receipt shall be a good discharge to the Owners and Tenants, and they to be accomptable for the same, according to such directions as shall be given them by the Commissioners; and the moneys so raised, and rents so received, shall be expended upon the purchasing or rebuilding houses in the other side of the Street, and upon the paving and amending of the Streets according to the purport of the Act: and the verdict of the Jury, and judgement of the Commissioners in the cases aforesaid, shall be sufficient and conclusive in Law, against the Owners, Occupiers, and their Heirs, Executors, &c. XX. No person shall be enabled to act as a Commissioner to the purposes aforesaid, till he have first taken his Oath before the Lord Chancellor, Lord High Treasurer of England, for the due and impartial execution of the Trusts by this Act com∣mitted to him. Provided, The Lord Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, shall be joynt Commissioners to execute all the powers of this Act within the City and Li∣berties thereof. And the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, the high Steward, and his deputy Steward, and the two high Burgesses of the said City of Westminster for the time being, to be joynt Commissioners to execute all the powers of this Act, to all the ends and purposes thereof, within the said City of West∣minster, or the Liberties thereof.
I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 6. The Church-wardens, Con∣stables, or Tything-men of every Parish, Town, or Hamlet for the time being, within England, Wales, Berwick, shall upon Monday or Tuesday in Easter-week with the advice of the major part of the Inhabitants choose two or more sufficient persons in∣habiting in the Parish, Town, &c, to be Surveyers of their High-ways, and give notice thereof in writing to the persons chosen; and for default of such choice, the Church-Wardens, Consta∣bles, and Inhabitants of every such Parish, Town, &c. shall forfeit and lose 5 l. II. Every Surveyer within twenty days next after notice of his Election, or of the publication of this Act, shall upon the penalty of 5 l. view and survey all the common and publick High-ways and Bridges within the Parish, Town, &c. where∣in he or they are respectively Surveyer, &c. And all Water-courses, Cawsies and Pavements therein which are to be repai∣red at the publick charge of the Parish, Town, &c. and shall consider what Reparations are necessary to be made, and what sum will be requisite to be raised for the repairing and enlarging of the same, over and above what will be done by the Laws made for the amending of High-ways; and hereupon shall with two or more substantial Housholders of the Parish, Town, &c. cal∣led to their assistance, within ten days after such survey made, lay one or more Assessment or Assessments upon every Inhabi∣tant rated to the Poor: and upon every Occupier of Lands, Houses, Tythes Impropriate or Appropriate, Portions of Tythes, Coal-mines, and other Mines saleable, Under-woods, Stock, Goods, or other personal estate (not being Houshold-stuff) with∣in the Parish, Town, &c. for the repairing and enlarging of the said High-ways, as they, and other the substantial Housholders, or the major part of them shall think meet and necessary, which Assessment shall not in the whole exceed 6 d. in the pound in one years accompt to the real value of the same: And 20 l. in ready money, goods, stock, or other personal estate to be rated equally to 20 s. a year Lands: Every such Assessment shall with∣in six days after be presented to some justice of the Peace near to the Parish where it is made, to be allowed by him; and after such allowance every person so assessed that shall not within twenty days after demand by the Surveyer, pay such sum assessed upon him to the Surveyer, shall forfeit and pay double so much as they are assessed to pay, unless upon complaint to the Justice he shall think fit to alter the same.
III. The Surveyors, or any of them within their limits may require and appoint every person who by the former Laws and Statutes of the Realm are chargeable with Wayn or Cart to the amending of the High-ways, to come and labour at the said ways, or send their Cart, Wayn and Team furnished, as by the Law is directed, to come and work for the amending of the ways for so many days as by the Laws are appointed, or for so many as the Surveyors shall think needful; for which Teams, work and labour, the Surveyors shall pay to the Owners of such Teams, Carts or Wayns according to the usual rate of the Coun∣trey, for such work as they shall do over and above what by the Laws made for the amending of High-ways they are appointed to do: And if question shall arise of the worth of such work or labour, some Justice of the Peace near adjoyning, and not living in the said Parish, shall determine what is fit to be allowed for such work; and if any such person charged to send his Team to work, shall refuse or neglect so to do, he shall forfeit 10 s. for every day he shall make such default, and every Labourer 1 s. 6 d. for such day he neglects to work. IV. It shall be lawful for Surveyors of High-ways within their several Precincts by order from the Quarter Sessions, and upon the View, and upon the allowance of two or more Justices of the Peace authorized thereunto by the Sessions, where any common High-way is not of the breadth of eight yards from shoars and brinks of the Ditches on either side, or from the banks and hedges where there are no ditches, to assign and lay out so much of any mans several Lands, next adjoyning to the said High-way, where it may conveniently be done, as shall enlarge the said way to the full breadth of eight yards, by the consent of the Owner or Owners of the said Lands, according to his or their respective interests herein; Or otherwise by order of the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions (after a Writ of ad quod Damnum first issued out and returned) to assign and lay out a new and more convenient way in and over the said Lands next or near adjoyning to the said common High-ways, the Survey∣ors first giving satisfaction for the said ground to the respective Owners according to their several interests, in the whole not ex∣ceeding 21 years purchase. Provided, If any common High-way shall be so altered and changed, then, and in such case the same new way, as also any new way altered, or to be altered by a Writ of ad quod Damnum, shall be from time to time repaired and amended by
such Parish, &c. or such person or persons, or in such manner and form as the old, former, common, or publick High-way was to be repaired and amended. V. Where there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cin∣ders or Stones within any Parish, Town, &c. to repair their common High-ways, it shall be lawful for the Surveyor, or such persons as he shall appoint, upon approbation and allowance of two Justices of the Peace within the County, to dig, take, and carry away Gravel, Chalk, Cinders, Stones out of the waste and common of any neighbouring Parish, Town, &c. or up∣on the Sea-coast, without paying any thing for the same, for the repairing and amending the ways aforesaid, so as they fill up the place within one moneth next ensuing, if requi∣red by the Owner of the Soil. But where there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, &c. within the common or waste grounds of any Parish, Township, or Hamlet to repair the High-ways therein, it shall be lawful for the Surveyor, or such as he shall appoint, to enter into the several ground (not being an House, Orchard, Garden, Court-yard, Park with Deer in it, Meadow) of any person within the Parish, Township, or Hamlet near adjoyning to the High-way to be repaired, where any such materials are to be found, and dig, take, and carry away such quantities thereof without paying any thing for the said materials, rendring only such damages to the occupiers or owners thereof, to be assessed by two Justices near to the said Parish, in case of difference about the same, so as the pits and holes so digged be filled up in such manner; and under such pe∣nalties as are prescribed in the Statute of five Eliz. concerning mending of High-ways. VI. After 29 September, 1662. No travelling Waggon, Wayn, Cart or Carriage, wherein any Burthens, Goods, or Wares shall be carried or drawn for hire (other than such Carts and Carriages as are employed in and about Husbandry, and managing of Lands, and in carrying of Hay, Straw, Corn un∣threshed, Coal, Chalk, Timber for shipping, materials for building, Stones of all sorts, or such Ammunition or Artillery as shall be for his Majesties service) shall at any one time tra∣vel, be drawn, or go in any common or publick High-way with above seven Horse-beasts, whereof six shall draw in pairs, and not with above eight Oxen, or six Oxen and two Horse-beasts: Nor shall at any time carry above 2000 weight between 1 October and 1 May (except such particulars as afore∣said)
Nor above 3000 weight between 1 May and 1 Octob. Nor above five quarters of Wheat, Meal, Meslin, Rye, Pease, Beans, Tares: Nor above eight quarters of Barley, Malt, or Oats. Nor shall any Waggon, Wayn, or Carriage be employed for the uses aforesaid, the wheels whereof are less in breadth than four inches in the Tyre, upon pain every Owner of such Waggon, Wayn, Cart, Carriage, Horse-beasts or Oxen, shall for every of the said offences forfeit 40 s. to be divided in three equal parts; One to the Surveyors of the High-ways where a∣ny of the offences shall be committed, towards the repairs of the ways of the Parish where the offence is committed; One other part to the Overseers of the poor of the said Parish, for the relief of the poor of the Parish; one other part to him that shall dis∣cover and prosecute for any of the said offences. The penalties to be levied by distress of all, or any the Horse-beasts or Oxen, and to be distributed as aforesaid by the Constable, Surveyors of the High-ways, Overseers of the poor; and in case the pe∣nalties be not paid within three days after distress, the same to be sold, reserving the overplus, the charges of keeping and selling first deducted. VII. If any Suit shall be commenced against any person for any thing done in pursuance of this Act, the Action shall be laid in the County where the fact was done, and not else∣where; and the Defendant may plead the general Issue, and give the Act in Evidence; and if the Jury shall find for the Defendant: Or if upon Demurrer, Nonsuit, or Discontinuance, Judgement be given against the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall have double costs. VIII. All sums of money rated and assessed; all charitable gifts given, or to be given for the amending, &c. High-ways, Pavements, Cawsies, &c. All Fines, Forfeitures, sums of moneys arising by the) Act, and not otherwise disposed of by the Act. All Fines and Amercements imposed upon any Pa∣rish, Town, &c. for not repairing the High-ways, &c. not otherwise by the Act disposed of, shall be employed and be∣stowed by the Surveyors within the respective Parishes, Towns, &c. by Warrant under their hands and seals, and are to be collected and levied within the Counties, Cities, Towns and Limits, by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods as afore∣said. IX. Every person elected a Surveyor of the High-ways, shall within one moneth after the year expired, yield up to the Inha∣bitants
of the Parish, Town, &c. at some publick meeting ap∣pointed by the Inhabitants, a perfect account of all moneys he hath received or paid within the year, by reason of his said Of∣fice; and of whom, what, and to whom he paid the same; What moneys are in arrear for Assessments, Fines, Forfeitures, Penalties, &c. And if any overplus be in his hands, he shall return the same to the next Surveyor for the use of the Parish, Town, &c. to be disbursed in and about the High-ways the year following. And if the Surveyor shall not make such account and payment, two Justices near the Parish, upon complaint, shall examine the business upon Oath; and upon default found in him, commit him to the Gaol of the County, City, &c. there to remain till he hath made a true account and pay∣ment. X. All Justices of Assize, Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of the Peace are impowered to hear and determine all matters concerning charitable gifts, for the amending and keeping in re∣pair any common High-ways, Pavements, Streets, &c. with∣in their Commission, and to make Orders for the due employ∣ment of such Gifts (Except Gifts made to the said uses to any Colledge, Hall, Free-school, or Hospital which have Visiters of their own) and to determine all offences and defects in Surveyors concerning the same; and in case any person be a∣grieved by such Order, he may appeal to the Court of Chancery, as in case of a Decree made upon the Statute of Charitable uses. XI. From and after 1 May, 1662. No Certiorari shall be al∣lowed to remove any Information, Indictment, or other Pro∣ceedings in the Quarte-Sessions, of, for, or concerning any matter in the Act, unless the party against whom such Infor∣mation, Indictment, &c. shall before the allowance of such Certiorari be bound to the person, &c. prosecuting, in 40 l. with Sureties, as the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter-Ses∣sions shall think fit, to pay unto the Prosecutors within one moneth after Conviction of the party Indicted, their costs and damages; and in default thereof, the Justices shall proceed to tryal of such Indictment, &c. any such Writs of Certiorari notwithstanding. XII. Whereas at a general Quarter-Sessions holden for the County of Wilts, it was ordered, That an ancient Bridge called Foot-Bridge, leading through the Parish of Laycock, between London, Bath, and Bristol, was more convenient for all passen∣gers
than one other Bridge in the same Parish, called Rey-Bridge, should be repaired, and made passable for all Carts, Waggons & Carriages, with the materials of Rey-Bridge: That the Parishioners of the said Parish of Laycock, and all others em∣ployed by them in the pulling down of Rey-Bridge, & employ∣ing the materials thereof as aforesaid, be indempnified from all suits and troubles whatsoever concerning the same. And the said Parishioners of Laycock shall not hereafter be compelled by In∣formation, Indictment, &c. or other ways be chargeable with the re-building of Rey-Bridge, otherwise than for the maintain∣ing the same sufficient for Horse and Pack, as it now stands. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to exempt any Owner, Farmer, or Lessee of any Iron-work, or any other person within the Wildes of the Counties of Surrey, Sussex, Kent, for carrying so many loads of Timber, Gravel, Stones, or other materials, or contributing of sums of money towards the Repairing of High-ways, as they are obliged by former Acts. 2. Where the Justices of the Peace of any County at their gene∣ral Quarter-Sessions, or two Justices near any Parish, Township, &c. shall be satisfied, that the High-ways and Bridges within the same may and will be sufficiently repaired without the help of the Act, then there shall be no Assessment made within the same, for and toward their Reparations by vertue of this Act. XIII. The Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex are impowered in their Quarter-Sessions to make Orders for setting up a new Bridge of bricks or stone for passage of Carts and Carriages in the room & place of a Foot-bridge, now called Stratford Bridge in the Parish of Hillingdon in the said Coun∣ty, or in some other convenient place neer thereunto, at the pre∣sent charge of the whole County; but to be upheld, maintain∣ed and repaired after the erecting of the same, at the charge of the Lord of the Mannor wherein the said Bridge now stand∣eth, proportionable to the charge he is now at, and the residue of the charge to be born by the Parishioners of the said Parish; and the said Justices are to make respective Rates accordingly: so as the sum assessed for the erecting the said Bridge, exceed not 100 l. The said Bridge to be finished before the first of August, 1663. XIV. The Surveyors of all and every Bridge or Bridges with∣in their respective limits, shall take care, that before the Feast of St. Michael, 1662. all the Bridges have sufficient Walls, Posts and Rails of each side, four foot high at least, and that the
same be from time to time sufficiently kept and repaired. XV. Where any Lands are let, the Tenant or Occupier shall pay the assessment, and all charges for the mending of the High-ways, and not the Land-lord, except there shall be any agree∣ment betwixt them to the contrary. XVI. This Act, as to the power of raising money, shall con∣tinue in force for three years only, from the 25. of March, 1662. and no longer, but all other powers therein shall continue and stand in force until the end of the first Session of the next Parlia∣ment, and no longer. Ireland, Rebels Lands to be sold. Many Millions of Acres of Rebels Lands in Ireland, being so disposed of as confiscate, These Propositions were made to the Houses of Parliament; Anno 17 Car. 1. Cap. 1. I. That 2500000 l. of those Lands may be assigned, allotted and divided amongst Adventurers, viz. each Adventurer of 200 l. 1000. Acres in Ulster, for 300 l. 1000. Acres in Conought, for 450 l. 1000. Acres in Munster, for 600 l. 1000. Acres in Lienster according to English measure, consisting of Meadow, Arable and profitable Lands, to be holden in common Soccage of the King, as of his Castle of Dublin. II. That out of those 2500000. Acres a constant rent shall be reserved to the Crown of England, viz. out of every Acre in Ulster, 1 d. in Conought, 1 d. ob. in Munster, 2 d. q. in Lien∣ster 3 d. by which His Majesties Revenues out of those Lands will be much improved. III. That for erecting of Manors, setling of Wasts and Com∣mons, maintaining preaching Ministers, creating Corporations, and regulating the several Plantations, Commissions be granted by general authority of Parliament. IV. That the Undertakers within the City of London and 20. miles thereof, shall underwrite their several sums before the 20. of March, 1641. and all within 60. miles distant, before the first of April, 1642. and the rest of the Kingdom before the first of May, 1642. V. That the sums underwritten shall be paid in at four pay∣ments, i. e. one fourth part within ten days after the underwriting, and the other three parts at three moneths and three moneths,
all to be paid into the Chamber of London. VI. That every one who doth underwrite, shall at the time of his subscription pay down the twentieth part of the total sum by him then underwritten, and if the residue of his fourth part be not paid to such as have power to receive the same, within the ten days before limited; then such person shall not only forfeit the twentieth part deposited, but so much of his fourth part to be added thereunto, as shall make up the one moye∣ty of the first payment, and all the benefit of his subscription, which forfeiture shall accrue to the benefit of the rest of the Ad∣venturers. The Propositions above mentioned, being approved and as∣sented unto by the King, Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment; I. Enacted, That all and every the said Propositions, and every clause therein contained, are and shall be according to the Tenure thereof, ratified, confirmed, and established, with such explanations, alterations and additions, that after are expressed. II. That all and every person and persons which upon the 23. of October 1641. or at any time after shall be in rebellion, or levy war against the King, within his Realm of Ireland, or willingly aid, assist, or countenance any person in rebellion against the King, shall lose and forfeit to the King, his Heirs, and Successours, all such right, title, interest, use and possessi∣on, which they, or any of them, or any other person or per∣sons in trust for them, on the said 23. day of October, or at any time after shall have of, in, or unto Honours, Manors, Castles, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Reversions, Remainders, Uses, Possessions, Offices, Rights, Conditions, or any other Hereditaments whatsoever, of what nature or quality soever they be, And all such Right, Title, Interest, Use, Pos∣session, &c. of all the said Honours, Manors, Castles, Lands, &c. shall be vested, adjudged and taken to be in the actual and real possession of the King, his Heirs and Successors, without any Of∣fice, Inquisition hereafter to be made. III. That 2500000. Acres of Meadow, Arable Land, and Profitable Pasture, which are, or shall be forfeited by the Re∣bels, with the Woods, Bogs, Loughs and barren Mountains, cast in and above, with all the Buildings and Edifices thereup∣on, are, and shall be for the satisfaction of such person and per∣sons as shall underwrite any sum or sums of money, and pay
the same according to the meaning of this Act, the same to be allotted and proportioned to each Under-writer, according to the proportion of the sums underwritten and paid in, to be holden by such Rent and Tenure as in the Propositions are ex∣pressed. IV. That A. B. C. and D. persons in the Act named, shall give their dayly attendance at the Chamber of London, to re∣ceive the subscriptions and sums of moneys as shall be there ten∣dred and paid, which persons shall enter the names of the Under-writers, together with the sum and time of subscription, in one or more Books to be kept for that purpose, and shall issue out the said moneys in such manner as both Houses of Parliament shall by order direct. V. That the Sheriffs of each County of England and Wales, shall receive all such subscriptions and sums of moneys, as by vertue of this Act shall be tendered unto them, in their respe∣ctive Counties, and shall return the same subscribed with the names of the Under-writers, and times of their subscriptions to the Chamber of London, to the said A. B. C. and D. or any of them, to be by them entred into the Books to be kept for that purpose; who shall give acquittances, or receipts thereof to the Sheriffs: and the said A. B. C. and D. shall accompt for all such moneys received, to such persons as both Houses of Parliament shall direct, and the said Receivers shall receive one peny in every pound towards their pains and charges attending the same. VI. That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall declare, this present rebellion is appeased and ended, forthwith after such Declaration made, and sent to the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, the Chancellor, &c. shall issue forth Commissions unto all the four Provinces of that Kingdom, for the surveying and setting forth of the said 2500000 Acres, which Commissions shall be to such effect, and directed to such persons as the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall appoint; and the said Commissioners shall have power to sur∣vey all the forfeited Lands, and to measure forth of the same, 625000. Acres in every the said Provinces, Meadow, Arable and profitable Pasture (the Woods, Bogs, barren Mountains, &c. cast in over and above) and so divide the same by Lot a∣mongst the several Under-writers, and the Heirs of the Under-writers (if they be dead) and the Assigns of the Under-writers, as shall assign the same, according to the proportions mentioned
in the propositions, and according to the respective sums paid in; which division shall be done without favour, or advantage given to any persons, but be done, and determined equally, and by lot every mans Lands to be layed together, so near as con∣veniently may be: And if 625000. Acres of profitable Lands cannot be found in one Province, the same to be made up in va∣lue of the Rebels other Lands, and for want thereof, out of the profitable Lands forfeited in other Provinces, at the discretion of the Commissioners. VII. After every under-writer, his Heirs, or Assigns, shall have drawn his respective lot, which shall be appointed for his share; he shall be adjudged in the actual possession and seisin of the said Lands, with all thereunto belonging, mentioned in his lot, and shall, and may forthwith enter upon, and have, hold and enjoy the same, to him, and his Heirs, and all, and singular the Woods, Bogs, barren Mountains, &c. with all easements, and Commodities thereunto belonging. VIII. That all, and every person, and persons, after the allotment so made, who shall have 1000 Acres, or more, lying together in Lienster, or 2000. Acres or more, lying toge∣ther in Conought, or 1500. Acres or more, lying together in Munster, or 3000. Acres together or more, lying in Ulster, shall have power for every such 1000, 2000, 1500, or 3000. Acres to create a Manor within the limits of the said Lands respectively, and reserve Tenures, to hold of himself and his Heirs, as of his Manour, or Manours at his will and pleasure: And to have a Court Leet, Court Baron within the precincts of every such Manor, and to enjoy all such Royalties, Fran∣chises, Fines, Amercements, Suits, Services, and Fine-du∣ties, as to view of Frank-pledge, or Court Baron is belong∣ing; And also to have all Deodands, Felons goods, with all waifs and estrays. IX. No part of the moneys paid in according to this Act, shall be employed to any other purpose then the reducing of the said Rebels, until the Rebels be declared to be subdued by the Lords and Commons as aforesaid. And it shall be employed for the sending over into Ireland such Forces of Foot, Horse, Moneys, Ammunition, Victuals or necessaries to a War, as the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall direct, and the over-plus to be disposed of as they shall direct.
X. Plantations shall be regulated, Corporations created, Churches erected, Preaching Ministers maintained within the Limits and Precincts of the Lands so divided, as by Commis∣sioners to be nominated by the Lords and Commons in Parli∣ament shall be ordered and appointed. XI All Patents that shall be granted of any of the Rebels Goods, or Lands, or of any goods forfeited by this Act. And all Pardons granted to any of the Rebels before attainder, after 13. October, 1641. (without assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament) shall be void, and of none effect. XII. Every person, which after the first of March, 1640. shall take, enter into, or make any Compact, Bond, Covenant, Oath, Promise, or Agreement, to bring into the Realm of Ireland in any case whatsoever, the Authorities of the See of Rome, or defend, or maintain the same, shall forfeit to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all his Lands, Tenements and Heredi∣taments entailed, or not entailed: And all his Goods and Chat∣tels which he or any other had from him in trust, or otherwise, at the time of the making, entring into, or taking any such Bond, Compact, Covenant, Oath, Promise, or Agreement, other then such Lands, Tenements, &c. Goods and Chattels, as shall be bona fide for valuable consideration sold before the 23. of October, 1641. XIII. If any person since the 30th of October, 1640. be, or hereafter shall be in Rebellion in the Kingdom of Ireland, and be dead, or shall die before Attainder, or pardon for the same, All the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Estate; or Estates, Goods and Chattels which he had, or shall have, or any other person in trust for him, at the time of the making or entring into, shall be forfeit unto the King, His Heirs and Successors, and the King, his Heirs and Successors shall be in the actual sei∣sin and possession thereof. XIV. If any person or persons whatsoever, that at any time hereafter shall be attainted of Treason, or shall dye in actual Rebellion before Attainder; or hath, or shall take, enter into, or make any such Compact, Bond, Oath, Cove∣nant or Agreement as aforesaid, shall after the first of March, 1640. make, or hath made any Conveyance or Assurance what∣soever, of any Manors, Lands, &c. in the Kingdom of Ire∣land, unto, or for his own use; or unto, or for the use of his Wife, or any of his Children, or any in trust for him, or any of them; all the Uses, Rents, and Trusts so limited, other
than such as are or shall be bona fide made before his, her, or their marriage, or made in performance of any covenant in wri∣ting made before marriage unto, or for the use of his Wife or Children, shall be forfeited unto His Majesty, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors, and shall be adjudged, to be in the actual possession of the King, his Heirs, and Successors. XV. Every person, that shall have any part of the Lands so divided and allotted, may export out of this Kingdom, or the Dominion of Wales, any Horses, Mares, Cattel, Sheep, for the planting, and stocking of the said Lands, at any time during the space of two years from the time of the division, without paying any customs, subsidy, or Impost for the same, upon secu∣rity given to the Farmers or Collectors of the Customs, or one of them, that the said Horses, Mares, Cattel, Sheep, &c. so to be exported, shall be bona fide imployed for the stocking of the said Lands, and not to be employed to any other purpose. Saving, to all persons, bodies Politick and corporate, their Heirs and Successors, and the Heirs and Successors of every of them (other then the said Rebels, their Aiders, Abettors, Con∣trivers, Maintainers, and other persons whose Lands are or shall be forfeited by this Act as aforesaid) all such Right, Title, In∣terest, Possession, Reversion, Remainder, Offices, Annuities, Rents, Command, which they or any of them had, or ought to have in, to, or out of the said Honours, Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements, or Premisses, or any of them the 23. day of October, 1641. so as such person, or persons, bodies politick or corporate, &c. do make or enter, or cause to be made or entered his, or their claim to any such right, title, or interest in His Ma∣jesties Court of Chancery in Ireland within twenty days after proclamation made. Ireland, Rebels Land. I. Enacted, 18 Car. 1. That all persons of the Dutch Nati∣on, being Protestants, and Subjects to the Government of the States of the united Provinces of the Low-Countreys, shall be permitted to underwrite such subscription for the premisses until the sum of 200000 l. shall be under written, and that such of the Dutch as shall underwrite, shall underwrite their severall sums within this Kingdom before the 10. of May, 1642. and pay
the fourth part before the tenth day of May, 1642. at the Cham∣ber of London. That the Members of either House of Parliament, which shall underwrite any sum, and pay the same, or any part thereof at the Chamber of London, shall have the same days and times for payment of their sums underwritten, or to be underwritten, as they should have had, if they had subscribed their sums and paid the same in the several Counties where they had their ordi∣nary residence and habitation before the beginning of the Par∣liament. Ireland, Rebels Lands. An Additional Act. Enacted, 18 Car. 1. cap. That all and every Cities, Bo∣roughs, and other Towns Corporate, which have a perpetu∣al Commonalty and Succession, being within sixty miles of London; and all and every Companies, Guilds and Fraterni∣ties of any Craft, Mysterie, or Trade united and incorporated within the City of London, or within any other City within sixty miles distant thereof, which before the 20. of May, 1642. by their Citizens, Burgesses or any of them, shall underwrite any such sum, and pay the fourth part thereof before the twenti∣eth day of May aforesaid, and the other sums, parts of the said sum at three moneths, by equal portions to be paid at the Chamber of London, to such Persons appointed to attend there, or any two of them: and all other Cities, Boroughs, Towns Corporate, which have perpetual Commonalty and Succession sixty miles from London, and all Compa∣nies and Fraternities within the said Cities, Boroughs, Towns Corporate, &c. which shall as aforesaid, by themselves, their Burgesses, or one of them, underwrite, and pay in their moneys, on, or before the last day of May, 1642. shall have a proportionable share of the said Rebels Lands, and of other Lands forfeited, or to be forfeited by the first recited Act, un∣der the Conditions and Limitations in the said Act, or Propo∣sitions mentioned.
Ireland, Rebels Lands. Another Additional Act. I. Enacted, 18. Car. 1. cap. 37. That all and every person, or persons of the English, Scotish, Irish, or Dutch Nation, which before the 20. day of July, 1642. shall underwrite the sum of 10. l. and pay the fourth part thereof on or before the 20. of July, 1642. and the other parts within three moneths to be accounted from the 20. of July, 1642. all the said sums to be paid at the Chamber of the City of London; shall have a proportionable share of the Rebels Lands forfeited, or to be for∣feited, under the Conditions, Limitations and Provisions in the Acts before expressed. II. All and every the persons in the clause abovesaid, that hath at any time heretofore under-written, or shall underwrite any sum of money to the purposes aforesaid, shall pay in the sum so under-written, before the twentieth day of July, and they shall have a proportionable number of Acres out of the 2500000. Acres, which proportionable number of Acres, shall be measured out according to the Plantation Measure, viz. every Acre to consist of 160. Poles, or Perches, and every Perch to contain 21. Foot. Provided, That if any person who hath underwritten, according to the times limited in the Act, and shall not pay their moneys before the said 20. of July, shall have their proportionable number of Acres according to the English Measure, viz. sixteen foot and a half to a Pole, and no other, or greater measure. Judicial Proceedings. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. cap. 4. For avoiding of discontinu∣ances in the Courts at Westminster, because the four first returns of Easter Term, 1660. cannot be conveniently kept: No Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, or other things whatsoever pleaded, returned, or depending, or having day in any the said Courts, at the several returns, or other days certain after shall be discontinued, for the not keeping of such returns, or days, but shall be effectual in Law to all intents and
purposes: and all such places, &c. are continued and adjourned to Crastino Ascensionis Dom. and all Sheriffs and other Officers shall keep in their hands respectively, All Writs and Process un∣til Crastino Ascensionis, and then return the same. II. No Writs, Process, Plaints, Pleas, Informations, Indict∣ments, or Judicial proceedings, had, commenced, or prosecuted, before 5. of May, 1660. in the name of Custodes Libertatis Angliae authoritate Parliamenti, or the same in English, or in the name of Oliver Lord Protector of, &c. or in the name of Richard of &c. shall be abated, or discontinued, by the Kings Just re∣assumption to his Government, or because of error, abatement, or discontinuance, but all such Writs, and proceedings, and all Commissions for Answers, Commissions for Fines, Warrants of Attorney, &c. shall stand, and be continued, and pro∣ceeded upon, notwithstanding the change of the Kings name, and style in the Judicial proceedings. III. One Act made 1650. called, An Act for turning the Law Books, and proceedings in Courts of Justice into English, shall be in force, till 1. August, 1660. and no longer, and the Act touching the pleading of the general Issue, and the giving the special matter in evidence, to continue till the same time and no longer. IV. If the general issue hath been pleaded since 20. Novem∣ber, 1660. or before the said 1. of August, then such evidence may be allowed, as if the said pretended Act had continued, and not determined. Provided, That all Writs, Patents, and Commissions for Ju∣stices of either Bench, and Barons of the Exchequer, Commis∣sions of Oyer and Terminer, and Gaol delivery, and precepts upon such Commissions, and all other Commissions to be made by the Clerk of the Crown in Chancery, Charters, and Letters-Patents, of Lands, Liberties, Honours, or Offices do or may issue in the Kings name, in the same manner as usually before the making of the said recited pretended Act. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. cap. 9. All Fines, Recoveries, Verdict, Judgements, Statutes, Recognizances, Inrollments, Exemplifi∣cations, Inquisitions, Indictments, Presentments, Informations, Decrees, Probate of Wills, Letters of Administrations, & all pro∣ceedings in Law or equity: in all or any the Courts at Westmin∣ster, or in Wales, or in County Palatines, or the Dutchy, Barwick, or other inferiour Courts; and all things done by the Judges and Officers in pursuance thereof, or of the Court of Admiralty,
Delegates, Justices of Assise, Nisi Prius, &c. Commissioner of Sewers, Bankrupts, or Charitable uses; and all proceedings thereupon had in England since the first of May, 1642. are con∣firmed, notwithstanding any defect of legal Power, or difference in stile, or Title. II. All Fines levyed without paying the Kings Silver, or with∣out entry of money given for the concord, or before one Judge only, are made good and effectual: And all Fines, Recoveries, Judicial Proceedings in the Common Pleas since the death of the late King, of Lands in Durham are confirmed. Provided, All the illegal Proceedings, and illegal High Court of Justice, are excepted and hereby not confirmed. III. Whereas since the first of May, 1641. and before the 20. of August, 1660. divers who adhered to both Houses of Par∣liament, have been indicted for Treason; and others also who adhered to his Majesty or his Father, were impeached in like manner: All such Indictments and Proceedings thereupon, and all Grants made of any Lands forfeited by reason thereof, and title to the mean Profits claimed in that respect, be henceforth discharged, and that Restitution be made to the respective per∣sons, their heirs, &c. Provided, This Act shall not extend to avoid, or confirm any sales, or estates made by any pretended Act of Parliament since the first of May, 1642. Nor any Confirmation thereof in this Parliament, but they shall stand in such plight as they should have done if they had not been made. IV. All Recognizances, Bonds and Securities made to the late Keepers, or Protector, and not Pardoned or Discharged by this Act, or otherwise (other than such Securities as have been given to the said Powers) by any for their adherence to his Majesty, or his Father, and relating to the late Troubles, all which are declared to be void; and all Proceedings had for the said pretended Powers, and unpardoned (otherwise than as abovesaid) may be had and prosecuted in the Name, and to the use of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors. And also except∣ing all Obligations, Bonds and Securities to the said pretended Powers, by order of any Person or Persons of any Council of State, Committee of Safety, Major-Generals, Decimators, or any under them, or any other Military Power, which are de∣stined also to be void. V. This Act not to extend to continue after 8. May, 1660. any of the Judges at Westminster, Sergeants at Law, Commis∣sioners
of Sewers, or of Bankrupts, or of Charitable Uses con∣stituted by any of the late pretended Powers. Provided, It shall be lawful for any person grieved, to have a Writ of Error, Bill of Review, in such manner as former∣ly, other than such Errors and Defects as are remedied by the Act. VI. No Non-claim upon, or after any Fine hereby confirm∣ed, shall extend to bar any person, their Heirs, &c. (other than the parties to the said Fines, and their Heirs and Trustees) concerning such rights as they had by colour of any Act, or pretended Ordinance of Parliament, since 1. May, 1642. and be∣fore 25. April, 1660. were sold or disposed of, as of Crown-Lands, or Church-Lands, or as the Lands of any person for his adherence to the late King, or his now Majestie, or in re∣lation to the late Troubles, so as such persons, their Heirs, &c. pursue their Claims, by Action or Entry within five years after the 29. of May, 1660. VII. The Names and Styles of the usurped Powers and Au∣thorities, and the Act mentioned, are declared to be Rebelli∣ons, Traiterous, and abominable Usurpations, detested by the Parliament, as opposite to his Majesties just Rights, and a violation of the Priviledges of Parliament. VIII. All pretended Indictments, Outlawries, Inquisiti∣ons and Proceedings thereon of High Treason against any per∣son for levying War against Oliver Cromwel, or any other late usurped Power, are hereby made void. And all Assurances, Recognizances, and Judgements for Debt, or Damages here∣tofore had or suffered by any person whose Conviction, Out∣lawry, or Attainder is hereby discharged, shall be of no effect, as if no such Conviction, Outlawry, or Attainder had been. Knight-hood. Enacted 17 Car. 1. cap. 18. That from henceforth, no per∣son or persons, of what condition, quality, estate or degree soever, shall at any time be distrained or compelled by any Writ or Process of the Court of Chancery, or Court of Ex∣chequer, or otherwise by any means whatsoever, to receive, or take upon him, or them respectively, the Order or Dignity
of Knight-hood; Nor shall suffer, or undergo any fine, trouble, or molestation whatsoever by reason, or colour of his or their having not received, or taken upon him or them, the said Order, or Dignity: And all and every Writ and Process what∣soever, and all proceedings had or made contrary to that Sta∣tute shall be utterly void. Leases. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. cap. 30. All Grants by Copy of Court Roll, and Leases, and Licenses of setting and assigning Grants and Presentations, all elections of Heads, Masters, Fellows, Scholars, Students, and Officers of Colledges, Halls, Chur∣ches and Houses of Learning, and Hospitals, into dead, or o∣ther places, by reason of the late troubles, then or since va∣cant; Receipts and Acquittances of Rents incurred, Entries for Forfeitures, or conditions broken, had, made, or given since 5. March, 1642. and before 25. July, 1660. by any Masters, Provosts, Presidents, Wardens, Governours, Rectors, Principals and other heads of Houses, de facto of the same respectively in either of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or Deans and Canons, or Prebends de facto of Christ-Church, or Master, Provost, or Warden of the Colledges of Eaton, or Winchester, or by such Master, Wardens, or Governours, Brothers, Bre∣thren, or Sisters de facto of any Hospital, by whatsoever parti∣cular name, or stile of foundation the said Colledges, Church, Hospitals, Masters, Governours, Fellows, Deans and Canons, or Prebends, are stiled, founded, known or incorporated; and all Leases, Grants, by the Master, Warden, Brethren, Brothers, or Sisters of any Hospitals of the Patronage of any Bishop, Dean, Dean and Chapter, and all surrenders to them made to enable such Leases, Grants, and Presentations, shall stand and be of the same, and no other force and effect, as if the said Masters, Pro∣vosts, &c. had been such de jure, and duly and de jure entitu∣led in, and to the said Colledges, Halls, &c. or places respe∣ctively, and as if such Leases, granted by the Masters and Bre∣thren of any Hospital, of the Patronage of any Bishop, Dean, Dean and Chapter had been confirmed by the Bishop, Dean and Chapter. And that notwithstanding any defects in the
Lessors, or Grantors, and notwithstanding the restitution of a∣ny ejected person, the Rents, Covenants and Conditions in such Leases and Grants, shall go in succession, as if such Lessors, or Grantors had been de jure Masters, &c. any Law, Custom or Statute, notwithstanding. 1 Provided, Nothing in this Act extend to the confirming, or making good of any Lease, or Leases, or any parcel, or par∣cels of Lands, Tenements, Pastures, Houses, Orchards, Gar∣dens, Barns, or any of the Possessions of, or belonging to the Hospital of St. John the Baptist and the Evangelist in the Town of Northampton, made between 1. September, 1655. and 25. July, 1658. by the pretended Mr. George Goodman and his Co-brethren of the said Hospital. 2. This Act shall not make good in Law or Equity, any Lease, or Leases made by Simon Moor Clerk, late pretended Master of the Hospital of St. Oswald in the County of Worcester, or of any the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of, or belonging to the said Hospital, to Richard Moor his Son, or to any the Children, or Grand-children of the said Simon Moor, or to any in trust for the use, or uses of the said Si∣mon, his Wife, Children, Grand children, or any or either of them. 3. No person shall be confirmed in any Master-ship, Pro∣vost-ship, Head-ship, or Fellow-ship, or Chaplains-place, in any Colledge, or Hall in either of the Universities, or in the Colledges of Eaton or Winchester, that is not ordained Minister by Bishops, or Presbyters (or being ordained hath since renounced his Ordination) where by the local Statutes of the said respective Colledges, or Halls, Ordination is re∣quired. 4. This Act shall not confirm any Lease, or Leases of the Rectories and Personages of Randal and Littlecotes in the County of Lincoln, which have long since been in the tenure, or occupation of John Lord Culpeper, but that the said John Lord Culpeper his Executors or Administrators, re imbursing the new Tenant or Lessee so much money as hath been really paid for the Fine for such Lease, they shall be admitted to re∣new the said Lease, for the said Fine. 5. That Thomas Clifton now of Litham in the County of Lancaster Esquire, his Executors and Administrators (paying the several and respective Rents reserved unto the Colledge of
Christ-Church in Oxford, and securing unto John Arthurs, Thomas Bromefield and Lawrence Marsh, or the Survivours or Survivor of them, or the Executors, or Executor of the Survi∣vor of them, who have certain Tithes and Lands, parcel of the Mannor and Parsonage of Kirkham in the County of Lan∣caster, leased unto them from Doctor Owen, reputed Dean and the Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Christ in Oxford, for the uses in the said Lease expressed, out of the Premises the yearly sum of 400 l. to be paid half-yearly, by equal portions for 11 years next ensuing; and re-imbursing unto several other Lessees, or their Assigns, of many other parts, portions of the said Parsonage of Kirkham, so much money as was by them truly paid for their respective Fines (all which demised Premises, had long been in the Tenure, or Occupation of the said Thomas Clifton and his Ancestors, for several terms of years yet unex∣pired) shall have and enjoy the same for the residue of the said several terms yet to come. 6. It shall not confirm the election of any Head, Fellow, Schollar, or Chaplain of any Colledge or Hall in either of the Universities, that upon any other grounds besides the want of Episcopal Ordination, is, or was not capable of being elected into such place, by the Statute of the said Colledge or Hall, into which he or they were chosen. 7. It shall not prejudice the title of any person, or persons, who by Letters-Patents under the Great Seal, hath obtained from his Majesty since the 1. May, and before 26. of August, 1660, any grant of any Deanry, Headship of any House, Rectorship of any Colledge, Canons place, Prebendary, Fellowship, or Schollarship within either the Universities, or of the Colledges of Eaton, Westminster, or Winchester. 8. It shall not confirm any Lease, or Estate made to John Tombs Clerk, of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments be∣longing to the Hospital of St. Katherines in Ledbury in the County of Hereford, to any of his children, or to any other in trust for him, them, or any of them. 9 Not make good any Lease made by William Lenthal, pre∣tended Warden of the House of Converts, belonging to the Master of the Rolls, since 30. January 1642. of any Houses, or Tenements thereunto belonging, to the prejudice of John Lord Culpeper, his Successors, Lessees, or Assigns, the said Lord Culpeper re-imbursing the said Lessees, such moneys as
have been paid with interest for the same, discounting for the mean profits. 10. Not to confirm William Hooke in the Mastership of the Savoy, nor to make good any Lease of any lands, &c. belonging thereunto, made between 30. January, 1648, to the 1. of June, 1660. The Master of the Hospital for the time being, allowing to all such Lessees, all such sums of money, as they paid to the Master for a Fine at the time of making such Lease, and interest for the same, the Lessees discounting for the mean profits. 11. Not to confirm any Lease, or Grant mentioned to be made to any person, by John Owen, late Dean, and others Ca∣nons, or pretended Dean and Canons of the Colledge of Christ-Church in Oxford, of any of the Rectories, Tithes, Gleab-lands, of Hampton, Wickenford, Badsey, Aldington, Ʋffenham, South-Littleton, North-Littleton and Middle-Littleton in Worcestershire, heretofore the Possessions of Henry late Marquess of Wor∣cester, and Dame Anne his Wife, or either of them, dispos∣sessed for loyaltie to his Majesty; but that the Executor, or Administrator of the said Henry, shall be admitted to renew the Leases of the said Tithes, re-imbursing to such person all such sums of money paid for the said Lease, or Leases by way of Fine, with interest for the same, the said person, or per∣sons discounting to the said Executors, or Administrators for the mean profits received. 12. Not to confirm any Lease, Estate, &c. made by any pre∣tended Dean and Chapter, Master or Head of any Colledge in either of the Universities, or of any Hospital; which said Lease had not been good in Law, had they been made by a lawful Dean and Chapter, &c. nor to make good any Lease, or Leases of the Rectory, or Parsonage of Arrington in the County of Cambridge: nor the Rectory, or Parsonage of Soham in the said County: but that Thomas Chicheley, (paying and re-imbursing the se∣veral Tenants, &c. the several sums of moneys paid for Fines with interest, discounting such Rents and Profits taken out of the Premises) shall be restored to his ancient possessions; and that Trinity Colledge, and Trinity Hall in Cambridge shall Lease the said several Rectories and Parsonages to the said Tho∣mas Chicheley. 13. This Act not to extend to restore any person to any Headship, Fellowship, or Schollarship of any Colledge or Hall, or to any Chaplains or Clerks place, in any Colledge or
Hall in the Universities, or to any Rector, or Rectors place, that is, or shall be before 1. January, 1660. ejected out of their re∣spective Head-ships, &c. or out of any Lecture in the said Uni∣versity by his Majesties Commissioners, under the great Seal, for not having been legally and according to the several Statutes of the said places nominated elected or admitted in, or to the same. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. Cap. 35. That the Master of the Rolls for the time being, and his Successors, Masters of the Rolls, shall have power and authority during the time, he or they shall con∣tinue Master of the Rolls, by writing indented under Hand and Seal, to grant and make Leases for 41 years, or for lesser Term, to commence from the making of such Leases, of all and singular the Houses, Mansions, Grounds, or Tenements with the Appurtenances to the Master of the Rolls, as Master of the Rolls, or any part thereof: The Chappel of the Rolls, with a convenient Mansion-House, Court, Yard, Garden, Stable, Coach-house, and other Out-houses, and buildings fit for the use and habitation of the Master of the Rolls, onely excepted: which Lease, &c. shall be as good and effectual in Law, as if the Master of the Rolls had been seised of the Premises of a good estate in fee-simple. I. Provided, That in Leases where provision is made for new building of houses, the yearly Rent of 20 s. at the least shall be reserved upon every Lease, of such a quantity of the said Pre∣mises, as shall be set out and assigned by the Master of the Rolls for the time being, for any out-house or Tenement to be built upon: And in Leases where there is no such Provision, the like usual Rent as hath been paid, or reserved for the greater part of seven years last past, or more, shall be yearly reserved. II. That the Master of the Rolls for the time being, or any succeeding Master of the Rolls, after the Premises have been once letten, shall not make, or grant any new, or concurrent Lease, until within 7 years of the expiration of the Lease, then in being, nor for any lesser Rent, then was reserved upon the former Lease, nor for longer Term then 21 years from the making of such new Lease. I. Enacted 13 Car. 2. Cap. All Leases, or Grants already made, or hereafter to be made within three years by the King by Letters Patents, Indentures, or other Writings under his Great Seal, or Seal of the Exchequer; Or by Copy of Court-Roll, according to the customs of the respective Mannors, of any
Offices, Parks, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments (other than Honours, Lordships, or Mannors) parcel of the possessi∣ons of the Duchy of Cornwal, or annexed to the same, shall be good and effectual in Law, according to the Contents of the said Leases, &c. against the King, his heirs, &c. And all and every other person whatsoever which shall inherit or enjoy the Dukedorne of Cornwal by force of any Act of Parliament or o∣ther limitation. Provided, Such Leases to be made, shall be made but for three lives or fewer, or 31 years or under; Or some other Term determinable upon one, two, or three lives, and not a∣bove, and if made in Reversion, the same together with the Estates in possession not to exceed three lives, or 31 years; and not dispunishable of VVaste, and upon every such Lease shall be reserved the ancient Rent or more, as hath been paid for the greater part of twenty years next before the making of such Lease: And where no Rent hath been reserved, or payable, there shall be reserved a reasonable Rent, not under the fourth part of the yearly value of the Parks, Lands, &c. therein contained. II. All Covenants, Conditions, Reservations and Agreements contained in every Lease made, or hereafter to be made, of the premisses, shall be good, according to the words and contents of the same against them to whom the Remainder of the said Lands, &c. shall come, as for and against them to whom the in∣terests of the said Leases, &c. shall come respectively, as if the King at the time of the making such Covenants, &c. were seised of an absolute indefeasable estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple in the same, saving to all persons, Bodies politick, &c. (other than the King, his Heirs, &c. and all and every person who shall hereafter have, inherit and enjoy the said Dukedom of Cornwal) All such Rights, Titles, Estates, Claims and Demands of what kind, nature, or quality soever, of, in, to, or out of the said Offices, Lands, &c. as they had, or ought to have had before the making of the Act.
Manufactures and Trades. I. Enacted. 14. Car. 2. Cap 5. That for the making of Wor∣steds, and other Stuffs called Norwith Stuffs, and Regulating of the same within the County of the City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, There shall be 12 Wardens and 30 Assistants, all which are to be Master Weavers, 6 of which Wardens, and 15 of the said Assistants, shall be chosen the first Monday after Pen∣tecost Anno 1662. and so yearly, at some publick place by the Master-weavers, or the greater number of them, present at the said City and County of Norwich: And the other 6 VVardens and 15. Assistants chosen the same day yearly, within the City of Norwich, or county of Norfolk. And the said Wardens respective∣ly shall within 14 days after they shall be chosen, take an oath, to be ministred unto them by the Mayor of the said City for the time being, or his Deputy, or Steward of the Dutchy of Lan∣caster within the said County: viz. I A. B. do swear, That I will faithfully and honestly, perform and discharge the Office of a Warden of the said Trade of Worsted Weavers, according to the best of my skill, power, and knowledge: and the Assistants shall take the like Oath before such persons the VVardens shall be sworn: And if any of the Wardens so chosen shall refuse to take such Oath; or after he is sworn, dye before the end of the year, then it shall be lawful for the Master-weavers of the said city and county, to choose other VVarden or VVardens in the place of him, or them so dying, who shall be sworn in manner as aforesaid. II. That for the due execution of the powers and authori∣ties given by the Act, when, and as often as it shall be desired by 8 or more of the Assistants, Thirteen or more of the said War∣dens, and Assistants, shall have power to make and ordain By-Laws, Rules, and Ordinances, for and concerning the regulati∣on of the said Worsted-Stuffs, or other Stuffs now made, or hereafter to be made, within the said city and county of Nor∣wich, and county of Norfolk, both in length, breadth, and good∣ness, and of such other particulars, as they shall think fit, for the better Regulating the said Trade and Manufacture, and the Artificers of the same, which By-Laws, &c. being confirmed by the Mayor, and 2 Justices of the Peace of the said city, and county of Norwich; and three other Justices of the county of
Norfolk shall be obeyed and kept by the several persons within, and under the said Regulation; and the Wardens, and Assist∣ants are impowred to impose a sine or penalty, on such as shall not conform thereunto. The said fine or penalty upon any person, not exceeding 10 s. for every offence. III. The Wardens, and Assistants of the said City, and County of the said City, shall give personal notice to the War∣dens, of the County of Norfolk, or 2. of them, of the time when they intend to consider of the making of by-laws, &c. and shall set it up upon the Door of their Sealing Hall 14. dayes at the least before they proceed to make the same, to the end the Country Weavers may be there present. IV. All Yarns, called Worsted Yarns, and such other as are used by the Worsted-Weavers shall be made without fraud; and reeled on a Reel of a full yard about, every Reel-staff to contain 14. Leas, and every Lea 40. threads; 12. of the Reel-staffs shall make a dozen, and 12. dozen a grosse; and if any person shall put to Sale any Yarns made and reeled in other manner, every such person shall forfeit the Moiety, of the value of such Yarn to be recovered to the use of the Trade, and Manufacture by action of debt, &c. in any of the Kings Courts of Record. And the Wardens, and Assistants, shall and may in all Fairs and Markets search, in the said City of Norwich, and County of the same, and view all Yarn, which shall be there put to sale and to seize on such as they shall finde defective, and within 20. days next after seizure, to bring the same to tryal by a Jury, and to be proceeded in, as by the Act is appointed for defective Stuffs, and so set such fine upon the said Yarns, as they shall see cause, the fine not to exceed the Moiety of the Yarn found de∣fective; and no person shall be doubly punished for one offence touching Yarns, by this clause of the Act. V. All sorts of Stuffs, woven of Woollen only, or of Wooll, and other materials within the counties aforesaid, and the Makers and VVeavers of the same, shall be under the govern∣ment and regulation of the said VVardens and Assistants; and the By-laws made, or to be made by this, or by virtue of other Acts of Parliament, (except such Stuffs which are under the Regulation of the VVardens and fellowship of the Mystery, of Russel Sattens, Sattens, Reverses, and Fustians of Norwich making within the said city) shall be established. And all Stuffs to be made under the Regulation aforesaid, before they
be put to sale, shall be brought to Weavers Hall, within the County of the City of Norwich, to be viewed and searched by the said Wardens; and if it be found, they are well and suffi∣ciently made and wrought, according to the ordinances of the said Trade, then such Stuffs shall be sealed and allowed: But if such Stuffs shall be found and appear to be defective, they shall be seized by the Wardens, or two of them, and tryed by a Jury of twelve Artificers of the said Regulation of Worsted Weavers, six of them being of the City of Norwich, and six of the Coun∣ty of Norfolk; which Jury Impannelled and sworn before the Mayor of the City, shall try the said Stuffs whether they be made according to the By-laws and ordinances, and shall have power to impose a fine according to the nature of the Offence, not exceeding the moity of the value of the defective Stuffs, the fine to go to the use of the Trade and Manufacture; The defective Stuffs to be detained till the fine set by the Jury be paid; which if the owners shall not pay to the Wardens, or some of them within forty days, the said Stuffs to be sold by any two of them, returning the overplus to the owner. VI. If any Warden, or Wardens shall seal, or cause to be sealed any Stuffs under the regulation, which shall afterwards be discovered to be defective contrary to the act, and the By-laws. &c. made, and to be made, and found so by a Jury of twelve Artificers of the said Trade Impannelled and sworn before the Mayor, or his Deputy, &c. of which six shall be of the said City Weavers, and six of the Weavers of the Country Weavers; they are impowred to set a fine upon the Warden, &c. as the Jury shall think fit, not exceeding forty shillings, which Fine shall be to the use of the King: And the same Jury, or the like Jury, shall inquire into all and every the frauds and miscarriages of the said VVardens and Assistants in the execution of their Offices, and punish them in manner as is before mentioned to be done against other offenders under the said Regula∣tion. Provided, If they, or any of them shall be unjustly molested, and that the Stuffs upon such tryal shall be found good, and duly made, or they not guilty of such frauds and miscarriages, the persons so causelesly molesting them, shall pay to the VVardens, &c. so molested, double the Damages they shall suffer.
VII. It shall not be lawful for any person, &c. to buy any piece, or pieces of Stuffs before the same be sealed by the Wardens of the Trade, saving to the King, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors all such right of Customs, Subsidies and Aulnage of Norfolk and Norwich Stuffs or Worsteads, as he or they might have lawfully claimed before the Act: And if any piece or pieces of Stuffs be found in the possession of any person unsealed, (except in the possession of the first Owner or Ma∣ker) the said person, &c. shall be adjudged guilty of de∣ceipt, and shall forfeit for every piece of Stuff so found un∣sealed, four shillings, and the maker and seller of the same who shall deliver it out of his possession before it be sealed, four shillings for every such piece to the use of the Poor of the said Trade and Manufacture: And if any person shall counterfeit any seal of the said Trade, or seal any piece un∣der the Regulation with any counterfeit seal, or remove a seal off one piece, and set it to another which hath not been sealed by the Wardens. Every person so offending, and thereof convicted by his own confession, or witnesses, before the Mayor, or his Deputy, or one Justice of the Peace of the County of Norfolk, shall forfeit for every such offence 20 l. to the use of the King, &c. VIII. No person, &c. shall use or exercise the same Trade as a Weaver, unless he hath served to the same Trade as an Apprentice for seven years, upon pain of forfeiting for every moneth he shall exercise the same, forty shillings; one half to the KING, the other to him who will sue for the same in Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, in any of the Kings Courts of Record: And every person under the said Regulation, shall weave his proper stuff-mark into every piece at the end thereof, upon pain of forfeiting three shillings for every Piece woven without such mark to the use of the Poor of the said Trade. IX. The Wardens and Assistants, two or more of them have powr to enter and search the Houses, Work-houses, of any Artificers within the said City, &c. and County of Norfolk, under the Regulation of the Wardens, &c. and the Shops, Houses, and Ware-houses of any Merchant, com∣mon Buyer, Dealer in, and Retailer of any the said Stuffs, and into the Work-house of any Dyer, Sheer▪man, or other work∣mans house, and places of sale, and dressing of the said Stuffs
at all times of the day, and usual times of working; and may view and search the Stuffs there found, and if any Stuffs shall be found faulty, or defective, may seize, take and carry away the same, to be ordered and brought to tryal as in the Act is appointed for defective Stuffs. X. Whatever person under the regulation of the said Trade, shall employ two Apprentices in the said Trade, shall likewise employ and set on work 2. Journeymen, during the time he em∣ployes the Apprentices; and no Master-weaver, shall at any time set on work above 2. Apprentices or any week-Boy to work in a Loom, upon pain for every person for every moneth so offend∣ing to forfeit 5 l. to the Kings Majesty. 11. All persons who are, or may be concerned in any thing in this Act, are to yield obedience thereunto; and if any person, &c. shall refuse, hinder, and not permit the Wardens or Assi∣stants, to exercise their Office according to the Tenure of the Act, every person so offending, being convicted thereof, by oath taken as before is mentioned in the Act, shall forfeit 40 s. to the Kings Majesty: and if any person lawfully summoned to ap∣pear upon any Jury according to the tenure of the Act, shall refuse or neglect to appear, every person, &c. so refusing or neg∣lecting, shall forfeit 5 s. to the use of the poor of the said Trade, or Manufacture: and all penalties and forfeitures with all Fines, appointed to go to the poor of the said Trade and Manufacture, shall be levyed by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels, by warrant from the Mayor of the said City, or his Deputy, or by any one Justice of the Peace of the said City, or County of Norfolk, rendring the overplus of distress to the Owner, or otherwise to be recovered by action of Debt, Bill, &c. in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed to the Defendant. XII. No Weaver under the regulation of the said Trade and Manufacture, shall set any Loom on work for the weaving of any Stuffs under the said regulation for the 15. August in every year, till the 15. of September then next following, upon pain of forfeiting to the King 40 s. for every Loom which shall be used in work within the said time. XIII. A true account shall be made at the 4. assemblies to be held quarterly by the Wardens, before the Mayor of the City of Norwich for the time being, and one of the Justices of the Peace of the said City, and two Justices of the Peace of
the County of Norfolk, of all Fines and forfeitures as shall be received and had, belonging to the said Trade and Manufacture, and of all charges and disbursments touching the same: and the overplus which shall remain (the necessary charges dedu∣cted) shall be divided into two equal parts, one moiety to be di∣sposed of by the Wardens and Assistants of the said City, or the major part of them; the other moiety by the Wardens and Assistants of the County of Norfolk, or the major part of them, to the use of the Poor of the said Trade and Manufacture, as the Justices aforesaid shall respectively direct. And all Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables and other Officers shall be ayding and assist∣ing to the said Wardens and Assistants as often as they shall be required, and in all Actions or Suits brought against any per∣son, &c. for acting according to the true intent of the Act, the person sued, &c. may plead the general Issue, and give the matter in Evidence, and shall recover double Costs, if the Ver∣dict pass for him or them, or the Plaintiff be Non-suit. This Act, nor any thing therein, shall not extend to com∣pel the Weavers of the Towns of great Yarmouth and Lynn in the said County of Norfolk, to bring their Wares to Norwich to be sealed, or to be prejudicial to the Weavers of the said Towns, or either of them, to deprive them or either of them of such Liberties or Priviledges as are granted to them by Act of Parliament, made in the fourteenth year of Henry the 8th. or by any other Act of Parliament, Grant or Charter whatsoever. I. Enacted. 14. Car. 2. Cap. 15. From and after the 25. of December, 1662. No person or persons whatsoever shall di∣rectly or indirectly use, exercise, continue, or set up the Trade, Art, or Mystery of a Silk-Thrower, within the Realm of England, unless such as are or shall he Apprentices to the said Trade, or have served seven years Apprentice thereunto, upon pain to forfeit fourty shillings for every moneth the said person, &c. shall use or exercise the said Trade; the one moiety to the King, his Heirs and Successors, the other moiety to such person, &c. as shall sue for the same in any of the Courts of Record within the Realm of England, or before any Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of the Peace at their Quarter-Sessions, by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, &c. wherein no Essoign, &c. shall be allowed. II. All persons whatsoever using or exercising as Masters
the said Art, Trade, or Mystery, or as Apprentices to the said Trade by seven years within the Cities of London, West∣minster, and the several Suburbs thereof, or within twenty miles compass of them, shall before 25. December, 1662. be admitted and are enjoyned to enter themselves into the Society of the said Corporation of Silk-Throwers, and to perform, and be subject to all such Laws, Orders, and Or∣dinances, as are▪ or shall be made, for or concerning the Re∣gulation or Government of the said Trade, Art, or Mystery, upon pain of forfeiting fourty shillings for every moneth he shall use or exercise the said Trade after 25. December, 1662. One moiety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other moiety to such person, &c. as shall sue for the same, in such manner as in the Clause precedent is appointed and directed. Pro∣vided, That such laws▪ Orders, Ordinances, &c. be not contrary, but agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and the Customs of the City of London. III. That the Masters, Wardens, Assistants and Commo∣nalty shall have and enjoy, and it shall be lawful for them at all times hereafter to do, and exercise within the said Cities, Suburbs, and places abovesaid, all such Grants, Pow∣ers, Priviledges and Authorities as in and by this Act, or by the Letters Patents of the said Incorporation are given to them for or concerning the regulation or Government of the said Trade, Art or Mystery, or any thing relating thereunto, any thing in the said Letters Patents to the contrary notwith∣standing. IV. Every Silk-winder, and Doubler, who shall at any time hereafter unjustly, deceitfully, and falsely purloyn im∣bezel, pawn, sell, or detain any part of Silk, delivered, or to be delivered by any Silk-Thrower or other person, to them or any of them to winde, or double: In every such case, as well the Winder or Journey-man so offending, as the Buy∣er and Buyers, Receiver and Receivers of such Silke, law∣fully convicted by confession, or by one Witness upon Oath before one or more of the Justices of the Peace of the County or Liberty where such offence shall be committed; Or if it be within any City, Town Corporate, impowred to minister such Oath, are impowred to hear and deter∣mine all and every the said offences, and to make to the party grieved such recompence for such their damage, loss and
charges, as by the said Justice or Justices shall be ordered and appointed. And if the party offending shall not be able to make recompence for his offence within fourteen dayes after Convi∣ction, then the party so offending, for the first offence shall be whipped and set in the Stocks in the place where the offence was committed, or in some Market Town in the said County neer the said place; and for the second offence to incur the like, or such further punishment, as the said Justices of the Peace, or chief Officers shall think convenient. V. All and every Receiver and Buyer of any Silke, or such as shall take to pawn any Silke imbezled, or pur∣loyned, (the matter of Fact being proved) shall make sa∣tisfaction within the time aforesaid, or else be subject to like punishment as by the Act is provided to be inflicted upon such person so imbezling or purloyning any such silk as aforesaid. Provided, It shall be lawfull for any Free-man of the said Company of Silke-Throwers to set on work any per∣sons being Native-born Subjects to his Majesty, and no o∣thers, whether they be Men, Women▪ or Children, to turn the Mill, tye Threads, double Silke, and wind Silke, as formerly they have used to do, although such persons set on work, or employed in the works and services aforesaid, shall not have served, or been Apprentices to the Trade of Silke Throwing by the space of seven years: and all and every such persons set on worke, and employed by any Free-man of the said Company, may be set on work and employed in the services aforesaid without any let or mo∣lestation, any thing in the Act to the contrary notwith∣standing. 2. That the said Corporation of Silke-Throwers shall not by vertue of this ACT make any Orders, Ordinances, or By-Laws, to set any rates or prizes whatsoever upon the Throwing of Silke, to binde or enforce their Members to work at: but their respective Members shall be left at liberty to contract with their respective Employers, and with the persons that they employ at such Rates as they shall agree upon. I. Enacted 14. Car. 2. Cap. 31. From and after the next Mon∣day after Easter, 1662. there shall be a Corporation to continue within the West-Riding of the County of York, consisting of
all the Justices of the Peace of the said West-Riding, two Masters, ten Wardens, twelve Assistants and commonalty, all which Masters, Wardens, &c. are to be of the best experienced Clothiers within the said West-Riding, and as have served and been brought up in the Trade of Clothing for seven years: One of the Masters, five of the Wardens, and six of the Assistants shall be chosen the first Monday after Pentecost then next following, and so yearly, by the Free Clothiers of the said West-Riding, in∣habiting within the Parish of Leeds, in the said County; and the other Master, five Wardens, and six Assistants shall be chosen the same days by the Free Clothiers Inhabiting out of the said Town and Parish of Leeds. And if any of the said Wardens, &c. after their respective Election do dye, then at any Court holden next after such decease, The said Masters, Wardens, and Assistants shall within eight days of their first Election take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, as also this Oath; viz. I A. B. Do swear I will well, faithfully and honestly perform and discharge the Office of a Master of the Corporation of the Free Clothiers according to my best Skill, Power and Knowledge: The like Oath to be ad∣ministred to the respective Wardens and Assistants. II. That the said Justices of Peace, Masters, Wardens and Assistants, with the Free Clothiers of the said West-Riding, shall for ever hereafter in name and fact, be a body politick and corporate, to all intents and purposes; have a perpetual succession, and be called by the name of the Supervisors, Masters, Wardens, Assistants and commonalty of the Trade and Mystery of Clothiers, for the well making of Broad Woollen Cloath within the West-Riding of the said County; and by Statute to plead and be impleaded, in all Courts and places of Judicature within the Kingdom; and by this name without Licence in mortmain, may purchase and take any Lands, Tenements, or He∣reditaments of the gift, alienation, or demise of any person, or persons, and any goods, and Chattels whatsoever, for the use and benefit of the said Corporation, not exceeding the yearly value of 200 l. III. For the better Regulating of the said Trade and Ma∣nufacture, the said Justices of the Peace, Masters, Wardens, &c. or any thirteen of them (whereof one of the said Justices, or Masters at the least to be present) shall from time to time meet and keep Court, upon the first Saturday in every moneth in the year, within the Town Hall of Leeds,
and also at such other time and place, as shall be appointed by the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, Assistants, or 13 of them, upon eight days warning to be given of such meeting and Court to be held; and if the said Masters, Wardens and Assistants, or the major part of them shall refuse, or neglect to appear, so as a Court cannot be holden: then such Master, Warden, or As∣sistant so refusing, &c. shall forfeit 20 s. one moiety to the use of the poor of such respective Town, where the person refusing shall live, the other moiety to the use of the Corporation: and the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, &c. or 13 of them, are to summon to appear at the Court to be holden, so many of the Cloathiers as they shall think meet for the better ordering of the affairs of the said Trade; the number of which persons so to be summoned shall not be under 48, and in case of neglect, or refusal, shall forfeit to the use of the Corporation, 3 s. 4 d. for every default of not appearing. IV. The said Justices, Masters, Wardens, &c. shall have power to make a common Seal, and to make By-laws, Rules, and Ordinances, for the better spinning, working, making, fulling and milling of Woollen-cloath, as may tend to the good, credit, and advancement of the Manufacture; which By-laws, and Ordinances being ratified by the Justices of Assise for the County of York, shall be four times in the year published at four Courts, and shall be obeyed and kept by the several persons, within and under the Regulation or Corporation, and the said Courts shall have power to impose a Fine and Penalty upon any person of the Regulation, being a Cloathier that shall not con∣form to such Rules, Ordinances, &c. so as the Fine for not conforming, for one offence exceed not 20 s. to go one moiety to the use of the Corporation, the other to the poor of the Parish where the person offending shall inhabit. V. The said Justices, Masters, Wardens and Assistants, shall choose Searchers in the several places of the West-riding, who shall be sworn before them, or 13 of them, for the true searching of Cloath, that it be of due weight, length and breadth: and the length, weight and breadth of broad wool∣len-cloath made within the West-Riding shall be, viz. every Cloath, called by the name of an End, or half Cloath, shall be betwixt 15 and 18 yards at length in the water, and not exceed one yard and an half in breadth within the Lists; every cloath called a short cloath, between 24 yards and 28
yards in length, and one yard and an half in breadth within the lists, and every yard of such Cloth shall weigh 2 pounds and a quarter, accounting 16 ounces to the pound, being well thicked, scoured, milled, and dried. And the Searcher shall examine and try by weight, all broad Cloaths of what sort soever, and shall after fix a Seal of Lead, expressing the length and weight thereof: And if any of the Cloaths be found faulty upon trial, the Justices, &c. shall impose a Fine upon the offenders, as ought to be imposed upon them by the Laws, and Statutes of the Realm, a third part of such Fines, &c. to be to the use of such Searchers certifying the said defaults, the two other parts to the poor of the Parish where the offence is committed, to be recovered as by the Statute of 21. Jac. Cap. 18. is appointed: and every Searcher shall take the oaths of Allegiance and Suprema∣cy, and the oath following, viz. I A. B. do swear, that I shal well and truly execute the Office of a Searcher of broad Woollen-cloath, within the West-Riding of the County of York, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and according to the best of my skill and knowledge: which oath the said Justices, Masters, War∣dens and Assistants have power to administer to them; and if any Searcher fail in the due execution of his Office, contrary to his Oath, he shall forfeit for such fault, or not setting his Seal of Lead as aforesaid, 5 l. and it shall be lawfull for any other Searcher within the said West-Riding, to re-search any of the said Cloaths. VI. It shall be lawfull for all and every Searcher, as often as occasion shall require, to enter into any Shop, House, Ware∣house in the day-time, of any Clothier, Draper, Cloathworker, or of any other person whatsoever where any of the said Cloaths shall be, to search for all suspected Cloath, and in case of re∣sistance, the party resisting shall forfeit 10 l. one moiety to the King, the other to the use of the Corporation; and if upon search any broad Cloath shall be made of, or mixed with Flocks, Thrums, Goats hair, or deceitfull wooll, the said Cloath shall be forfeited; and the said Justices, Masters, War∣dens, &c. may dispose thereof, as the same ought to be dispo∣sed of by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. VII. No person within the West-Riding, who hath not served Apprentice to the Trade of a Cloathier, for seven years, shall make any broad Cloath to sell, under the penalty of 5 l. for every moneth he or she shall continue to exercise the said
Trade, one moiety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to the use of the Corporation, and no Housholder, or House▪wife with∣in the West-Riding, or elsewhere within the said County, not be∣ing free of the trade of Clothiers, not having been exercised therein, or not being the Widow of such person as aforesaid, shall after the Feast of Pentecost next ensuing, make or cause to be made any woollen cloth, unless it be to the use of themselves, their children and families, but not to sell, upon pain to forfeit double the value of euery Cloth so made and exposed to sale, one moiety to the King, &c. the other to him who will sue, &c. for the same in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, &c▪ VIII. The said Justices, Masters, Wardens, Assistants are im∣powred to appoint a Clerk, a Register, Treasurer, and such other Officers to see the due execution of the powers given by the Act, and to give the men oath for the due execution of their places: and all fines, forfeitures and penalties imposed, or to be levied by the Act (the means and recovery whereof, is not other∣wise herein provided for) shall be levied by distress and sale of the offenders Goods and Chattels, by Warrant from the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, &c. or 13 of them, rendring the over∣plus to the Owner upon demand. IX. If any person whatsoever shall counterfeit the Seal of the said Corporation, he or they so offending, shall forfeit 20 l. so often as such person shall upon due proof be found guilty of the same, to be levied by distress and sale of the offenders Goods and Chatrels, rendring the overplus to the Owner, and for want of distress, the person, &c. to be committed to the common Goal of the County, where they shall be found, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of one of the Justices of the Peace of the said County, there to remain without bail, &c. for the space of six moneths, or until he shall have paid the said Fine. X. All and every Article, Clause and Sentence in any Act of Parliament heretofore made concerning the abuses of broad woollen Cloaths in the Act mentioned, and being repugnant or contrary to any Article in this Act, as touching the said Cloths, onely made within the said West-Riding, from and after the Feast of St. John the Baptist, 1662. shall be utterly void to all intents and purposes: and in all actions brought against any person, &c. for acting in any thing according to the true meaning of this Act, the party sued may plead the general Issue, and give the spe∣cial matter in evidence; and if the verdict pass for him, or the
Plaintiff be Nonsuit, the Defendant shall recover double costs. 1. Provided, Nothing in this Act shall extend, or be con∣strued to extend to take away any the Rights, Duties, or Cu∣stoms belonging to the Place of the Kings Aulnager or his Depu∣ty, within the said West-Riding, but that he or they may perform all and every thing, to him or them belonging, and receive all Fees due and accustomed to the said Office, in as ample manner as they might have done before the making of this Act. 2. Neither the said Supervisors, Masters, Wardens and Assi∣stants, or any of them, nor any other person, &c. free of the said Corporation of broad woollen Chothiers, shall by any authority derived from this Act, set or impose any other or lesser Rates, or wages upon any inferiour Workmen, servants, or Labourers, to be employed by them, or any of them, then such as shall be al∣lowed by the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions, ac∣cording to the Laws and Statutes touching Labourers. 3. This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. I. Enacted, 14. Car. 2. Cap. 31. Whereas divers persons do delude the Statutes, as well Goldsmiths as others by melting Silver-coyns of the Realm, above the value of groats, to the great diminishing of the Silver-coyn of this Realm, and the hin∣derance of the commerce of the same: No person or persons whatsoever, from and after 20. of December, 1662. shall wilfully melt, or cause to be melted, any of the current Silver money of this Realm, upon pain not onely of forfeiture of the same, but of double the value of such coyn so melted: one moiety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to the informers who shall sue for the same upon action of Debt, Bill or information in any of his Majesties Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoyn, wa∣ger of the Law, &c. shall be allowed. II. That the person or persons offending contrary to this Act (if he or they be a Free-man, or Free-men, or priviledged person of any City, or Corporation of England) shall upon con∣viction for the same, be disfranchised, and made uncapable of exercising the Trade of a Goldsmith, or any other Mysteries by virtue of the priviledges of the City or Corporation, of which they are members; and if the person offending and convicted, shall not be a Free-man, or priviledged person as aforesaid, he shall suffer imprisonment without bail, or mainprise, for six moneths next after his or their conviction.
Merchants. Anno 14. Car. 2. Cap. 23. Whereas the powers of the Com∣missioners, mentioned in an Act of Parliament, made in the 43 of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entituled, An Act concerning matters of Assurances, used amongst Merchants, for the hearing and determining of Causes arising on Policies of Assurance, erected within the City of London, upon Commissions granted, is much retarded for want of power to them given; and the mischief by the said Act intended to be prevented, is increa∣sing. Enacted. That from and after 24. of June, 1662. It shall be lawfull for the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal, to issue out yearly one standing Commission under the Great Seal of England, thereby authorising the Commissioners therein named, or three of them (whereof a Doctor of the Ci∣vil Law, or Barrister at Common Law, of 5 years standing to be always one) to meet and sit, and make a Court, and to proceed in all things, in the execution of the said Commission, as be∣fore the Act any five might have done: and the said Commis∣sioners, or three of them, are impowred to summon parties and witnesses to appear, and in case of contempt, or wilfull delay in the witnesses upon the first summons, and tender of reason∣able charges, and in the parties, upon their second summons, to punish the offenders by imprisonment or costs, for such time, and in such manner as shall be reasonable, according to the quality of their offences: Every Commissioner to proceed in the execution of the said Commission, having taken an Oath before the Lord Mayor of the City of London, to proceed uprightly and indifferently between party and party, and no person shall proceed in execution of the said Commission, before he be first sworn before the Mayor, to proceed accordingly, as formerly he should have been before the Mayor and Court of Aldermen. II. That in case the said Commissioners or three of them, shall finde cause to examine witnesses beyond the Seas, or any re∣mote parts of the Kings Dominions, for the clearing of any doubt or matter depending, in such case by direction of the said Commissioners, or three of them, the like Commissions, or Process shall issue out of the Court of Admiralty, as have for∣merly been returnable before the Commissioners: and the
said Commissioners, or three of them, shall have power to give and pass their final sentence, decree, and execution, as well against the bodies of the party Elected as against his Executors, Administrators, and his Goods and Chattels; and to assess costs of suit upon such persons as shall be condemned by the Decree of the Court, as to them shall seem just. That it shall be lawfull for any one of the Commissioners to administer an Oath to any of the Witnesses legally summoned to give Testimony (timely notice hereof being given to the ad∣verse party, or set up in the Office before such Execution) to the end such Witness, or Witnesses may be truly examined. 1. Provided, The said Commissioners shall in no case proceed both against person and goods for one and the same debt. 2. That any thing in this Act contained, shall not in any wise extend to prejudice the appeal to the High Court of Chancery, given or allowed by the former Act of Parliament of 43 Eliz. Marriages I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. Cap. 33. All Marriages had or solemni∣zed since May, 1642. before any Justice of Peace, or reputed Justice of Peace, of and within England or Wales, or other his Majesties Dominions, and by such Justice, or reputed Justice so pronounced or declared: And all Marriages within his Majesties Dominions since the same 1. May, 1642. had or solemnized ac∣cording to the direction or true intent of any Act or Ordinance, or reputed Act or Ordinance of one or both Houses of Parlia∣ment, or of any Convention sitting at Westminster under the name, stile or title of a Parliament, shall be, and shall be ad∣judged, esteemed and taken to be of the same, and no other force or effect, as if such Marriages had been had and solemnized ac∣cording to the Rites and Ceremonies established or used in the Church or Kingdom of England, any law, custom, or usage to the contrary hereof not withstanding. II. Where in any Suit commenced, or to be commenced in any of the Courts of the Cōmon Law, any issue hath been joyn∣ed, and not already tried or determined or shall be joyned upon the point of Bastardy, or lawfulness of Marriage, for or concern∣ing the Marriages had and solemnized as aforesaid, the same is∣sues shall be tried by a Jury of 12 men, according to the Course of trial of other Issues triable by Jury at the common Law, and no otherwise.
Militia. Anno 13. Car. 2. Cap. 6. VVhereas an Act is under con∣sideration, for the exercising of the Militia for the most safety and ease of the King and his People, which Act cannot as yet be perfected: Enacted, That the Militia and Land-forces of this Kingdom, and of the Dominions of Wales, and Barwick, now under the power of Lievtenants, or their Deputies, shall be Exercised, Ordered and Managed until the 25. day of March next ensuing, in such manner as the same now is exercised, or∣dered and managed, according to such commissions and instru∣ctions as they formerly have, or from time to time shall receive from his Majesty. II. That all and every person and persons, who have, or shall have acted, or done any thing in executing of any Commis∣sion, or Commissions of Lievtenancy issued by the King that now is, or by colour of them, or any of them, touching or con∣cerning the same, or any of them, or relating thereunto, are and shall be saved harmless and indempnified: And all Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, Officers, Ministers of Justice, and all other persons that have, or shall have acted by or under them, or by their or any of their Commands, since 24. of June 1660. be till the 20. day of July 1661. as to any assaulting, arresting, detain∣ing, or imprisoning any person suspected to be a Fanatick, Se∣ctary, or Disturber of the Peace, or seizing of Arms, or search∣ing of houses for Arms, or for suspected persons, are and shall be hereby saved harmless and indempnified. 1 Provided, This Act, nor any thing therein, shall after 25. of March next, be prejudicial to any County, City, or place within this Kingdom, which are over-charged with Men and Arms beyond their ancient proportion. 2. Not to extend or be construed, or taken to extend to the giving, or declaring any power for the transporting of any the Subjects of this Realm, or any way compelling them to March out of this Kingdom, otherwise than by the Laws of England ought to be done. III. No person whatsoever shall be capable of acting as a Lievtenant, or Deputy Lievtenant, or other Officer, or soul∣dier, by virtue of this Act, who hath not already taken
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy since the return of his Majesty into England, till he shall take the same according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, which Oath the Lords of the Council, or six of them are to administer to a Peer of the Realm, and the Deputy Lievtenants, or any two or more of them, in their respective Counties to a commoner. Ministers. I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. Cap. Every Ecclesiastical person, or Minister Ordained by any Ecclesiastical persons, before 25. December last past, of the age of 24. years, not having renoun∣ced his Ordination, who hath been since 1. January 1642. pre∣sented, and in actual possession of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, Rectory, Parsonage, Vicaridge, Church, Chappel, or other Ec∣clesiastical promotion with cure of souls, within the Realm of England, Wales, Berwick, which hath been void by death, resigna∣tion, surrender, or otherwise to the Patron, or other person pre∣tending title to accept resignation since the said 1. day of Janu∣ary, and was in 25. of the said December in possession being in the Kings gift, Donation and Presentation, &c. or of the late King Charles the first, or of any Arch-Bishop, Bishop, Dean, Dean and Chapter, Body politick or Corporate, or any other person whatsoever, other than such as are hereby restored, shall be and continue the real and lawful Incumbent, Rector, Par∣son, Vicar and possessor of the said Ecclesiastical Benefices, Li∣vings and promotions respectively, to all intents and purposes, as if he had been presented, collated, admitted, Instituted and Inducted thereunto in due form of law, and had read and sub∣scribed the articles according to the Statute in that case pro∣vided, and notwithstanding any other thing by him done, or omitted to be done, aswel against the King his Heirs and Suc∣cessors, as against all and every person and persons whatsoever, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, saving to the Patrons their just rights of Patronage, Donation, Presenta∣tion, Collation, or Nomination upon the next Avoydance of every such Ecclesiastical person, Minister or Incumbent, as full as if the Act had not been made. II. Every voluntary surrender or resignation made by any Incumbent to the Patron, or to the late pretended powers since
the said 1. January of any Ecclesiastical Benefice or promotion' shall be adjudged an effectual Avoidance of such Benefice, or promotion, as if it had been made to the competent Ordinary, and accepted by him. III. No presentation, Collation, &c. aforesaid, nor confir∣mation by this Act of any Person or Minister, in or to any Ec∣clesiastical Benefices, Livings or promotions aforesaid, shall be any usurpation in Law to the prejudice of any person, or per∣sons whatsoever, who have, or shall have right to present there∣unto, upon the said Avoidance. IV. Every Ecclesiastical Person, or Minister formerly Sequest∣red, or rejected and kept out (after lawful presentation, &c.) of the Profits of any the said Ecclesiastical Benefices, Livings or promotions, who hath not subscribed any Petition to bring the late King Charles to tryal; or hath not by writing, Preaching, Printing or other open Act, procured or Justified the Murther of the said late King: Or hath not by Preaching, Writing, &c. declared his Judgment to be against Infant Baptism, shall be restored to the same and to the possession thereof, before 25th. of December next ensuing. And every Ecclesiastical person afore∣said, who shall be removed, shall enjoy the tithes, profits, gleabs and houses thereunto belonging till 25th. of December next en∣suing: And shall then upon such removal, yeild up peaceably the possession thereof, and give bond to the person restored, to render to him, his Executors, &c. the full moiety of the clear profits and tithes of the value thereof, from Michaelmas last, till Michaelmas next ensuing (all taxes & other requisite charges first deducted and allowed before the removal of the goods of the said Person, or Minister,) or the tithes or profits for the same, at or upon the said 25th. of December: And the Minister so to be removed upon his quitting the possession shall be absolutely ac∣quitted and discharged from all tithes and profits received, and all arrears thereof, other then the moiety of the tithes and profits secured by bond as aforesaid; against the Minister so restored, his executors, &c. and all other persons whatsoever. 1 Provided, Every Minister, not scandalous, nor insufficient, heretofore sequestred or ejected out of 2. Benefices, or Ecclesiasti∣cal Livings with cure of souls, shall be restored to one of them, and no more, at his Election, except he hath formerly resign∣ed, or surrendred any of the said Benefices, or Livings, and hereupon the Patron, or other in his right, hath presented, or
put into the same, any other Incumbent, or Minister; in which case the sequestred or Ejected Minister, shall not be restored to such Benefice, or Living so resigned, or surrendred. II. Every Minister, confirmed in any Ecclesiastical Benefice or Living, with cure of souls by this Act, who shall have more then one Ecclesiastical Benefice, &c. with cure of souls, shall hold and enjoy only one of them and no more, at his Election, except where he hath formerly resigned and surrendred any of the said Benefices, &c. and thereupon the right Patron or other in his right hath presented, or put into the same any other In∣cumbent, or Minister as aforesaid; in which case the Minister so to be confirmed, may return and keep the Benefice, &c. which he hath not resigned, &c. as aforesaid. IV. Where the Person, or Minister formerly sequestred, or Ejected shall declare his consent in writing before the Commis∣sioners appointed by the Act, that the present possessor shall be and continue in such sequestred benefice, Living or promotion, the present possessor shall be thereby settled and confirmed therein as the sole and rightful Incumbent thereof to all intents and purposes: And every person, or Minister who shall be re∣moved by the Act, shall pay all tithes not pardoned, and repair and make satisfaction for all willful or negligent dilapidations made or suffered by him, in and upon the premises since 29th. of September last past, and shall pay all such fifths which were arrear, and unpaid at Michaelmas last past, due or payable by him by any order not reversed of any Committees, or Commissio∣ners formerly appointed by any pretended authority whatsoe∣ver or pay all arrearages, of money due by agreement of the par∣ties, and not quitted by like agreement, to be ascertained by the Commissioners, for the payment of which he shall give his bond unto the Minister to be restored, to pay the same before the 25th. of December next: And upon refusal so to do, the Minister to be restored, may bring his action of debt at the common Law for the same, and recover the same, and the full value in damages besides cost of suit. V. Every Ecclesiastical person or Minister now in possession of any Ecclesiastical benefice, living, promotion who shall conti∣nue and be setled therein, shall pay all such arrears of fifths, or other sums of money in lieu thereof due or payable by him, by any order, or agreement as aforesaid (or to Master Honywood Parson of Kegwath in Leicester-shire, who was beyond Sea, since
the said 1. January, 1642. who hath therefore had no order, or agreement for his fifths as have accrued due or payable out of such Ecclesiastical benefice, Living, or promotion) during the time he hath possessed the same to such person as hath been E∣jected: And every Ecclesiastical person or Minister now living, or the Executors, or Administrators of every Minister deceased, to whom any fifths or sums of money, are or were due by any such order, or agreement, (or the said Master Honywood) and still are arrear, shall have the same paid unto them, and may re∣cover the same by action of debt at the common Law, against such person or Minister who ought to have paid the same, during the respective possession of such living, for which the same ought to have been paid: In which action, no essoin, &c. shall be allowed, and no person to whom fifths have been paid, shall be hereafter questioned for the same. VI. Every Ecclesiastical person, or Minister to be removed out of, or confirmed in any such benefice, Living or promotion which now is, or hath been possessed as aforesaid, his and their Executors, &c. shall be and are respectively inabled to have, hold, and enjoy all the mean profits already received, and to receive, recover, collect, or compound for, and enjoy all and e∣very the arrears of tithes, profits, or duties thereunto belonging, or which shall belong thereunto during such time he was so pos∣sessed thereof, or before and until Michaelmas now next ensu∣ing, and to sue for the same in any Court of Law or equity, as if he or they had been and were the true and lawful Incumbent, or possessor of such Ecclesiastical benefice, Living, or promotion. Provided. If any Minister or other such Ecclesiastical person ha∣ving any Ecclesiastical Benefice, with cure of souls, which is by this Act to continue the real & lawful Incumbent thereof, hath petitioned to bring the late King Charles to tryal: Or hath by Writing, Preaching, Printing or other Act procured, or endea∣voured, or Justified the murther of the said late King; or hath declared his Judgement to be against Infant Baptism, then such Minister, shall not remain, continue and be, or taken to be law∣ful Incumbent of the Ecclesiastical Benefice or living, but the same is hereby declared to be void to all intents and purposes, as if such person, or Minister were dead: and the Patron who hath the next Avoydance shall and may present to the same, as in case of vacancy or Avoydance by death of the Incumbent, any thing in the Act notwithstanding. VII. The persons in the Commission of the Peace in the seve∣ral
Counties of this Realm, Wales, Berwick 1. September 1660. within their respective Counties, Liberties and Precincts, five or more of them dwelling next to the Church or Living to which a Person is to be restored, or from which any Minister is to be re∣moved (who are no waies interessed as Patrons, or parties in the Patronage, or Tithes of the said Church, &c. or any part thereof) are appointed to be Commissioners, to execute all and singular the Powers and Authorities hereby granted within their respective Counties, &c. for and concerning the removing and restoring of such persons and Ministers as aforesaid, and all other the Premises; and finally to determine all Differences touching the same until the 25. of December next: and all Suits and Actions in Law or Equity, and all Proceedings and Ver∣dicts thereupon had for or concerning the Premises, shall be, and are hereby stayed, annulled, and voided. Provided, All grants and Leases made for a valuable conside∣ration paid or given, of any Copy-hold, or Free-hold Lands be∣longing to any sequestred living or rectory (exempting the Gleab and the Tythes for three lives, or 21. years, wherein the ancient Rent is reserved, made by any Minister or Ecclesiastical person possessed of the said rectory or living by any real, or pretended Authority since 1659. shall continue good and effectual in Law against the sequestred and ejected Incumbent to be restored, and all others, as if they had been made by the proper Incumbent: VIII. If any rightful Patron hath presented his Clerk to any Benefice with Cure, unto those persons who were stiled Commissi∣oners for approbation of publique Preachers, sitting at White-Hall; or the Committee for plunder'd Ministers, who sate in the year 1659. and the Clerk so presented was refused to be admitted with∣out any lawful cause, such Clerk shall be taken, & is hereby En∣acted to be the present Incumbent of such Benefice, unless such Pa∣tron hath since presented another Clerk to such Benefice, or un∣less such Clerk so refused be since settled in some other Benefice. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to confirm, or continue any Person in a Benefice, or Ecclesiastical Living, who hath since 25. of December last, voluntarily yielded up, and left the possession of the said Benefice, or Ecclesiastical Living, and is still out of possession thereof, or who by any writing executed under his Hand and Seal, hath agreed to yield up and leave the same: And where there hath been any agreement between the persons concerned in the Act, for the acquittal of the Mi∣nister who ought to have paid fifths of, and from the same, or
any part thereof, no fifths or satisfaction for fifths shall be claim∣ed, or paid contrary to the said agreement. IX. All and every person who have paid and satisfied by composition or otherwise, any Tythes, Pensions, Oblations, Ob∣ventions, Rents, or other Duties belonging to any Rectory, Vi∣caridge or other Ecclesiastical Benefice or promotion, to any person or persons being in possession, or receiving the profits thereof, by colour or pretence of any authority, or to their as∣signs, or to any other claiming from, by, or under them, are and shall be discharged from the said Tythes, Pensions and other Ecclesiastical duties, against all and every person whatsoever. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to confirm or establish the possession of the Rectory of Ewelme, in the County of Ox∣ford, with Thomas Cole, or any other persons, who have by virtue of any pretended title entred into the same. But that the said Rectory be restored to Robert Saunderson, Dr. of Divinity, Regi∣us Professor in the University of Oxford, to be enjoyed by him and his Successors, according to a grant made thereof by the late King James unto the Regius Professor of Divinity for the time being and his Successors for ever. 2. Nor to confirm or establish the possession of the Rectory of Somersham in the County of Huntington, with any person who hath by virtue of any pretended title entred into the same, but that the said Rectory be restored to Dr. Anthony Tuckney, the present Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cam∣bridge, to be enjoyed by him and his Successors, according to a former grant thereof made to the Regius Professor of Divinity for the time being and his Successors for ever. 3. Not to extend to confirm, or restore any Ecclesiastical person or Minister in, or to any Benefice, Living, or Ecclesiastical pro∣motion, that shal refuse to take the Oaths of Allegiance & Supre∣macy, being tendred to them by the Commissioners, or 3. of them; which Oaths they are impowred and enjoyned to administer. 4. This Act shall not prejudice the title of any person or persons, to any Ecclesiasticall Living, Benefice or promotion with cure of souls, who have been, or shall be presented to such Benefice by the King, under the Great Seal of England, between 1. May, 1660. and 9. September the same year, but such Presentees shall and may after the said 29. of September, enjoy rhe said Benefices respectively; Nevertheless such per∣sons as upon the 25. of December 1659. were the Possessors of
such Benefices, shall not be charged by such Presentees with, or for any Profits by them, or any of them received, since the said 29. of September, but shall hold the said Benefices, &c. until the said 29. of September. 5. Not to extend to confirm any Parson in the Vicaridge of Kidlington in the County of Oxon, but that the said Vicaridge shall remain as formerly annexed to the Rectorship of Exeter Colledge in Oxon. 6. Not to extend to confirm any Person in the Rectory of Garsington in the County of Oxon, but that the said Rectory as formerly shall remain annexed to the Presidentship of Trinity Colledge in Oxon. 7. Not to extend to confirm any Person in the Rectory of Castor in the County of Northampton, but that the said Rectory shall remain as formerly annexed to the Bishoprick of Peter∣borough. 8. Not to extend to confirm any Person in the Vicaridge of Cudsden in the County of Oxon, but that the same shall remain as formerly annexed to the Bishoprick of Oxford. 9. Not to extend to the confirming or setling any Person in a Living that hath maliciously Printed any Treatise, or Preach∣ed against the Kings Majesty that now is, his Right or Successi∣on to the Crowns of these Realms, so the same be proved by the Oaths of two credible witnesses before the Commissioners, and so adjudged before 25. Decemb. 1660. 10. Not to extend to confirm any Ecclesiastical Person that did appear in Arms, or march in a Troop in opposition to the intended restoring of his Majesty, and a free Parl. since 1. Aug. 1659. So as the same be proved by the Oaths of two credible witnesses before the Commissioners, before 25. Decemb. 1660. 11. Not to extend to confirm any Person in the Rectory of Acton in the County of Middlesex, which Rectory the King, be∣fore the 26. of August, hath granted under his Sign Manual to one of his Chaplains. If any Minister who by the Act shall be adjudged to be re∣moved, shall not give up the possession according to the Order of the Commissioners, the Commissioners or five of them shall grant their VVarrant to the Sheriff of the County, to put the person adjudged to be restored, into possession according to the Act; and in default of such VVarrant, the Sheriff for the time being is required to give possession accordingly.
X. All and every the Peers of this Realm, according to their respective Titles and Interests, may within the space of six ka∣lender moneths from the 1. of September, 1660. present, and no∣minate their respective Clerks unto any Ecclesiastical Benefices, Livings, or Promotions of their respective Patronages, or where∣unto they had right to present at any time since 1. January, 1642. and the Presentees shall be thereupon admitted, instituted and inducted, and after have, enjoy, and sue for and recover the possession, and from thenceforth take the whole profits, and shall be accounted, and be perfect Incumbents of the same, as fully as if they had been presented and placed therein within six moneths next after the first avoidances, notwithstanding any Lapse, in∣curred or devolved to the King, or to any other person, or persons whatsoever. 1. Provided, Such Presentees as have been, or shall be pre∣sented by the Kings Majesty before the said 9. day of September, 1660. by Title of Lapse or otherwise, shall and may enjoy the said Benefies respectively, the last mentioned clause, or any thing in the Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Moneys distributed. I. Enacted, 14. Car. 2. Cap. 8. That the sum of 60000 l. be with convenient speed distributed amongst such truly loyal, and indigent Officers who have had real command of Souldiers who have never deserted his Majesties nor his Fathers service during the late times of Rebellion and Usurpation, and have not a sufficient Livelihood of their own, nor have obtained a∣ny Office or Employment sufficient for a Livelihood: and that 60000 l. of good English money be paid to such persons as shall be chosen by Commissioners declared in the Act, by the ways following, viz. That all the several Moneys or Taxes a∣rising out of the Assessments of and from the Counties of Corn∣wal, Rutland, Monmouth, Lancaster, Westmerland, and An∣glesey for all the 18. moneths, according to an Act entituled, An Act for granting to the King 1200000 l. to be levied by 70000 l. per Moneth for 18. Moneths, be paid to such Treasurer by the Receiver General, or such as the King shall appoint for the re∣ceipt thereof in all the said Counties; and upon payment of the said Moneys, the Acquittance under the Hand and Seal of the said
Treasurer shall be a discharge to the Receiver General, &c. And after such payment no Receiver General shall undergo any trou∣ble by Process from the Exchequer for the same Moneys. But if such Receiver General or person, &c. shall refuse or fail to pay the same to such Treasurers at the days appointed by the Act, the Treasurer may sue for the same in any Court of Record at West∣minster. II. Several persons particularly named in the Act are ap∣pointed Commissioners for the respective Counties and Places named in the Act, for granting Certificates to such Officers as are declared: And all the said Persons, or any nine or more of them, shall be Commissioners to apportion the Moneys which shall be received, or raised by the Act, and exercising all the Powers in the Act. III. The Commissioners, 9. or more of them, are to meet in the Star-Chamber near Westminster Hall, 1. June, 1662. and no∣minate a Treasurer, Register, Collectors, taking security of every of them for the performance of their several Trusts; and upon clearing of their Accompts, may give them allowances; and the respective Commissioners in the several Counties are to send Certificates to the Commissioners sitting at Westminster, con∣cerning the said Offices before 29. September, 1662. The Certi∣ficates being signed and sealed by the major part of the Com∣missioners who shall be present; which Certificates shall be kept by the Register, and fairly entred into a Book; and the Register shall out of the Journal book of the Commissioners Orders, en∣ter against the breviate of each Officers Certificate, the sum or∣dered him by the Commissioners for his proportion according to the distribution; and after 29. September, 1662. no Certificate shall be admitted, nor any distribution thereupon made. IV. Every Certificate must particularly describe the quality and degree of the Officers in this manner, viz. These are to certifie, That it doth appear unto us, That A. B. of C. was a Captain, &c. And that he is truly loyal and indigent, and hath never to the best of our knowledge or information deserted his Majesties or his Fathers service during the late times of Rebellion and Ʋsur∣pation, and hath not a sufficient Livelyhood of his own; nor hath since His Majesties Return obtained any Reward, Office, or Employment: Wherefore we commend him as a sit person to receive a proportion of such Moneys as are to be distributed by the Act. The Certificate must be signed and sealed by the major part of
the Commissioners, otherwise not to be allowed by the Commis∣sioners sitting at Westminster. V. The Commissioners sitting at Westminster, nine or more of them shall and may after 1 November, 1662. proportion the Moneys received by the Act amongst such Officers, according to the number of the Certificates sent in, and order payment to be made to them, or such person or persons as shall under their Hands and Seals before 2 Witnesses depute to receive the same: and after such Order made, the said Commissioners, or seven of them, may issue out Warrants for payment of the distributions to such Officers or their Assigns, but shall issue no Warrants for payment of any moneys, unless such moneys be ordered to be paid as aforesaid; and the Treasurer shall issue no moneys, un∣less upon Warrant under the Hands and Seals of seven of the Commissioners, and such Warrants shall be a discharge to the Treasurer upon clearing his accompts. VI. The distribution of moneys amongst the Officers shall be according to their different pay, according to the present esta∣blishment of his Majesties Forces in England: so as a Colonel of Foot shall have so much more then a Captain of Foot, by how much a Colonels pay doth exceed a Captains, and so proporti∣onably betwixt all other Officers. VII. The Commissioners, nine or more of them, are to rate and assess all and every Officer that holds any Place or Office in England and Berwick, of the value of 5 l. or more, and they are by Oath, and other lawfull ways to finde out with convenient speed the full value of all Offices aforesaid, that they may be assessed before the 1 August, 1662. And all the moneys so as∣sessed are to be levied and paid to the Treasurer before 1 Novem∣ber, 1662. And the said Commissioners are to rate and assess every Officer to pay for all the 18 Moneths the full sum of 12 l. and so proportionable for any Office or Place of greater or lesser value, and the Register is to enter such Rates into a Book, and deliver duplicates to the Collectors, who are to demand and levie the moneys accordingly: and if any such Officer shall not pay his proportion so rated, within 20 days after notice thereof, and after demand made by the Collector, the Collector may distrain upon the Goods of such Officer, and sell the same, returning to the Owner the overplus: and the Collectors for the better receiving of the said several Rates, are to make use of all such powers and authorities, as are given to any Collectors, by
the Act entituled, An Act for granting to the King, 1200000l. VIII. All Moneys to be raised out of Offices, or Officers, shall be distributed by the Commissioners to such loyal and in∣digent Officers, in such sort, and by such ways and means as the 60000 l. is before directed to be distributed. IX. Whereas there are in London, Westminster, and in several other cities, towns and places in England and Wales, many Hospitals and other Houses and places of Receipt, benefit, and advantage of indigent, maimed, and decayed persons, and also there now are, or hereafter may be several Stipends, Pensions, and charitable Gifts to be disposed to such and the like persons in general, without any particular appointment by pious Bene∣factors: It is Enacted, That at all times hereafter, where any va∣cant place or places shall happen to be in such Hospitals, Houses, or other places; Or where such Stipends, Pensions, or other charitable Gifts shall be given, or disposed of, That the Guardians, and Go∣vernours of such Hospitals and places, and all persons whatsoever, who have power of admitting and receiving into such Hospitals, &c. and disposition of such Stipends, &c. prefer before all others in such Admissions, all and every such loyal person and persons desiring the same, as have served the late King, and his now Majesty in their Wars, and have not deserted their duty and loyalty, being conformable to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, so as such person be qualified to hold such place; and before all others to have and dispose of the said Stipends, &c. to such persons, and that the Widows and Children of such loyal persons be preferred be∣fore all others, Except the Founders Kindred. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to impower any per∣son to order, distribute, or pay any of the foresaid Moneys to any person named a Commissioner in the Act. 2. All Officers who are Members of the House of Peers shall be assessed for their Offices by the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Coun∣cil, and such other persons, as shall be appointed by the King under the Great Seal, or five of them; which Commissioners are not to be fewer then twelve. 3. Nothing in this Act shall be drawn into president as to the disposing of Moneys formerly granted to the King; or the taxing of any particular sort of men, distinct from the body of the People.
Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, imposed upon persons excepted out of the gene∣ral Pardon. I. Enacted, 13. Car. 2. Cap. 15. All and every the Man∣nors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Re∣mainders, Rights, Conditions, Interests, Offices, Fees, Annuities, and other Hereditaments, Leases for years, Chattels eal and other things of what nature soever they be, of Isaac Ewer, Sir John Danvers, Sir Thomas Maleverer, William Purefoy, John Blakiston, Sir William Constable, Richard Dean, Francis Aleyn, Peregrin Pelham, John Moor, John Aldred, alias Alured, Hum∣phrey Edwards, Sir Gregory Norton, John Venn, Thomas Andrews Alderman, Anthony Stapley, Thomas Horton, John Fry, Thomas Hammond, Sir John Bourchier, all deceased; William Lord Moun∣son, James Chaloner deceased, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, Robert Wallop, and Sir Arthur Hasle∣rigg (who during his life, committed many horrid and trayter∣ous Crimes) which they, or any of them, or any other to their or any of their uses, in trust, &c. had the 25. of March, 1646. or at any time since, shall stand and be forfeited to the King, his Heirs and Successors, and shall be adjudged to be in the actu∣al and real possession of the King without any Office, &c. II. All and every the Goods, Debts and other Chattels per∣sonal, of the persons in the Article aforesaid deceased, whereof they, or any of them, at the time of their respective deaths, or any other in trust for them, or any of them, stood possessed of, or interressed in Law or Equity: And all the Goods, Debts, and other the Chattels personal whatsoever, of them the said William Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps and Robert Wallop, whereof upon the 11. day of Februa∣ry, 1569. they or any of them, or any other in trust for them, stood possessed of either in Law or Equity, shall be adjudged and forfeited to the King, and are hereby put in the actual and real possession of the King without any further Office, &c.
III. No Conveyance, Assurance, &c. whatsoever, of or out of any Mannors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, not being the late Kings, Queens or Princes; or of any Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, not being Lands or Here∣ditaments sold or given for Delinquency, or pretended Delin∣quency, by pretext of any Act, Order, Ordinance, or pretended Order, since the first day of January, 1641. nor any Statute, Judgment or Recognizance had, made, &c. to any persons, Body Politick or Corporate, before the 29. day of September, 1659. by any of the aforesaid Offenders or their Heirs, or by any others, claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, other then the Wise or Wives, Childe or Children, Heir or Heirs of the said persons, for money Bona fide to them, or any of them paid or lent, or other valuable consideration; nor any Conveyance, As∣surance, &c. by any person or persons, to the Offenders afore∣said in trust, and for the benefit of any other person or persons not being any of the Offenders aforesaid, or in trust for any Body Politick or Corporate, shall be impeached, defeited, made void, or frustrated hereby, or by any of the Convictions and Attainders aforesaid, but that the same shall be held and en∣joyed by the Purchasors, Grantees, Lessees, Cestuy que use, Cestuy que trust, and every of them, their Heirs, &c. respectively, as if this Act had not been made: so as the said Conveyances, and all and every the Grants and Assurances which by virtue thereof ought to be held and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall before the first day of January, 1662. be entred and enrolled of Record in the Exchequer, and not otherwise. IV. William Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, Robert Wallop Esquire, and John Phelps be, and are hereby degraded from all Titles of Honour, Dignities and Pre∣heminences which they now have, or hereafter may descend unto them: and none of them shall bear or use the Title of Lord, Baronet, Knight, Esquire or Gentleman, nor any Coat of Arms, or other legal Title or addition, but are hereby made per∣sons of dishonour and infamy. V. William Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, Robert Wallop, and the said John Phelps, shall up∣on the 27. day of January, 1661. or so soon after as they shall be apprehended, carried to the Tower of London, and from thence drawn upon Sledges with Ropes about their necks, quite through the Streets unto the Gallows at Tyburn, and in
like manner be brought back again, and be imprisoned during the term of their natural lives. 1. Provided, No Executor, or Administrator to any of the dead persons whose estate is hereby forfeited, shall be sued or molested for any debt, or legacy by them paid as Executors or Administrators, to any person or persons to whom the same was due or bequeathed, and was paid bona fide; but the re∣spective Legatees, &c. who have received, &c. any such Lega∣cies from the Executors, shall be accomptable to the King for all such Legacies as they have respectively received, and shall pay the same to the Kings Majesty, 2. Nothing in this Act shall extend, or be construed to for∣feit the term, estate or interest which Sir William Lewis of Bor∣den, in the County of Southampton, had, or hath in the custody of the Park called East-Mean Park in the said County, and in the game of Conies therein, for the term of three years to come, from our Lady-day last, being the remaining years of a greater term; the which Park and Premises belong to the Bishop of Winchester, the said Sir William hath surrendred to the Bishop of Winchester, and hath now taken a Lease for three lives, the which Lease for three lives to the said Sir William, shall notwithstanding this Act remain good, saving to every person, &c. their Heirs, &c. all such estate, right, title and interest in Law and Equity which any person hath, or ought to have therein, not being in trust for any of the said Offenders, nor derived by, from, or under them, since the 25. of March, 1646. saving also always, and re∣serving to Cuthbert Collingwood Esquire, and George Collingwood Gent. his Son, their and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and the Farmers and Tenants of the said Cuthbert and George, or either of them, and of their Heirs, &c. all such right, title of entry, action, use, interest and possession, which any of them had, or ought to have, of, into, or out of the Mannors, Townships, Vil∣lages, Hamlets and Precincts of Eslington, Whittingham, Barton, Thrownton, Fawden, Keynton, West-Brunton, East-Brunton, Dun∣nington, Blakedon, alias Blagdon and Weslade in the County of Norihumberland, and of, in, to or out of any the Lands, Tene∣ments, &c. and appurtenances to any of them belonging, 3. Not to extend or prejudice the estate and interest in Law and Equity of Rachel Powre Widow, of, in and to one Copy∣hold Messuage and Mill with the appurtenances, being in Chepmansford in the County of Southampton, which by the Or∣der
and decree of the High Court of Chancery of the 21. of June, 1661. she is to be restored unto, and put into possession of, &c. but that she shall hold and enjoy the same according to the said decree. IV. It shall and may be lawfull to and for Barrington Bour∣chier Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir John Bourchier herein before mentioned, to hold and enjoy all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to him granted and conveyed, or mentioned to be granted or conveyed in and by certain Let∣ters Patents under the Great Seal of England, dated 22. of March, in the 13. year of his now Majesties Reign, against the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for ever. Parishes. I. Enacted. 12. Car. 2. Cap. That all the Precinct, viz. be∣ginning at the Strand, at the East-end of Bedford-house, including the House, Backsides, Gardens, &c. thereto belonging: All the Houses within the narrow bounds, viz. fourty foot without the Brick-wall, and all Houses and Buildings and Lands with∣in the said Bounds, bounded by the House of Humphrey Vaughan in Russel-street East, by the House of William Bard in Shandois-street West; by the House of William Crisby in James▪street North, and by the House of Richard Tramton in Bedford-street South, be a distinct Parish, called the Parish of Saint Paul Co∣vent Garden. II. That the said Precinct be divided and exempted from the Parish of Saint Martins, and from all Dependances, Offices, Char∣ges, Contributions for or in respect thereof, and from the Cure of the Rector and Vicar of the said Parish of Saint Martins, and their Successors, and discharged of all Tithes, Offerings, Ob∣ventions, Easter-books, and other Parochial duties whatsoever. III. The new erected Church within the said Precinct shall be the Parish-Church of the said Precinct, and William Earl of Bedford, Son and Heir of Francis, late Earl of Bedford, shall have the Patronage of the said Church, and may present some fit Person to be Rector of the same, as often as the same shall become void, and the Rector and his Successors shall be incor∣porate and have capacity by the name of Rector of the Church of Saint Paul Covent Garden, and shall have cure of the Souls of
all the Inhabitants within the said Parish; and shall hold to him and his Successors for ever, all that House in Covent Garden sci∣tuate in James-Street now in the possession of Edward Blayden Taylor. IV. The Rector and his Successors shall have one yearly Rent of 100 l. to be issuing out of several Houses in Covent Garden, late in the occupation of Sir Edmond Verney Knight, Sir Charles Gaudy Knight, Sir Edward Sydenham Knight, now in the occupa∣tion of Sir Edward Ford Knight, Sir Robert Bowles Baronet, and William Gape Apothecary, upon the 4 usual feasts of the year, viz. at the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, Saint Michael, the Birth of our Lord God, and the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, by equal portions, with power to distrain for the said 100 l. per annum, or any parcel thereof, upon the Houses charged with the said Rent, and 20 s. in the name of a penalty, if the same be unpaid by the space of 21. days after any of the said feast days aforesaid. V. The Rector of the said Parish, by and with the consent of the Patron, may from time to time nominate an able Minister to be a Curate Assistant to him, and his Successors: And for the further maintenance, and for a Provision for the Curate, and o∣ther Officers, there shall be 3 Churchwardens for the said Parish, one to be chosen by William Earl of Bedford, his Heirs, &c. ano∣ther by the Rector and his Successors, a third by the Inhabitants of the Parish, and 250 l. shall yearly be charged upon the Hou∣ses of the Inhabitants, except Bedford-House, to be assessed by the Churchwardens, after a pound rate, according to the yearly va∣lue of the respective Houses, which shall be confirmed by two Ju∣stices of the Peace of Westminster, and be collected by the Church∣wardens at the four usual feasts, or times of payment at the feasts above mentioned; and if the said sum be not paid after demand, then to levy the same by distress, and sale of the parties goods as shall be in arrear, returning the overplus. VI. The Churchwardens, shall out of the said moneys re∣ceived by them, pay to the Rector and his Successors 150 l. per annum, and to the Curate 50 l. per annum at the said 4 feasts, or within 21 days; and in default of payment of the said respe∣ctive sums at the respective House of any of the Churchwar∣dens, the 2 next Justices of the Peace dwelling in Westminster upon complaint, may cause the Churchwardens who shall fail of payment to be Imprisoned till payment be made: The
residue of the said assessment to be employed by the Church∣wardens for Wages and Salaries of a Clerk and two Sextons yearly to be nominated by the Earl of Bedford, his Heirs, &c. and to be distributed according to the directions of the Earl and his Heirs, and the Rector and his Successors. VII. If any person hath by virtue of any Authority, or pre∣tended Authority, received any sums of money heretofore as∣sessed on any of the Inhabitants of the said Parish, and hath not paid the same into his or their hands, the said Justices of the Peace shall call them to accompt; and if they shall refuse or neglect to pay such Moneys as accompted for, and unpaid, they may levie the same by distress, and in default of distress commit the persons to the common Goal, the moneys to be disposed of to the use for which they were assessed. VIII. The sum of 312 l. 10 s. shall after the proportions aforesaid, be assessed upon the Inhabitants of the said Parish, by the two next Justices of the Peace of Westminster, and be levied and collected by them, or such as they shall appoint, for and to∣wards the full satisfaction of a Salary for the Minister, Curate, Clerk and Sextons, who have officiated in the said Precinct, since St. Thomas-day, 1659. until our Lady-day, 1661. to be di∣stributed as William Earl of Bedford shall direct. IX. The Church-wardens, or two of them are to make Rates and assessments upon the Inhabitants of the said Parish, from time to time, for the paiment of Scavengers for cleansing the Streets of the Parish, and for the repairing and amending of the Church when need shall be; the said rate and assessment to be made and allowed as is before appointed for the raising of 250 l. a year as aforesaid; and in case the Inhabitants refuse or neglect to pay the said assessments assessed upon them, after demand made at their houses, the Church-wardens, or two of them, may levie the same by distress and sale of the goods of all or any as shall refuse to pay the same, rendring the overplus, if any be, to the Owners. 1. Provided, It be lawfull for the Overseers of the poor, and Surveyors of the High-ways of the Parish of St. Martins, and the Church-wardens of St. Paul Covent-Garden to assess and collect of the Inhabitants of the parish of Covent Garden, for the bene∣fit of the poor and reparation of the High-ways, all such rates and taxes, as they might have done before the making of the Act.
2. This Act not to extend to avoid any Ecclesiastical Law, or Constitution of the Church of England, nor destroy any Rights belonging to the Bishop of London, or his Successors, but that he and they may at all times visit, institute, and exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the said Parish, as they might do in other Parishes within the Diocess of London. Pardon, Indempnity and Oblivion. I. Enacted. 12. Car. 2. Cap. 8. All Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Murthers, Felonies, Offences, Crimes, Contempts and Misdemeanours, counselled, commanded, acted or done since 1. January 1637. by any person, or persons before the 24. of June 1660. (other then the persons herein, after by name ex∣cepted) by virtue or colour of any Command, Power, Authori∣ty, Commission, Warrant or Instructions from the late King, or his now Majesty, or from any other persons, deriving authority, mediately or immediately from both, or either of them, or from both, or either House of Parliament, or from any reputed Par∣liament, Keepers of the Liberties of England, Protector, chief Magistrate, Commander in chief by Sea or Land; or by any Pretence, Warrant, or Command whatsoever, from them or a∣ny of them, or their, or either of their respective Counsels, or from any persons whatsoever deriving or pretending to derive authority from them, or any of them, be Pardoned, Indempni∣fied, Discharged and put into utter Oblivion; (except before excepted) and all and every person and persons, Acting, Aiding, Assisting, Abetting and Conselling the same, their Heirs, Exe∣cutors, &c. are hereby Pardoned, Indempnified and Discharged from the same, and from all pains of death, and other Pains, Judgments, Indictments, Convictions, Attainders and Forfei∣tures, therefore had, and which might accrew for the same, and all grants thereupon made, are declared to be null and void: and all and every person and persons, Bodies Politick and Cor∣porate, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Successors, are restored to their Land, Tenements, &c. Goods and Chat∣tels, and other things forfeited, which to the King doth, or shall appertain, by reason of any the said Offences before men∣tioned, and not hereafter in the Act excepted and foreprized.
II. All Appeals; and all personal actions, Suits and prosecuti∣ons whatsoever, for or by reason of any Act of Hostility, Assault, Imprisonment, or breach of the Peace, advised, counselled, commanded, acted or done by reason of any the late troubles or late War in his Majesties Dominions, or relating thereunto: And all Judgments and Executions hereupon had before the 1. day of May, 1658. Stand and be from henceforth discharged: But not to restore any person, &c. any sums of money, mean profits, or goods already received, or taken under such Executi∣on, or to give any accompt for the same: and all demands of Arrerages of Rents, and mean Profits of Lands incurred, or grown due, or which have been paid, received or disposed of by virtue, or colour of any the authorities, or pretended authori∣ties aforesaid (other then such Arrerages and mean Profits as shall be otherwise disposed of by the Act) be, and shall be from henceforth discharged, III. All and every, the Subjects of England, Ireland, Wales, Jersey, Guernsey, Berwick, and other of the Kings Dominions, &c. their Heirs, Executors, &c. and all Bodies in any wise, Incorpo∣rated, Cities, Burrougs, Shires, Towns, Villages, Ridings, Hundreds, Hamlets and Tythings, and every of them and the Successors of every of them, are hereby acquitted, pardoned, in∣demnified, discharged against the King, his Heirs, &c. of and from all manner of Treasons, misprisons of Treasons, fellonies, contempts, offences, trespasses, entries, wrongs, deceits, misde∣meanors, forfeitures, penalties, sums of monios, & other matters concerning Tenures and Wardships and Arrerages of Rents (o∣ther the Arrerages of Rents, for the Excise or customs, or other then such Arrerages of Rents or mean Profits as shall be disposed of by the Parliament) and from all Arrears of Tenths, first Fruits, Fines, Post-fines, Issues and Amercements, all securities given for them, concealments of customs and Excise, Arrerages of Purvey∣ance & compositions for the same: And from all pains of death, pains corporal and pecuniary, and generally of and from all o∣ther things, causes, suits, and executions in the Act, not after excepted, which may, or can be by the King in any wise, or by any means pardoned before and unto the 24. of June 1660. to every or any of his said Subjects, Bodies corporate, Cities, Hundreds, Towns, Villages or Tithings or any of them: And all Grants and Patents since the 25. of March 1641. Touching. Wardships of the Body and Lands, or Touching the Marriage
of any Heir within age, and all the mean Profits yet unreceived, and demandable by reason thereof, are hereby discharged. IV. This Pardon and Oblivion shall be as good and effectual in Law, to all and every his Majesties Subjects, Bodies politick, or corporate and others, in, for and against all things which be not in this Act excepted and foreprized, as the same should have been, of all the Offences, Contempts, Forfeitures, Causes, Mat∣ters, Suits, Judgments, Executions, Penalties and other things, not in the Act excepted; had been particularly, specially and expresly named, tehearsed and specified, and pardoned by proper and express words and names in their kindes, natures, and qua∣lities for all things before the said 24. of June 1660. and his said Subjects, nor any of them, nor the Heirs, Executors, Ad∣ministrators of any of them, nor the said Bodies politick, nor any of them shall be Sued, Vexed, or Inquieted by the King, his Heits or Successors, in their Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands and Tenements, for any manner of matter, Cause, Misdemeanors, Forfeiture, Offence, or other thing suffered, done or committed before the said 24. June 1660. against the late King, or the Kings Majesty that now is, his Crown, Dignity, Prerogative, Laws or Statutes, but onely for such Matters and Offences as be excepted by this Act out of the same: And all and every the said Kings Subjects, &c. by his or their Deputy or Deputies, Atturney or Atturnies, may plead this Act of free pardon, for his or their discharge, for any thing by the Act pardoned, discharged with∣out any Fee: Paying for the Writing, or entry of the Judg∣ment, or cause concerning such plea, only 16 d. to the Officer or Clerk, who shall enter such plea, matter, &c. for the parties discharge in that behalf: And this Pardon, shall be by the gene∣ral words, deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed and taken in all manner of Courts, of his Majestie and elsewhere, most Bene∣ficial and avaleable to all the Subjects, Bodies corporate and other persons, and to every of them (not in this Act excep∣ted) without any ambiguity, question, or delay whatsoever, pleaded by the King: or his or their Atturney general, or by any other person for his Highness, his Heirs or Successors. V. If any Officer, or any Clerk of the Kings Courts, make out any writs, summons, or process whereby any of the Sub∣jects shall be grieved in their Bodies or Estates by reason of any thing hereby pardoned, or if any Sheriff or Escheator or other Offices whatsoever, levy, receive, take, or withhold any thing
hereby pardoned, every such offender being convict thereof, shall yield to the party grieved treble damages, besides Costs, and forfeit to the King 10 l. and all such Writs, Process, &c. shall be of none effect. VI. Except out of this free and general Pardon all Murthers done or committed by any persons, &c. (other then such are par∣doned by the first Clause) And also Except all and every the Of∣fences of Pyracy and Robbery done upon the Seas (not done in relation to the differences and Wars aforesaid) and every procu∣ring and abetting of any such Offenders, comforting and recei∣ving of them, or any of them, or any Goods taken by way of such Piracy and Robbery: And Except the detestable Vice of Buggery, committed with Man, or Beast; and all Rapes, and carnal Ravishments of Women; and also all wilful Ravishments and taking away, or marrying of any Maid, Widow, or Damsel against her will, or without the assent or agreement of her Pa∣rents; and all abetting, ayding, &c. of such Ravishments, &c. com∣mitted and done. And Except all Offences made Felony by an Act entituled, An Act to restrain persons from Marriage, till their former Wives or Husbands be dead; And Except all Offences of Invocations, Conjurations, Witchcrafts, Sorceries, Inchantments and Charmes, and all offences of procuring the same: and all persons now attainted or convicted of any the said Excepted offences. And Excepted all and singular the Accompts of all and every person and persons appointed by any of the Authorities, or pretended Authorities, to be Treasurer, Receiver, Farmer or Collector (other then the several Sub-Collectors of the several Parishes, Towns, Hamlets, &c. respectively, for and concerning their Receipts before the 24th. day of June, 1659.) who have received or collected any Subsidie, Custom, Tonnage and Poundage, Prize-goods, Assessment, Sequestration, New-Impost, or Excise; or of any the Rents or Revenues of any Lands, &c. of, or belong∣ing to the late King, Queen, Prince, King that now is; or un∣to the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Ca∣nons, Prebends, or other Officers belonging to any Cathedral or Collegiate Church; or Popish Recusants convict, or of per∣sons sequestred for their Recusancy, or other sequestred Estates, received or collected by, or paid unto them since 30. January, 1642. And of all Monies and other Duties grown due, or con∣tracted upon the sale or disposition of them, or any of them. 1. Provided, The Heirs, Executors, &c. of any Accomptant
Excepted and deceased, shall not be lyable for the matters here∣in mentioned, Except for such Monies as remain due upon their Accompts already stated, and not paid in. And no Accompt for any monies discharged by any Order or Ordinance of both or either House of Parliament, or of any Assembly so reputed; or of Oliver or Richard, stiled, or obeyed as Protector, or by others under them. 2. No persons shall be charged for any Monies received for Fees, Salaries, or Wages then allowed, or for Monies by him disbursed by any publick use, though the Authority by which the same was issued, was not warrantable by Law. 3. No Military, or Commissioned Officer of the Armies, or Navies, Souldier or Mariner, who before the 25th. of March, 1659. hath received any monies for his pay, or the pay of o∣ther Souldiers, or for other contingencies of the Souldiers or Garrisons under his command, shall be called to accompt therefore. 4. No person shall be called to accompt for any of the mat∣ters of this Exception after 24th. of June, 1662. And in case a∣ny person who stands accomptable for any Monies since 1. Ja∣nuary, 1642. before the 30th. of January, 1648. have been robbed or plundered by Souldiers or others, of the Monies in their hands; or of any Notes, Books of Receipts or Acquittances touching their payment, the Oaths of such persons shall be a good discharge for so much of their accompt; and the Oath of every Accomptant in, and between the years 1642. and 1648. of what they have payed to any publick use, shall be a good dis∣charge as to so much of the accompt of such person or persons: and all Judgments of Discharge, or Quietus est given upon any Accompt in the Exchequer since 1648. to be allowed. VII. Except all Accompts of the Revenues of Churches and Vicaridges in Wales and Monmouthshire, and all Judgments of Discharge, or Quietus est thereupon had; and all Briberies, Perjuries, subornation of Perjury, or Witnesses; Forgery of Deeds, Debenturs, Bills of Publick Faith, Wills and Writings whatsoever; Or of Examination of Witnesses, whereby to en∣danger any mans life, liberty or estate; and the counselling or procuring of such counterfeiting or forging: And also all offen∣ces in detaining, imbezling of any Goods, Monies, Chattels or Jewels of the late King, Queen, or Prince, or their Children, or other their Shipping and Ammunition of War, and other such Goods
Chattels as have been sold or disposed of to any servants or cre∣ditors of the late King, for payment of their debts, or wages. VIII. Except, All Issues, Fines, Amercements, Rents, and other publick Duties, levyed or collected by any Sheriff, or other Officer, for the use of the said King, Authorities, or pretended Authorities, or for his Majestie that now is and not accompted for, or discharged. IX. Except, All Offences done by any Jesuit, Seminary, or Popish Priest, contrary to the Tenure or Effect of the Statute of 27. Eliz. And all Outlawries, Proceedings, Judgments and Executions for the same Offences, or any of them. 1. Provided, It shall be lawful for Clerks and other Officers of the Courts at Westminster, to make Writs of Capias utlaga∣um, against such persons Outlawed as be pardoned by the Act, to compel the Defendant, to answer to the Plaintiffs at whose suit they were outlawed: And every person so Outlawed, shall have a Seire Facias, against the party who is so Out∣lawed, before the pardon shall be allowed to him or them so Outlawed. 2. This Act of pardon, not to extend to pardon any Out∣lawries upon any Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum, till the party Outlawed shall satisfie, or agree with the party at whose suit he is Outlawed or condemned. Except, All informations and proceedings depending concer∣ning High-waies and Bridges, and all Issues returned concer∣ning the same, since 30. January 1648. And except all Recog∣nizances, Bonds, and Securities given, or entred into since the 25. of March 1640. by any Receiver, Bailiff, Collector, or other Accomptant in the Court of Exchequer, and their Sureties and Accompts respectively. Not to extend to pardon or discharge any Recognizance, Obligation or Bond which is not yet forfeited. X. All Acts of Hostility and Injuries, whether between the late King and the Lords and Commons then in Parliament as∣sembled, or between any the people of the Nation which did arise upon any action, attempt, assistance, counsel, or advice, having relation to the late troubles between late King and Par∣liament, or the King that now is, or any of his subjects (which are not herein excepted) the same and what ever hath ensued thereupon, whether touching upon the Laws or Liberties of the Nation, or upon the honour of the King, or upon the
Honour and Authority of Parliament, or to the prejudice of any particular or private person, shall in no time after the 24. of June, 1660. be called in question, whatsoever the quality of the person, or of what kinde or degree, civil or criminal the in∣jury to be, and no mention to be made thereof in time to come. XI. If any person or persons within three years shall pre∣sume to call, or alledge of, or object against any other per∣son, &c. any name, names, or other words of reproach, tending to revive the memory of the late differences, or the occasions therof, every person so offending, shall pay unto the party grieved, if he be of the degree of a Gentleman, or above, 10 l. if under that degree, 40 s. to be recovered by action of debt, to be brought in any of his Majesties Courts of Record where∣in no Essoyn, &c. shall be allowed, so as the action be brought and presented within six moneths after the Offence committed. Provided, This Act shall not extend to give any benefit unto any person or persons, who have had any hand in plotting the Rebellion in Ireland, (other then such as by an intended Act shall be named to be pardoned) nor to incur to restore any per∣sons, Bodies Politick or Corporate (other then the Marquess of Ormond, and other the Protestants of Ireland) and their Heirs, and such others as in an Act intended to be passed, shall be expressed, any Estates, Liberties, Franchises, or Hereditaments in England or Ireland sold, or disposed of by both or ei∣ther Houses of Parliament, or any Convention assuming the name of a Parliament, or any persons deriving authority from them, nor to the mean Profits, Rents, or Contingen∣cies of the same. XII. Every person hereby pardoned, may plead the general issue, and give the Act in evidence for his discharge. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to pardon any persons whatsoever for any theft, or stealing of any goods, or other fel∣lonies since the 4. of March, 1659. 2. Nor to extend to acquit or discharge any persons from making restitution of all such Rents, summs of Mo∣neys, Horses, Cattel, or other Goods, which by a pretended Act, Entituled, An Act of repeal of two Acts of Parliament for Sequestrations, are requested to be restored from whom they were taken, nor bar the Owners from their actions
or suits at Law or Equity, for or by reason of the same, or any other Rents, sums of Money, Houses, &c. which since the 25. day of July, 1659. have been by any person wrongfully received or taken away, and for which the said wrong doers are not any wise indempnisied by the said, or any other Act of Repeal. XIII. No person who by virtue of any Order, Warrant, me∣diately or immediately derived from the late King, or the now King, or any the Authorities aforesaid, or any person acting un∣der them, that have levied, seized, sequestred, or paid to any pub∣lick use, or to any publick Treasury within this kingdom, any goods, debts, rents, or moneys belonging to any person whatso∣ever, shall be molested for the same, but discharged for so much as their Acquittances extend unto. 1. Provided, This shall not extend to discharge any per∣son, &c. for any sum or sums of money received for that illegal Tax of Decimation, or upon the accompt of any Militia, settled or acted in since 1648. and not accompted for, or paid over, or discharged to, or by any that had authority or pretended au∣thority to discharge the respective Receivers of the same. 2. If any person or persons being the Kings menial ser∣vant, &c. or having, or pretending to have particular directions from him, have during the time of such his relation to the King, or whilest they pretended to act for his Majesties interest, wilful∣ly, maliciously and trayterously held intelligence with any For∣reign Prince, State, or with any person usurping Supreme Au∣thority in the Kings Dominions, or with their Agents, and with∣out the Kings Licence, and to the intent to betray the Kings Person or Counsels, or have received moneys or pensions for such treachery, such person is excepted out of the Act, so as such person be out▪lawed, or convicted thereof within two years from the 25. of April, 1660. 3. Nor to extend to pardon or discharge any debts or money due for Excise of any Goods or Merchandises, where∣of entries have been made in the Custom-House, which have grown due since the 25. of March, 1658. or to dis∣charge any moneys due to the Farmers of Excise, since the 25. of March, 1652. 4. Not to extend to pardon or give any benefit what∣soever to John Lisle, William Say, Sir Hardres Waller, Va∣lentine Wanton, Thomas Harrison, Edward Whaley, William
Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmund Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey, Robert Titchborn, Owen Row, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goff, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Chaloner, John Carew, John Jones, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Thomas Wogan, Edmund Har∣vey, Thomas Scot, William Crawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, John Dixwel, Georg Fleetwood, Simon Meyn, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas Wait, John Cook, Andrew Brough∣ton, Edward Dendy, William Hewlet, Hugh Peters, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, or any of them, nor to those two per∣sons, or either of them disguised upon the Scaffold the 30. of January, 1648. erected before White-Hall; all which per∣sons, for being instrumental in the Murther of the late King, are wholly excluded and left to be proceeded against as Traytors. But in regard the said Owen Row, Augustine Garland, Ed∣mund Harvey, Henry Smith, Henry Martin, Sir Hardres Waller, Robert Titchborn, George Fleetwood, James Temple, Thomas Wait, Simon Meyn, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Peter Temple, Robert Lilburn, Gilbert Millington, Vincent Potter, Thomas Wogan, and John Downs, have rendred themselves (according to the Declaration of the 6. of June, 1660.) and thereby pretended to some favour: It is Enacted; That if the said Owen Row, and the rest last mentioned Persons, or any of them shall be attainted for their Treason and Murther afore∣said: Yet the Execution of them shall be suspended untill his Majesty and the Parliament shall order their Execution. XIV. Except out of the Act Oliver Cromwel, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw and Thomas Pride; Nor shall the Act extend to discharge the Lands, Goods, Rights, and Trusts of Oliver Cromwel, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, Isaac Ewer, Sir John Danvers, Sir Thomas Maleverer, William Pure∣foy, John Blackiston, Sir William Constable, Richard Dean, Fran∣cis Allen, Peregrine Pelham, John Moor, John Aldred, Hum∣phry-Edwards, Sir Gregory Norton, John Venn, Thomas An∣drews Alderman, Anthony Stapely, Thomas Horton, John Fry, Thomas Hammond, Sir John Bourchier, all deceased, from such forfeitures and penalties as by an Act of Parliament intend∣ed to be passed for that purpose, shall be therein expressed.
XV. Except also William Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, Robert Wallop, all which persons did act and sit in that Trayterous Assembly which mur∣thered the late King Charles the First, and are therefore re∣served to such Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, not extend∣ing to life, as by another Act of Parliament shall be imposed upon them. XVI. Except Sir Arthur Haslerigg, for and in respect onely of such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, not extending to life, as by an intended Act to be passed, shall be Inflicted and imposed. 1. John Hutchinson Esquire, and Francis Lassels, are made for ever uncapable to execute any Place or Office of Trust, and Francis Lassels is to pay to the King one full years value of his Estate. 2. The Act not to extend to the pardoning, or to give any benefit unto Sir Henry Vane, John Lambert, or either of them: but they are wholly exempted out of the Act. 3. Provided, If William Lenthal, William Burton, Oliver Saint-John, John Ireton Alderman, Colonel William Sydenham, Co∣lonel John Desborow, John Blackwel of Mortlack, Christopher, Pack Alderman, Richard Keeble, Charles Fleetwood, John Pyne, Richard Dean, Major Richard Creed, Philip Nye Clerk, John Goodwin Clerk, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Colonel Thomas Lister, and Colonel Ralph Cobbet, shall after 1. September 1660. accept, or exercise any Office Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Mi∣litary, or other publick Employment in England, Wales, or Ber∣wick; such person or persons who shall so accept or execute as aforesaid, shall stand to all intents, as if he or they had been totally exempted by name in the Act. All those who since 5. December, 1648. did give sentence of Death upon any person in the late Illegal High Courts of Justice in England or Wales, or signed the Warrant for Execu∣tion of any person there condemned (except Col. Richard Ingoldsby, and Colonel Matthew Tomlinson) are disabled to bear any Office Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military in England, and Wales, or to a Member of any Parliament after 1. Spe∣tember, 1660. XVII. All Trustees in a pretended Act made 1649. concern∣ing Tithes Appropriate, Oblations, &c. Fee-farm Rents, first Fruits, &c. and their Heirs, shall accompt for the same, if
they have not been employd or disposed of for the maintenance of Ministers or other uses, according to the said pretended Act, or some other Act or Ordinance made in the years 1650, 1654, 1656. by an assembly called or reputed a Parliament, or assum∣ing such power according to the intention thereof. And the A∣gents and Receivers under the Order of the said Trustees; and the Occupiers and Tenants of the premisses who have taken the pro∣fits thereof without agreement for Rent, and have made no satis∣faction to the said Trustees or others by their Order; and also they who have holden the same under agreement to pay Rent, and have not paid the same, shall respectively accompt for so much of the premisses as are unsatisfied according to such Agreements: All which payments and accompts shall be made to such persons and in such manner as shall be directed. Nevertheless, no Mini∣nister, or School-master, or other person for whose benefit or maintenance the said pretended Act or Ordinances were made, shall be accomptable for any profits or monies paid to them, or received by them, by virtue of any Order of the said Trustees, or any of them, or otherwise. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to pardon any Bond ta∣ken in his late Majesties Name before 1642. for the securing of any proper Debt of any servant, or Receiver of the Revenues of his said Majesty, if it hath not been paid to, or by Order of some lawfull, or pretended Authority: And whereas by an Or∣der of 26 May, 1641. The House of Commons did accept of 150000 l. as a composition from the Farmers of several Cu∣stomes, Voted to be Illegally taken: and some of the said Farmers did pay the said 150000 pounds at the desire of the said House of Commons: and upon their Declaration, that such of the said Farmers as did not pay their proportions, should not be pardoned, but proceeded against, and out of their Fines satisfaction to be made to those who had paid the said Summe: And in pursuance thereof, did on the 1. of June next following Resolve, That the Estates of such persons, living or dead, as by colour of any Pattent received Monies from the Sub∣ject under the pretence of such Customs, ought to be liable to restitution. This Act doth not pardon any person, his Heirs, Executors, &c. who have not paid their proportions of the said sum of 150000 l. or ought to have been contributary there∣unto; but that the estates of the dead as well as of the living of such persons who ought to have been contributary, in whose possession soever (Purchasors bona fide▪) upon valuable
consideration only excepted) shall be charged and chargeable with the payment of their proportions, as if this Act had not been made. 2. Not to extend to pardon any person, their Heirs, Execu∣tors, or any sums of monies due, and arrears for Excise of Beer, Ale, or other Native or Inland Commodities since 24. of June, 1659. 3. Not to extend to the pardoning or discharging of any sum of money due from any Officers or Souldiers to any of the Sub∣jects of this Kingdom for Free-Quarter, since the 2d of July, 1659. Or to discharge any Monies borrowed by any Officers for preventing Free-Quarter. XVIII. No Conveyance, Assurance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of Leases, Grants and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust, or Limitation of Use, or uses of any Mannors, Lands, Tenements, or Here∣ditaments, not being the late Kings, Queens, Princes, or Church-Lands; Nor being Lands sold or given, or so appoin∣ted to be for the Delinquency, or the pretended Delinquency of any one whatsoever by pretext of any Act, Order, or Ordi∣nance, or reputed Act, &c. since the first of January, 1641. Nor any Statute, Judgement, or Recognizance had, made acknowledged, or suffered to any Person or Persons, Bodies Politique or Corporate, before the 29th of September, 1659. by any of the persons before in this Act by name Excepted, or their Heirs; Or by any claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them (other than their Wives, Children, Heirs of such persons, or any of them) for monies bona fide, to them or any of them paid or lent: Nor any Conveyance or Estate, &c. made before the 25th of April, 1660. by a∣ny person, to any such person Excepted by name as aforesaid in Trust, or for the benefit of any other persons, Bodies Politique or Corporate (not excepted by name as aforesaid) shall be defeated, impeached, or made void hereby, or by the At∣tainder or Conviction of any such person Excepted, but shall be held and enjoyed by the Purchasors, Grantees, Lessees, Assignees, Cestuy que Ʋses, Cestuy que Trusts, their respective Heirs, Executors, &c. as if no such Attainder or Conviction had been. Provided, The Act not to extend to indempnifie any person whatsoever, who have entred into any Messuages, Lands, Tene∣ments and Hereditaments, called Fabrick Lands, or possessed
themselves of any Rents or Revenues given for the repair of any Cathedral, or other Church; Or who have sacrilegiously enriched themselves by the converting of the Plate, Utensils and Materials of, or belonging to such Churches for their private use and ad∣vantage for, or in respect of the said crimes only. Parliament. 1. Enacted, 16 Car. 1. Cap. 1. In case there be not a Parli∣ment summoned by Writ under the Great Seal of England, and assembled and held before the 10th day of Septemb. which shall be in the third year next after the last day of the last meet∣ing and sitting of this present Parliament, the beginning of the first year to be accounted from the last meeting and sitting: and so from time to time at all times hereafter, if there shall not be a Parliament before the 10th day of September, in the third year next after the last day of the last meeting, and sitting before that time assembled and held. Then in every such case, the Parliament shall be assembled and held in the usual place at Westminster, on the second Monday, which shall be in the moneth of November then next ensuing. II. In case the present Parliament assembled and held; Or any other Parl. which shall hereafter be assembled and held by Writ; Or in case any Parliament shall assembled be by au∣thority of this present Act: and such Parliaments, or any of them be prorogued, or adjourned, or continued, or adjourned by prorogation or adjournment untill the 10th day of September, which shall be in the third year next after the last day of the last meeting, and sitting in Parliament, to be accounted as aforesaid: In every such case, every such Parliament so pro∣rogued or adjourned, or so continued by prorogation or ad∣journment, shall from the said 10th day of September be clear∣ly and absolutely dissolved. And the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and every Commissioner or Com∣missioners for the keeping of the Great Seal of England, shall within six dayes after the said 10th day of September, in eve∣ry such third year, in due form of Law, without any War∣rant or direction from his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, seal and send abroad several and respective Writs to the several and respective Peers of the Realm, that they be personally at
the Parliament to be held at Westminster, the second day of No∣vember next following the said tenth day of September, to treat concerning the high and urgent Affairs concerning his Majesty, the State, the defence of the Kingdom, and Church of ENG∣LAND; and shall seal, and send abroad several and respe∣ctive Writs, to the several and respective Sheriffs of the several and respective Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of England and Wales, and to the Constable of the Castle of Dover, Warden of the Cinque ports, Mayor and Bayliffs of Berwick upon Tweed, and to all and every Officer and person to whom Writs have used to be directed, for the Election of the Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses, of, and for the said Counties, Cities, Cinque-Ports, and Boroughs respectively, to appear and serve in Parli∣ament, to be held at Westminster on the second Monday, which shall be in November aforesaid; which said Peers after the said Writs received, and Citizens, Barons and Burgesses shall then, and there appear and serve in Parliament according∣ly. III. The Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, and Commissioner, or Commissioners shall take a solemne Oath in haec vexba, Viz. You shall swear, That you shall true and faithfully issue forth, and send abroad Writs of Summons to Parliament, for both Houses, at such time as is enjoyned by an Act of Parliament, Entituled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long intermission of Parliaments. The said Oath to be administred by the Clerk of the Crown to them; and that none of them respectively shall execute any of the said Offices before they have taken the said Oath. IV. If the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or any of the said Commissioners shall fail or forbear to issue out the said Writs accor∣ding to the true meaning of the Act, he or they respectively shall be disabled, and become by virtue of this Act, ipso facto, to bear his or their said Offices, and be further lyable to such punishments, as shall be inflicted on him or them by the next, or any other ensu∣ing Parliament. V. In case the Lord Chancellor, &c. shall not issue forth the said Writ as aforesaid; Or that the Parliament do not as∣semble, to be held at the time and place aforesaid, then the Parliament shall assemble, and be held in the usuall place at Westminster on the third Monday, which shall be in the moneth of January then next ensuing: And the Peers shall be enabled, and are enjoyned to meet in the old palace of Westminster
in the usual place there, on the third Monday of the said moneth of November, and they, or twelve, or more of them assembled, shall at, or before the last Monday next following the 10th day of September aforesaid, by virtue of this Act, without other Warrant, issue out Writs in the name of the King, his Heirs, or Successors, attested under the Hands and Seals of twelve, or more of the said Peers, to the several and respective She∣riffs of the several and respective Counties, Cities, and Bo∣roughs aforesaid, &c. and to all other Officers and Persons, to whom Writs have been used to be directed for the Electing of Knights, Citizens, Barons and Burgesses for the said Coun∣ties, Cities, Cinque-Ports, and Boroughs, to be and appear at the Parliament at Westminster aforesaid, to be held on the third Monday in January then next following; which Writs the Clerk of the Petti-bag, and other Clerks to whom the writing of Writs for Summons to the Parliament doth belong; Or whom the said Lords, or twelve or more of them shall ap∣point, shall make and prepare ready for signature of the said Lords, or any twelve, or more of them, upon pain to lose their places and Offices, &c. And the said Writs so issued forth, shall be of the same power as Writs or Summons to Parliament under the Great Seal of England have ever been, or ought to be: And the Messengers of the Chamber, or others who shall be appointed by the said Lords, or any twelve, or more of them, are speedily to deliver the said Writs to every per∣son and persons, Sheriffs, Officers, and others to whom the same shall be directed; which, if they or any of them fail to perform, they shall forfeit their places, and incur such other punishment, as by that, or any other ensuing Parliament shall be imposed on them. VI. That all and every the Peers shall make their appea∣rance, and assemble on the said third day of January, in such manner, and to such effect, and with such power, as if they had received Writs of Summons to Parliament under the Great Seal in the usual and accustomed manner: And in case the said Lords, or twelve or more of them, shall fail to issue forth such Writs; Or that the said Writers do not come to the said several Counties, Cities, &c. so that an Election be not thereupon made: And in case there be no Parliament assembled and held before the said 23d day of the said moneth of January, and so from time to time, and at all times hereafter, if the next Parli∣ment assembled here before the said 23d day of January,
then the Parliament shall assemble, and be held in the usual place at Westminster, in such manner, and by such means only as is here∣after Enacted in this present Act, and not otherwise, on the second Tuesday, which shall be in the month of March next after the said 23 day of January, at which the Peers shall assemble at the time and place afore-said, and shall be liable to such pains for not ap∣pearing and serving then and there in Parliament, as if he or they had been summoned by Writ under the Great Seal, and had not appeared and served, and to such other pains and censures, as by the rest of the Peers in Parl. assembled, they shall be adjudged unto. VII. That the several Sheriffs of their several Counties, Ci∣ties and Boroughs, &c. and the Chancellor, Masters and Scho∣lars of both, and every the Ʋniversities; the Mayor and Bailiffs of the Borough of Berwick upon Tweed, shall, at the several places to be held and appointed for their respective Counties, Universities, Cities and Boroughs, &c. next after the said 23. day of January, cause such Knight and Knights, Citizen, and Citizens, Burgess and Burgesses of their said Counties, Univer∣sities, Cities, Boroughs, &c. to be chosen by such persons, and in such manner, as if several and respective Writs of Summons to Parliament under the Great Seal of England had issued: And in case any of the Sheriffs, or the Masters and Scholars of the Universities, or the Mayor and Bailiffs of Berwick respectively, do not before ten of the clock in the Forenoon of the same day, wherein their several Courts and Places shall be held or ap∣pointed, begin and proceed on in choosing such Knight and Knights, Citizen or Citizens, Burgess or Burgesses, as aforesaid; Then the Free holders of every County, Master and Scholars of every University, and the Citizens and others having joyned in such Election, shall forthwith, without further warrant or di∣rection, proceed to the Election of such Knight or Knights, Ci∣tizen or Citizens, Burgess or Burgesses afore-said, in such manner as is usual in case of Writs of Summons issued and awarded. VIII. That the Sheriffs of their several and respective Coun∣ties, Constable of the Castle of Dover, and Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, or his Lieutenant for the time being respective∣ly, shall after the 23 day of January, and before the 8th of February next and immediately ensuing, send forth their Pre∣cepts to the several Cities and Boroughs within their several Counties, and likewise unto the Cinque-Ports, commanding them
respectively to make their choice of such Citizens, Barons, Burgess and Burgesses to serve in the said Parliament, at the time and place aforesaid: which said Cities, Cinque-Ports and Boroughs, shall respectively before the last day of the said moneth of February, make Election of such Citizens, &c. as if Writs of Summons of Parliament under the Great Seal of England had issued. And in case no such Precept shall come to the said Cities, &c. Or in case any Pre∣cept shall come, and no Election be made before the said last day of February, That then the said Citizens, Burges∣ses, and other persons, that ought to Elect and send Citi∣zens, &c. to the Parliament, shall on the first Tuesday in March next ensuing the said last day of Febrauary, make choice of such Citizen and Citizens, Barons, Burgess and Burgesses, as if a Writ of Summons under the Great Seal of England had issued, and Precepts thereupon issued to such Cities, Cinque-Ports, and Boroughs: Which Knights, Citizens, &c. shall appear and serve in Parliament, at the time and place afore∣said, and shall each be liable to such Pains and Censures for their not appearing, and serving then and there in Parliament, as if he or they had been Elected and Chosen, by virtue of a Writ under the Great Seal of England, and shall be subject to such further Pains and Censures as the rest of the Knights, Citizens, &c. assembled in the Commons House of Parlia∣ment, he or they shall be adjudged unto: And if the Sheriff and other persons to whom it appertaineth to make Returns and accept and receive such Returns of such Elections, as if Writs of Summons had issued, and been executed as hath been used and accustomed; and in default of making Return of such Elections, it shall be lawfull for the Free-holders, and such as have elected to make Return of Knights, Citizens, &c. by them elected, which shall be as effectual to all intents and purposes, as if the Sheriff or other Officers had received a Writ of Summons for a Parliament, aad had made such Re∣turns: and such Elections, Precepts, and Returns shall be had, made at such times, and by such persons, and in such manner as in the Act is expressed, any Writ, Proclamation, Edict, Act, Restraint, Inhibition, Order or Warrant to the contrary notwithstanding. And in case any person shall advise, frame, contrive, serve, or put in execution any such Writ, Proclamation, Edict, Act, Inhibition, Order or Warrant thereupon, he or they shall incur and sustain such
pains, penalties and forfeitures limited in and by the Statute of Provision and Praemunire of 16 R. 2. and shall be disabled du∣ring life, to sue, or implead any person in any action real or per∣sonal, or make any gift, grant, or conveyance, or other disposition of his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels which he hath to his own use, by act executed in his life time, or by his last will, or otherwise: Or to take any gift, conveyance, or legacy to his own use, or to take any benefit of any gift, conveyance, or legacy to his own use. IX. If any Sheriff, Constable of Dover Castle, Warden of the Cinque-Ports, shall not perform his duty enjoyned by the Act, he shall forfeit 1000 l. every County, Cinque-Port and Bo∣rough that shall not make election, shall incur the penalties following, viz. every County 1000 l. every City not a Coun∣ty 200 l. Cinque Port 100 l. the said forfeitures to be recovered at Westminster in the name of the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, Information, where∣in no essoin, protection, wager of Law shall be allowed, or any more than one imparlance. And if any person (after notice given that the action is prosecuted by virtue of this Act) shall procure such action to be stopped before judgment, by colour of any order, power, or authority, save of the Court where the action is brought: Or after judgment, shall cause or procure Ex∣ecution to be stayed by any order, power, or authority, save only by Writ of Error, or Attaint, the persons offending to incur the pains and penalties of the Statute of 16 R. 2. of Praemunire: and such action, suit, or information shall not be discontinued, by the death or removal of the Mayor, but it shall be lawfull for the Lord Mayor next succeeding in the said Office to pro∣secute every such action, &c. and the fift part of the forfeitures in the said Act, shall go to the use of the City of London, and the other four parts residue to be employed and disposed of, as by the Knights, Citizens, &c. in Parliament assembled shall be ap∣pointed. Provided, If the Free-holders, and those who have power to make Election, do proceed, making Election of the Knights, Citizens, &c. which Election shall be afterwards adjudged and declared void, then the Counties, Cities, &c. shall not incur the penalties in the Act, so as an Election in fact be made. X. No Parliament assembled shall be prorogued, or dissolved within fourty dayes after the time appointed for the meeting
thereof, without the consent of the King, his Heirs, &c. and both Houses of Parliament; and that neither Houses of Parliament, shall be adjourned within fifty dayes, unless it be with the free assent of both Houses. XI. That the Peers assembled in Parliament, may at any time during their assembly in Parliament, choose and declare such a person to be Speaker for the Peers, as they shall think fit: and likewise the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses assembled in Parliament, may declare one of themselves to be Speaker for the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, &c. as they shall think fit, who shall be perfect Speaker of either Houses accor∣dingly. XII. All Parliaments hereafter to be assembled by authority of this Act, and every member thereof, shall have all rights, pri∣viledges and immunities, as any Parliament summoned by Writ under the Great Seal of England, or any member thereof might, or ought to have, and the Members assembled in the House of Commons, shall have voices in Parliament before, and without taking the Oath of Supremacy, or Allegiance, or any of them. 1. Provided, That if the King, his Heirs, or Successors, shall during any Parliament to be assembled, award Commission, or Commissions to any person, or persons to take and receive the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, of all or any the members of the House of Commons, and any of the Members shall refuse to take the same; that such persons so refusing, shall be decla∣red no Member of that House, nor enjoy any voice there∣in. XIII. This Act shall be publickly read yearly at every Gene∣ral Sessions of the Peace to be held next after the Epiphany, and every Assize next ensuing, by the Clerk of the Peace, and Clerk of the Assizes for the time being, and if they, or either of them shall neglect or fail to do the same, they shall forfeit the summe of 100 l. I. Enacted, 17 Car. 1 Cap. That this present Parliament now assembled, shall not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament▪ to be passed for that purpose; Nor shall be at any time or times during the continuance thereof, prorogued, or ad∣journed, unless it be by Act of Parliament, to be passed for that purpose. II. That the House of Peers, shall not at any time or times during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by
themselves, or by their own order, and in like manner, that the House of Commons, shall not at any time or times, during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by themselves, or by their own Order. III. That all and every thing and things whatsoever, done, or to be done, for the adjourning, Proroguing, or dissolving of the present Parliament contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void and of none effect. Expired by the death of King Charles the First. Petitions. I. Enacted. 13. Car. 2. cap. 5. No person whatsoever from and after, 1. August, 1661. shall sollicite, labour, or procure the getting of hands, or other consent of any persons above the number of 20, or more, to any Petition, complaint, remon∣strance, declaration, or other addresses to the King, or both, or either Houses of Parliament for the alteration of matters established by Law in Church, or State, unlesse the matter thereof hath been first consented unto and ordered by three, or more Justices of the County, or by the major part of the grand Jury of the County, or of the division of the County, where the same matter shall arise, at their publick Assizes, or general quarter Sessions: Or if arising in London, by the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty in Common-councel As∣sembled. II. No person whatsoever, shall repair to his Majesty, or Par∣liament upon pretence of presenting any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, or Declaration, or other Addresses with exces∣sive Number of people, nor at any one time with above the Number of ten persons, upon pain of incurring a penalty, not ex∣ceeding 10 l. in money, or three moneths Imprisonment with∣out bail or mainprize, the offence to be presented at the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes, or quarter Sessions within six moneths after the offence committed. Provided, This Act not to extend, nor debar any person, or persons not exceeding the Number of nineteen to present any publick or private grievance or complaint to any Member, or Members of Parliament after his election, and during the continu∣ance of the Parliament, or to the King, for any remedy to be paid thereupon; nor to any Addresses whatsoever to the King, by all or any the Members of both, or either Houses of Parliament
during the sitting of the Parliament, but that they may enjoy their freedom of Addresse to the King, as heretofore hath been used. Poll-money for the Disbanding the Army. I. Enacted. 12. Car. 2. cap. 9. All and every person who at the time of the execution of this Act shall be of the several Ranks and degrees herein after-mentioned; shall pay the several sums of money in the Act appointed, viz. every Duke of England, Scotland and Ireland inhabiting and residing within the Kingdom, shall pay 100 l. every Marquesse 80 l. every Earl 60 l. a Viscount 50 l. a Barron 40 l. The eldest Son of a Duke being of the age of 21 years 60 l. of a Marquesse 50 l. of an Earl 40 l. of a Viscount 35 l. of a Barron 30 l. a Barronet of any of the three Kingdoms, or of Nova Scotia 30 l. a Knight of the Bath 30 l. a Knight Bachelor 20 l. a Serjeant at Law 20 l. every person of the degree of an Esquire above the age of 21 years 10 l. every Widow respective∣ly according to her Husbands degree a third part what her Hus∣band was to pay. II. Every Parson or Vicar possessed of a Parsonage or Vica∣ridge, or other estate of 100 l. 40 s. every Doctor of the civil or common Law 5 l. every Advocate 5 l. a Judge or Commissioner in the Court of Admiralty 20 l. a Proctor 5. l. a Doctor of Phy∣sick 10 l. III. The Lord Mayor of London 40 l. every Sheriff, Alder∣man, or who hath fined for Alderman 20 l. every Deputy Alderman 10 l. The Town clerk of London 20 l. every Com∣mon-councel-man 5 l. every person who hath been Master of the first twelve Companies, or fined for the same 10 l. every Warden hereof, or who hath fined 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. every one of the Livery of the first twelve Companies 5 l. every one who hath been Master of either the Companies of Diars, Brewers, Leather-sellars, Girdlers, Stationers, Woodmongers, Upholsters, Apothecaries, Pewterers, Tallow-chandlors, Armourers, or Sadlers 6 l. every person who hath been a Warden of either the said Companies 5 l. every person of the Livery 3 l. every person of the Yeomanry 1 l. every person who hath been Ma∣ster of the Company of Barber-chirurgions, White-bakers, Wax∣chandlers, Cutlers, Butchers, Carpenters, Painters, Cordwain∣ers, Coopers, Scriveners, Brown-bakers, Turners, or Inholders 3 l. every person who hath been Warden of the said Companies
2 l. every of the Livery 1 l. every person who hath been Master of the Companies of Founders, Curriers, Masons, Bricklayers, Joi∣ners, Plaisterers, Weavers, Fruiterers, Marblers, Imbroiderers, Poulterers, Cooks or Plummers 1 l. every person who hath been Warden 15 s. every of the Livery 10 s. every person who hath bin of the Livery of either Company of Bowyers, Fletchers, Black-Smiths, Botlemakers, Woolpackers, Farriers, Paviers, Lorriners, Glasiers, Clerks or Watermen 5 s. every Freeman of any Com∣pany within the City of London 1 s. he that keepeth one or more Hackney-coaches, and a pair of Horses 10 s. every Merchant Stranger, if a Knight 40 l. if below that degree and be a Merchant trading to Sea 10 l. If trading within the Land 5 l. every Alien born using Trade within any of the Cities or Corporations of the Kingdom being a Houskeeper 10 s. every English-Merchant resi∣ding in or about London, not Free of the City 10 l. every English Factor within the City 2 l. every person who hath been Alder∣man in any City within the Kingdom, if under the degree of a Knight or Squire 5 l. IV. Officers, viz. Prothonotary of the Kings-bench 100 l. the Clerk of the Crown of the Kings-bench 20 l. Custos Brevium of the said Court 40 l. Marshal of the Kings-bench 50 l. Master of the Rolls 60 l. Clerk of the Crown in the Court of Chancery 40 l. Clerk of the Rules in the Kings bench 10 l. Warden of the Fleet 50 l. Clerk of the Hannaper 40 l. Master of the Subpoena Office 40 l. Clerks of the Inrolment 10 l. a piece; every of the six Clerks in Chancery 40 l. every Cursitor of the same 10 l. Usher of the Court of Chancery 10 l. every Clerk of the Petty-bag 5 l. every Examiner of the said Court 10 l. Chief Register of the said Court 20 l. every under Register 10 l. every Clerk in any of the offices of the six Clerks in Chanoery 8 l. the Clerks of the Chappel of the Rols 3 l. a piece, every Prochonotary of the Court of common-Pleas 50 l. Custos Brevium of the said Court 80 l. eve∣ry Philezer of the said Courts 10 l. the Master of the fine Office 30 l. Clerk of the Warrants 10 l. Clerk of the Outlawries 20 l. Clerk of the Statutes 20 l. Clerk of the Treasury 10 l. Exigent∣er of the City of London 40 l. every other Exigenter 5 l. the Kings remembrancer of the Exchequer 40 l. the Lord Treasurers remembrancer 10 l. every Tellers of the said Courts 20 l. a piece, every Attorney of the Exchequer belonging to the office of Kings Remembrancer 10 l. every Attorney of the office of Pleas 10 l. the Remembrancer of the First-fruits 20 l. the Clerk of the Pipe 40 l. the forreign opposer 20 l. the Clerk of the Estreats 20 l.
the Clerk of the Pleas in the said Courts 30 l. the Auditor of the Receipt of the Exchequer 40 l. Clerk of the Pell in the Re∣ceipt 30 l. Usher of the Court of Exchequer 20 l. every Attorney of the Office of Pleas in the Court of Exchequer 10 l. every Audi∣tor of the said Court 10 l. Clerk of the Court of the Dutchy of Lancaster 10 l. every Auditor of the said Court 10 l. every Clerk of the Privy Seal 10 l. every Clerk of the Signet 10 l. every At∣torney at Law in any of the Courts at Westminster, or within the Courts of Law or Equity, within the Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, Durham, and of the Marches of Wales 3 l. every Person in any office, or place under his Majesty (except his Houshold servants in ordinary) 10 l. The Lieutenant of the Tower of London 50 l. every one that can dispend in Lands, Leases, Monies, Stock, or otherwise of his own proper estate 100 l. per ann. 40 s. and so for a greater and lesser Estate, eve∣ry single person above the age of 16 years 12 d. every other person not rated, nor receiving alms, above 16 years of age 6 d. V. All the several persons of the several qualities and degrees set down in the Act, shall pay their several proportions, in man∣ner following, viz. within the City of London and ten miles of the same within twelve days after proclamation made of the Act, and in all places else within twelve dayes after proclamation made in the accustomed places of the several Cities and Coun∣ties: And the Act appointed special Commissioners for every County, City, &c. and a very large clause, as in the Act (for which vide the Act at large) of the respective powers and autho∣rities given to the Commissioners, in the Act named for the ma∣naging and assessing of the several moneys payable by vertue of the Act. VI. And if any person shall disswade another from pay∣ing the Rates assessed, or shall corruptly consent that any person shall be rated below the proportion appointed, and the offence be proved by the Oaths of two Witnesses before any three of the Commissioners who are impowered to administer the same, shall by the Commissioners or three of them, in their se∣veral Counties where the offence is done, be committed to the common Goal of the said County (except they be Peers of the Realm) there to remain till delivered by the Justices of Assize, or Justices of the Peace at the general Quarter-Sessions; and all persons who are chargeable with the Receipt of any the said moneys, who are negligent in the execution of their respective
duties, shall be liable to such punishments as the Parliament think fit. VII. If any person within the City of London, or within fif∣teen miles of the same, shall before the time limited, pay to Sir Richard Brown Baronet, Sir John Langham Baronet, Sir Wil∣liam Wheeler Knight, Sir William Vincent Knight, Thomas Rich Esquire, and Chamberlain of the City of London, or any two of them Treasurers, and shall receive from any two of them a Certificate, or Acquittance of the receipt of such moneys, the said persons severally shall thereby be discharged of, or for the said sums, and do acceptable service to the King and King∣dom. VIII. If any person shall lend the sum of 100 l. or more, and before 1. August 1660. pay the same to such as are authori∣zed to receive the moneys charged upon the respective Inhabi∣tants of the City of London, they shall do acceptable service, and be secured by this Act for the repaiment thereof, with in∣terest at 6 l. per cent. for a year till the same be paid, and the moneys so lent shall be paid by the Treasurers before-named out of the moneys to be received by them, and the acquittance of the persons so receiving the said moneys, shall be a good discharge to the said Treasurers for such money and inte∣rest. IX. The rates taxed upon the Lords, shall be collected by a Collector nominated by the Peers, who shall pay over the said sums to the Treasurers. Provided, No person of what degree or quality soever shall be doubly taxed, but every person shall pay the greater proportion he or she is charged withall. X. All and every the sum and sums of money to be levied and raised by this Act, shall by the Treasurers be imployed and dis∣posed for and towards the paying of the arrears, disbanding and discharging the respective Forces of this Kingdom, by Land and Sea, who were in pay the 10. day of June, 1660. and to no other use or purpose whatsoever; and accompt shall be given by the Treasurers, to this, or to the next, or any other succeeding Par∣liament. Provided, If any Peer shall be assessed higher than his Degree or Rank expressed in the Act; they shall be as∣sessed by George Duke of Albemarle, John Marquesse of Win∣chester, Henry Marquesse of Dorchester, Algarnoon Earl of Northumberland, William Lord Paget, Philip Lord Whar∣ton,
John Lord Hunsdon, Henry Lord Arundel, or any five of them. An Additional Act. I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. cap. 10. Every Housholder being Ma∣ster, or Masters of a Family, shall within two days after demand made by any Assessor, or other Officer appointed, deliver to the Officer a true List of all persons above the age of 16 years, as shall inhabit or reside in their respective Families, with their Names, Sirnames, Degrees and Qualities, and upon default hereof, be∣ing convicted before two of the Commissioners, shall forfeit 5 l. and for every person omitted out of the List 10 s. to be levied by distresse, &c. II. The Commissioners in the respective Counties, Cities, &c. shall at, or before 20 October next, return into the Exchequer true Duplicates of all sums of monies taxed and assessed by the Act, with the names of the Collectors of the same. III. The Commissioners named for London and the County of Middlesex, shall after the receipt of every sum paid to them by the Collectors, Immediately pay the same to the Treasurers, whose acquittances shall be a sufficient discharge. IV. If any person having any estate in one County or more, shall pay in one County or place what he can be charged with∣all as his greatest proportion for his degree, or whole estate in the several Counties, &c. and producing an acquittance or cer∣tificate thereof, the Commissioners are to discharge such per∣sons in all Counties and places, where he shall be taxed and assessed. V. Any three of the Commissioners may issue out their War∣rants under hand and seal, to the Constable, or other Officer to distrain the Goods and Chattels of all and every person, and of every Tenant for, and in behalf of the Land-lord, who shall refuse or neglect to pay the respective sums assessed upon him. Provided, The Act not to extend to any Peer of the Realm, but the Steward of every the Peers, or other servant shall deliver in the Lists of their Family, to such persons as are appointed by the Act. Another Additional Act. I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. cap. 27. All persons of the several Degrees in the Act before mentioned, shall pay their several sums therein appointed (although they be the Kings servants, and all persons Ecclesiastical and Temporal, and Bodies Poli∣tick, shall pay for their Estates real and personal forty shillings
for a 100 l. per ann. and so proportionable, but not for Estates under 5 l. per ann. II. The Commissioners in the first Act named, or three of them, are impowred to appoint two or more persons in all Parishes, or places, to review the Rates there formerly made, and if they find a neglect in the former Assessors, of any under-rated, or omitted, they shall assess them to the full value for their degrees or estates; or it shall be in the discretion of the Commissioners to make new Rates, and to return the same at such places and times, as they, or three of them shall appoint. III. Every Attorney, or sworn Clerk in the Office of the Pipe, and every Officer of the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer shall pay 20 nobles a piece. IV. Every Barrister, and other person that hath subscribed to any writing, and be therein entituled Esquire, or hath been so named in any Commission or Act before the sitting of this Parliament, shall pay as a reputed Esquire within the said Act. V. Every person who hath, or shall pay fully for his Degree, the same exceeding the proportion of his estate real and per∣sonal, shall by certificate thereof from the Commissioners or two of them, be discharged from any further paiment, so that the estate, and the value and place be therein expressed; and where any have paid, or shall in any other County upon the like certificate, he shall be discharged for so much therein men∣tioned. VI. The Commissioners, or three of them, are to determine all abuses of Assessors, or Collectors imployed in this, or the for∣mer Acts, and to impose Fines upon them, who upon infor∣mation by the Oath of two Witnesses, shall offend after 20 De∣cember 1660. in their imployments, the fine not to exceed 5 l. for one offence; and they have power to command Consta∣bles or Tithing-men to levy the same by distress upon the per∣sons refusing, delivering the overplus to the parties, reaso∣nable charges deducted, the said Fines to be imployed to the same purposes, as the moneys raised by the former Acts; and if no distress can be taken by the Officers appointed by the former Act, or Acts, the Commissioners or three of them, have power to cause every person where no distresse is, to be committed to the next common Goal, there to remain till satisfaction be made of the money charged upon him, by this, or the former Acts.
VII. If any person be sued for any act done in execution of this, or of the former Acts, he may plead the general issue, and give the special matter in evidence, and upon a Nonsuit, or ver∣dict against the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall recover double costs. The Act not to extend to any Peer, in point of Assessment, Imprisonment, Distress and otherwise, and diverse other persons particularly in the Act named, are added to the Peers named in the first Act for the Assessing of the Peers, who, or any five of them, have power to Assess and Levy all such Summes of money as shall be assessed according to this, and the former Act, upon such Peers as have not paid proportionably according to their estate: and several other persons are particularly named in the Act Commissioners for several Precincts, to use the same powers as if they were named in either of the former Acts. Poor. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 9. For the relief of poor and maimed Souldiers, and Marriners, who served the late King, and his Majesty that now is, in the late Wars, and the relief of the Wi∣dows and Orphans, of such as have dyed or been slain in the said service. That after the first day of this Parliament, every parish within England, Wales, Berwick, shall be charged weekly to the payment of such summe of money as formerly hath been Rated by the Statute of 43 Eliz. Cap. 3. Concerning Marriners and Soul∣diers, and further such summe of money (over and besides the same) as the Justices of the Peace in their next Quarter-Sessions, or any other Quarter-Sessions to be hereafter, shall be adjudged meet to be assessed upon every Parish, or Chapelry, so as the Ad∣ditional summe exceed not 2 s. 6 d. nor be under the summe of 3 d. each week for each such Parish or Chapelry, to be levyed in manner and form, and under such penalties as by the said Statute of Queen Eliz. is Enacted, to be paid to the Treasurers for the maimed Souldiers, appointed by Justices of the Peace of the County, or Liberty, by virtue of this, and the Statute aforesaid; which the Treasurers shall issue out, and accompt for, in such manner, and under such penalties, as by the said Statute is de∣clared.
II. Every Officer, Souldier, or Marriner, maimed, indigent, aged, or disabled in body for work, in the service of the late King, or the King that now is, during the late Wars, who are de∣stitute of competent subsistance, who hath continued faithfull to his trust, and not deserted the same, by taking up Arms against the late King, or the King that now is, shall repair to the place where he was last setled before he took up Arms, with a Cer∣tificate of his service and hurts received, under the hand of his Captain, or other Commissionated Officer, and repair to the two next Justices of the County where his setling was, and the said Justices upon examination of the truth of such Certifi∣cate, shall by Warrant to the Treasurer assign him relief untill the next quarter Sessions to be holden for that County, or Li∣berty, at which time a yearly pention shall be by the Justices, or the major part of them, granted, in manner and form, and with power of revocation or alteration, as by the said Statute is declared and directed; and if the Captain or Commissionated Officer who is to make the Certificate be dead, the said two Ju∣stices of the Peace at the request of the party, and by persons of credit, shall give such relief, as in case of examination as afore∣said. III. Touching the Widows and Orphants of such as dyed, or suffered death in the service aforesaid (over and above the re∣lief they shall gain by their work and labour, &c. the Treasu∣rers for the maimed Souldiers shall allow such further relief from time to time as shall be adjudged meet by the two next Justices of the peace of such County, and the said relief shall be paid out of the surplusage of such stock of maintenance as shall remain in the hands of the Treasurers after such pensions and payment of them made, of which surplusage and allowance made to such Widows, and Orphans, the Treasurers shall give accompt, and the same distribute in such manner as by the Justices shall be dire∣cted. IV. The Justices of the Peace in every County, or Liberty, shall forthwith call all such Treasurers, high Constables, Con∣stables, and other persons which have formerly been intrusted with the receipt, collecting of such monies charged upon any Parish by the said recited Act (whereof no accompt hath been given) their Executors and Administrators to a strict accompt, concerning such levies and collections made, and such monies as they shall find remain in the custodies of such persons, to order forthwith to be paid for the intents and purposes
aforesaid, and no other, to the Treasurer by the Act appoin∣ted. 1. Provided, No pension to be given, or assigned by authority of this Act, shall exceed to any one person the sum of 20 l. per annum. This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 12. Whereas poor people are not restrained by reason of some defect in Law, from going from one Parish to another, and therefore do settle themselves in Parishes where there is best stock; and when they have con∣sumed it, then go to another, and at last become Rogues and Vagabonds, that it may be lawfull upon any complaint made by the Church-Wardens, or Overseers of the Poor of any Parish, to any Justice of Peace within fourty dayes after such persons coming to settle in any Tenement under the yearly value of 10 l. for any two Justices, whereof one to be of the Quorum, where such persons that are likely to be chargeable to the Parish shall come to inhabit, by Warrant to remove such persons, &c. to such Parish where he or they were last setled, either as a native Housholder, Sojourner, Apprentice, or Servant for the space of fourty dayes at the least, unless they give sufficient se∣curity for the discharge of the Parish, to be allowed by the Ju∣stices. 1. Provided, Such persons who think themselves agrieved, by the Judgment of such two Justices, may appeal to the Justices of the Peace of the County, at the next quarter-Sessions, who are required to do Justice according to the merits of their cause. Provided, It may be lawfull for any person to go into any County, Parish, or place to work in time of Harvest, or at any time to work at another work, so as they carry with him or them a Certificate from the Minister of the Parish, one of the Church-wardens and one of the Overseers of the Poor, that they have a dwelling house wherein they inhabit, and hath left Wife and Children, or some of them there, and is declared an Inhabitant there; and in such case if the person shall not return to the place aforesaid, when his work is done: or shall fail sick or impotent while they are in the said work, it shall not be accounted a settlement in the cases aforesaid, but it may be lawfull for two Justices to convey the said person, or persons to the place of his or their habitation under the pains in the Act prescribed, and if such person shall
refuse to go, and shall not remain in the parish where he ought to be setled, it shall be lawfull for the Justices of the Peace where the offence shall be committed, to send such person to the house of Correction, there to be punished as a Vagabond, or to a publick Work-house, to be employed in work, or la∣bour. II. From henceforth there shall be one or more Corporation or Corporations, Work-house, or Work-houses within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Boroughs and places within the Counties of Middlesex and Surry, lying within the parishes in the weekly Bills of Mortality, consisting of a Pre∣sident, Deputy-President and Treasurer. And the Lord May∣or shall be President of the Corporation, Work-house, or Work-houses within the said City. The Aldermen Assistants, and fifty two other Citizens to be chosen by the Common-Council of the City: They may elect a Deputy-President, and other Officers to execute the powers appointed by the Act. And a President, Treasurer, and Assistants shall be appointed for the City of Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, by the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal, for the Corporation or Work-houses within the same. For the places within the weekly Bills of Mortality, in the Counties of Middlesex and Surry, a Pre∣sident, Deputy and Treasurers shall be chosen by the Justices of the Peace of the said Counties, of the most able Inhabitants and Free-holders for a Corporation and Work-houses in the same places. III. The Presidents, Treasurers and Assistants aforesaid, shall be Bodies Politick and Corporate for ever, and shall have a perpetual succession, and may sue, implead, and be im∣pleaded by the name of President and Governors of the poor of the respective places in all Courts and places of Judicature within the Kingdome of England, Wales, &c. and may with∣out licence in Mortmain purchase Lands, &c. not exceeding the yearly value of 3000 l. of the Gift or Device of any per∣son or persons; any Goods, Chattels, summes of monies whatsoever, to the uses and intents in the Act after appointed. And every Corporation may keep Courts for the purposes ex∣pressed in the Act, at such times as shall be appointed by the respective Presidents, or their Deputies; and they make Court-Seals for the use of the respective Corporati∣ons.
IV. It shall be lawfull for the respective Presidents and Go∣vernors of the said Corporations, or two of them, or for any per∣son appointed by two of them, from time to time to apprehend any Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, or idle or disorderly persons, within the said Cities, Liberties, Places, &c. and cause them to be kept and set on work, in the several and re∣spective Corporations or Work-houses; and the major part of the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter-Sessions may signi∣fie to the Kings Privy-Council, the names of such Rogues, &c. as they shall think fit to be transported to the English Planta∣tions; and upon the approbation of the Privy Councel, signi∣fied to the Justices of the Peace, which persons shall be tran∣sported, it shall be lawfull for two or more of the Justices of the Peace to transport, or cause them to be transported, from time to time, during the space of three years next ensuing this Session of Parliament, to any of the English Plantations beyond the Seas, there to be disposed of in the usuall way of servants for a term not exceeding seven years. V. If the Presidents and Governors of any of the said Corpora∣tions, shall certifie under their Seals, their want and de∣fect either of a present Stock for the foundation of the work, or for a supply of the future; and what summe they shall think fit for the same, to the Common-Councel of the City of London, and the Burgesses and Justices of the Peace in their Quarter-Sessions at Westminster, or to the Justices of the respective Counties of Middlesex and Surry, in their Quarter-Sessions: the Common-Councel, Burgesses of Westminster and Justi∣ces of the Peace in the several Counties in their Quarter-Sessions, are required from time to time to set down and ascertain such competent summes of money for the purposes aforesaid, not exceeding one years Rate, usually set upon any person, for, and toward the relief of the Poor, and the same to proportion out of the severall Wards, Precincts, Counties, Divisions, Hundreds and Parishes as they shall think fit, and thereupon the Alder∣men, Deputies, Common-Councel in the City of London, the Burgesses and Justices of the Peace of Westminster and the Liberties thereof, the Justices of the Peace of the Coun∣ties of Middlesex and Surrey, are required equally and in∣differently, according to the proportions for the severall Wards, Precincts, and Parishes, to Tax and Rate the severall Inhabitants within the said respective Wards, Precincts, and
Parishes, with which tax, if any person, &c. shall find him or them agrieved, he or they may make complaint to the Justices of the Peace at their next open Sessions, who shall take final order therein, as by Law is provided. VI. It shall be lawfull for any Alderman of London, or his Deputy, Burgesses, and Justices of Peace of the City of Westmin∣ster, or any two Justices of the Peace of the Counties of Middle∣sex and Surrey, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to au∣thorize the Churchwardens, or Overseers of the Poor, within the places and Parishes aforesaid, to receive, demand, of every person and persons, such sums of money as shall be assessed upon them, by virtue of the taxations, and constitutions aforesaid, and for default of payment, within ten days after demand, or notice left at the dwelling house or lodging of every person assessed, to levy the same by distress and sale of his goods, rendring the overplus to the party distrained. VII. All Stocks raised for the relief and imployment of the poor in the City of London, and the Liberties thereof, which were in the hands of a Corporation appointed in the City, for that purpose before the 29 of September, 1660. or at any time since, with all the arrears of monies formerly allotted to that ser∣vice, or Legacies given to that end, shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Corporation, or work-houses established by this Act, and they, or their Deputies shall collect, gather, receive and recover the said monies, and Legacies; with which arrears the Corporati∣ons hereby established, shall be invested, and interessed for the ex∣ecution of the service hereby enjoyned, and those who now have, or had any of the said Stocks in their hands, shall be ac∣comptable to the said Treasurer, or to those who shall be ap∣pointed by the Corporation for the same. Provided, There shall be allowance made of monies laid out by the former Corpo∣ration for the relief of the said poor, or the carrying on of the said service. VIII. The respective Presidents, and Governors, or seven of them, may make, and constitute, Orders and By-laws for the bet∣ter relieving, regulating and setting the poor to work; apprehen∣ding and punishing Rogues and Vagabonds, within the Cities, Li∣berties, and places aforesaid. Provided, The said By-laws be pre∣sented to the Justices of the Peace at their quarter-Sessions, and confirmed by the Order of the said Court. IX. The Presidents, and Governors, of any of the said Cor∣porations, or work-houses, or four of them, may choose and
entertain all such Officers as shall be needfull to be imployed in and about the premisses, and to remove them as they see cause, and to make such reasonable allowances unto them out of the Stock belonging to the work-house, as they shall think fit. X. Whereas Lords of Mannors do not keep Court-Leets every year; Enacted, In case any Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman shall dye or go out of the parish; any two Justi∣ces of the Peace, may swear a new Constable, Headborough, &c. till the Lord shall hold a Court; or till the quarter-Sessions; who shall approve of such Officers, or appoint others, and if any Officer continue above a year in his Office, the Justices in their quarter-Sessions may discharge such Officer, and put other in his place, till the Lord of the mannor shall hold a Court. XI. Any Justice of Peace, shall reward any person, or persons who shall apprehend any Rogue, Vagabond, or Sturdy Beggar, by granting to such person, &c. a warrant under his hand and Seal to the Constable, &c. of the parish where such Rogue, &c. passed through unapprehended, requiring him to pay to such person or persons 2 s. for every Rogue, &c. which shall be so apprehended; and if such Constable, &c. refuse or neglect to pay the same, the Justices of the Peace shall proceed against such Constable, &c. according to the Statute of 39 Eliz. and 1 of King James, and compell him to pay such money as he hath forfeited by the said Statute, and to allow the said 2 s. out of the said for∣feiture, and also reasonable allowance for loss of time as they shall think fit. XII. Whereas Constables, &c. are at great charges in reliev∣ing, conveying with passes, and carrying Rogues, &c. to houses of correction, and work-houses aforesaid; All Constables, &c. so out of purse, together with the Church-Wardens and Over∣seers of the poor, and other Inhabitants of the parish, may make a Rate, and Tax all the occupiers of Lands and Inhabi∣tants chargeable by the Statute of 43 Eliz. within the parish; which rate confirmed under the Hands and Seals of two Justi∣ces of the Peace, the Constable by Warrant, under the Hand of two Justices may levy by distress and Sale of such persons goods as shall refuse to pay the same, rendring to the party the over∣plus. XIII. Whereas the putative Fathers and Mothers of Bastard-Children, leave the said Children upon the charge of the pa∣rish
where they are born; and run away out of the parish, and County, although they have estates sufficient to discharge the parish. The Church-Wardens and Overseers for the poor of such parish where such child shall be born, may seize and take so much of the Goods and Chattels, and of the Rents and profits of the Lands, of such reputative Fathers, or Mothers, as shall be ordered by two Justices of the Peace, for and towards the discharge of the parish, for the bringing up, and providing for such Bastard-child; and by order of the Sessions, the Church-Wardens and Overseers may dispose of the said Goods by Sale, or of so much thereof, as the Court shall think fit: And so much of the said Rents and profits of their Lands for the purposes a∣foresaid. XIV. The Poor, Needy, Impotent, and Lame persons, within every Township, or Village, within the Counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, Northumberland, Bishoprick of Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland, shall after the passing of this Act be maintained, provided for, and set in work, within the several Townships, or Villages where they shall inhabit, or where they were last setled; and there shall be yearly appointed according to the directions of the Act, of 43 Eliz. two or more Overseers of the poor, within every the said Townships, or Vil∣lages, who shall from time to time perform and execute all powers and authorities for the necessary relief of the poor, within the said Townships, or Villages; and lose, forfeit, and suffer all such pains and penalties for not performance thereof, as is limited and appointed, in, and by the said Act, of 43 Eliz. And the Justices of the Peace, within the said respective Counties, shall have and enjoy the like powers and authorities to raise and levy monies, and to do, and execute all and every such other Act within every Township, and Village, within the respective Coun∣ties, where they are Justices, as is appointed for them to do and execute within any parish, or parishes, in, and by the said Act of 43 Eliz. under such pains and penalties, for not performance of their duties, to be levied and disposed of, as by the said Act is ex∣pressed. XV. It shall be lawfull for the Justices of the Peace, in any the Counties of England, Wales, or the major part of them, in their Quarter-Sessions, to Transport, or cause to be Transported, such Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, as shall be convicted, and adjudged to be incorrigible to any of the English Plantati∣ons beyond the Seas.
1. Provided, This Act shall not extend to be, or expounded or taken, to the prejudice, or infringement of any the Franchises, Rights, Liberties, or Priviledges heretofore granted by any Kings or Queens of this Realm, his Majesties Predecessors, to the Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of St Peter in West∣minster. 2. This Act as to all the matters therein contained (excepting what relates to the Corporations constituted thereby) shall extend and be in force till the 29th of May, 1665. and the end of the first Session of the next Parliament then next ensuing, and no longer. Post-Office. I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. cap. 34. There shall be from hence∣forth one general Letter-Office in London, from whence all Letters may be sent through England, Scotland or Ireland, or other the Kings Dominions, or into any Countreys beyond the Seas, at which Office all answers may be received; the Master of such Office shall be appointed by the King, his Heirs, &c. by Letters-patents under the Great Seal, and be called the Kings Post-Master General, and he and his Agents shall have the receiving, ordering, dispatching, sending post, and delivering of all Letters and Pacquets whatsoever, which shall be sent to and from all and every the parts and places of England, &c. where he shall settle Posts, or running Messengers for that pur∣pose▪ Except such as shall be sent by Coaches, Carriers, Carts, Wagons and Pack-Horses, and shall be carried along with their Coaches, Carts, Wagons, &c. and except Letters of Merchants and Masters which shall be sent by any Ships or Ves∣sels of Merchandize, or by any other persons imployed for the Carriage of such Letters: and except Letters to be sent by any friend in their wayes of journey or travel, or any messenger on purpose, for or concerning the private affairs of any per∣son: and except Messengers who carry and re-carry Commis∣sions, Writs, Processe or returns thereof issuing out of any Court. II. Such Post-Master General constituted as above-said, and his Deputies, and no other person whatsoever, shall pro∣vide Horses and furniture to let to hire unto all through-Posts and persons riding in post by Commission or without, to
and from all and every the parts and places of England, Scotland and Ireland, where any Posts shall be settled. III. The Post-master and his Deputies shall take for portage of Letters and furnishing of horses for through-posts, and per∣sons riding post, according to the rates hereafter mentioned, not exceeding the same, viz. For every Letter not exceeding a sheet, for 80 miles 2 d. not exceeding two sheets 4 d. and for every pacquet proportionably to the said rates, the like for the port of every pacquet of Writs, Deeds, or other things 8 d. for an ounce weight, for every Letter not exceeding a sheet, for above 80 miles 3 d. not exceeding two sheets 6 d. and proportionably at those rates for all pacquets of Letters, for pacquets of any other things 12 d. per ounce: and for every Letter not exceeding a sheet to Berwick, or from thence to London 3 d. and not exceed∣ing two sheets 6 d. and proportionably to those rates for pac∣quets of Letters; and for pacquets of bigger bulk 18 d. per ounce, for Letters or pacquets within 40 miles from Berwick, or other places where such Letters shall be received 2 d. not exceeding two sheets 4 d. and so proportionably for pacquets of Letters, and for other pacquets 8 d. per ounce; for Letters not exceeding one sheet further distance 4 d. and if a double Letter 8 d. and proportionably for pacquets of Letters, and for other pacquets 12 d. per ounce: for Letters not exceeding one sheet from Eng∣land to Dublin in Ireland, and from thence to England 6 d. not exceeding two sheets 12 d. and so proportionably for pacquets of Letters and for other pacquets 2 s. per ounce: for every single sheet within 40 miles from Dublin, and other places where they shall be received 2 d. not exceeding two sheets 4 d. and so pro∣portionably for pacquets of Letters, and for other pacquets 8 d. per ounce; and if above 40 miles 4 d. and not exceed two sheets 8 d. and so proportionably for Letters, and for greater parcels 12 d. per ounce. For forreign Letters and pacquets, rated either by the Letter or the ounce, viz. Morlaix, St Maloes, Caen, New-haven, and places of like di∣stance, port paid to Roven is for a single Letter 6 d. double 12 d. treble 1 s. 6 d. ounce 1 s 6 d. Hamburgh, Collen, Frank-fort, port paid to Antwerp is for a single Letter 8 d. double 1 s. 4 d. treble 2 s. ounce 2 s. Venice, Geneva, Legorn, Rome, Naples, Messina and other parts of Italy by way of Venice, Franct pro Mantua, Letter single 9 d. double 1 s. 6 d. treble 2 s. 3 d. ounce 2 s. 8 d.
Marcelia, Smerna, Constantinople, Aleppo, and all parts of Turkey, port paid to Marcelia, Letter single 12 d. double 2 s. treble 2 s. 9 d. ounce 3 s. 9 d. Geneva, Legorn, Rome, and other parts of Italy, by way of Lions, Franct pro Lions, Letter single 12 d. double 2 s. treble 2 s. 9 d. ounce 3 s. 9. Of Letters sent outwards, to Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nantz, Orleans, Byon, Towers, and places of like distance, port paid to Paris, Letter single 9 d. double 1 s. 6 d. treble 2 s. 3 d. ounce 2 s. and for Letters brought into England from the same places, Letter single 12 d. double 2 s. treble 3 s. ounce 4 s. Noremberg, Bremen, Dantzick, Lubeck, Lipswick, and other pla∣ces of like distance, post paid to Hamburgh, Letter single 12 d. double 2 s. treble 3 s. ounce 4 s and for Letters brought from the said places to England, Letter single 8 d. double 1 s. 4 d. treble 2 s. ounce 2 s. From Calais, Diep, Bulleign, Abbeville, Amiens, St Omers, Montrel, brought into England, Letter single 4 d. double 8 d. treble 12 d. ounce 12 d. Roven, brought single Letter 6 d. double 12 d. treble 1 s. 6 d. ounce 1 s. 6 d. Paris, single 9 d. double 1 s. 6 d. treble 2 s 3 d. ounce 2 s. Dunkirk, Ostend, Lisle, Ypre, Courtry, Gaunt, Bruxels, Bridges, Ant∣werp, and other parts of Flanders, Letter single 8 d. double 1 s. 4 d. treble 2 s. ounce 2 s. Sluce, Flushing, Middleburgh, Amsterdam, Roterdam, Delf, Hague, and from other parts of Holland and Zealand, Letter single 8 d. double 1 s. 4 d. treble 2 s. ounce 2 s. IV. All Merchants Accompts not above a sheet, all Bils of Exchange, Invoices and Bils of Lading shall be allowed with∣out rate in the price of the Letters, and so the covers of Letters not exceeding the 4th part of a sheet of paper sent to Marseilles, Venice or Legorn, to be sent forward to Turkey, shall be allowed to passe without rate or paiment, and according to the same rates for the port of Letters, pacquets, or parcels to or from any the parts or places beyond the Seas, where Posts have not been heretofore settled, and may hereafter be settled by the Post-master General for the time being, his Executors, or Assigns; and such Post-master may take for each Horse hire, for every English mile riding 3 d. and 4 d. for the Guide for every Stage.
V. All Letters and pacquets that by any Master of a Ship or Vessel, or any of his company, or passenger shall be brought to any Port-Town within the Kings Dominions (other than Letters as are before excepted, or may be sent by Carriers, or a Friend) shall by such Master or Passenger be forthwith delivered to the Deputy or Deputies only of the Post-Master for the said Port-Town, and by him or them to be sent to the general Post-Office to be delivered as is directed. VI. No person or persons whatsoever, other than such Post-ma∣ster General constituted as aforesaid, and his Deputies or Assigns, shall carry, re-carry, and deliver Letters for hire, or imploy any Foot-post, Hors-post, Coach-post or Pacquet-boat, for the conveying or re-carrying of any Letters by Sea or Land within the Kings Do∣minions; or provide Horses and Furniture for through-Posts, or riding in Post with a Guide and Horn, upon pain of forfeiture of 5 l. for every offence against this Act, and of 100 l. for every weeks time that any Offender shall imploy, maintain and continue any such Foot-post, Hors-post, &c. which Forfeitures shall be sued for, and recovered by Action of Debt, &c in any of the Kings Courts of Record, wherein no wager of Law, &c. shall be allowed; One moiety to the King, &c the other to the Informer who will sue for the same. 1. Provided, If any Post-master doth nor, or cannot furnish any person riding Post with sufficient Horses within one hour after demand, such person or persons are at liberty to provide themselves as conveniently as they can; and the persons who shall furnish such Horses, shall not be liable to the forfeitures in the Act. 2. If through default or neglect of the Post-master, any person riding Post shall fail of being furnished with sufficient Horse and Horses after demand as aforesaid, the Post-master General shall forfeit 5 l. one moiety to the King, &c. the other to the Informer, to be recovered pro ut above, &c. Nothing in the Act shall be understood to prohibit the carrying or re-carrying of any Letters or Pacquets to, or from any Town or place, or to or from the next respective Post-road or Stage appointed for the purpose; but every person shall have liberty to send such persons as they shall think fit to carry the said Letters or pacquets without any forfeiture or penalty therefore, any thing in the Act notwithstanding.
Printing and Printers. I. Enacted, 14. Car. 2. cap. 33. No person whatsoever shall presume to print, or cause to be printed within the Kings Dominions, or beyond the Seas, any heretical, se∣ditious, schismatical or offensive Books or Pamphlets, where∣in any Doctrine shall be maintained, which is contrary to the Christian Faith, or the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of ENGLAND, or may tend to the scandal of the Church, or the Government or Governors of the Church, State or Com∣monwealth, or any particular person; Nor import, sell, dispose, or procure to be published, or to be bound, stitched, or sowed together. II. No person, &c. shall hereafter print, or cause to be printed any Book or Pamphlet, unless the same with all the Titles, Epi∣stles, Preambles, Dedications, and other matters thereto annexed be entred first in the Book of the Register of the Company of Stationers London (except Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, appointed to be printed by warrant under the Kings Sign Ma∣nual, or one of his principal Secretaries) and unlesse the same Book, &c. and the matters thereunto annexed be first lawfully Licensed to be printed by such persons as shall be appointed to License the same, viz. All Books concerning the Common Laws, by the allowance of the Lord Chancellor, &c. Lord Chief Ju∣stices, and Lord Chief Baron, one or more of them, or by one or more of their appointments. All Books of History concer∣ning the state of this Realm, or concerning the affairs of State, by the principal Secretaries, one or more of them; or by their, or one of their appointments. Books of Honour and Arms by the Earl Marshal, or by his appointment; Or by the three Kings of Arms, Garter, Clarenceux, and Norroy, or two of them, Garter to be one: All Books Imprinted, or Re∣printed. Provided; The Chancellors of the Universities shall License such Books as are to be Imprinted or Re-printed within the limits of the University, not medling with Books of the Common Law, or matters of State which belong to any particular persons without their consent.
III. Every person and persons who shall be authorized to Licence the imprinting of Books, shall have a written Copy thereof; which said Copy shall be delivered to the Printer or Owner for the imprinting thereof; and after the imprinting thereof, shall entirely be returned to the Licencer to be kept in the publick Registries of the Lord Bishop of Canter. or London; or in the Office of the Chancellor, or Vice-Chancellor of either Ʋni∣versities; or with the Lord Keeper, Chief-Justices, Chief-Baron, Principal Secretaries, Earl Marshal, or King of Arms, of all such Books Licenced by them respectively. If it be an English Book to be Licensed, two Copies shall be delivered to the Licencer, one whereof shall be delivered back to the Printer or Owner, the other to be reserved as afore-said, to the end the Licencer may be secured, that it shall not be altered without his privity; And upon the Copy to be licensed, the Licencer shall testifie under his Hand, that there is not any thing therein contain∣ed which is contrary to the Christian Faith; or any of the matters, &c. in the first Clause of the Act contained; which Licence or Approbation shall be printed in the beginning of the Book, &c. IV. Every Merchant and other person, &c. who shall here∣after import any Book or Books from any parts beyond the Seas into this Realm, shall import the same in the Port of London on∣ly, and not elsewhere without the Licence of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London, or one of them; and shall before the said Book or Books be delivered forth, or out of their hands, or exposed to sale, give a true Catalogue in writing of all and every such Book or Books, to the said Bishops, or one of them; and no Merchant or other person, &c. who shall import any Book or Books into the port afore-said, shall open any dry-fats, parcels, or other fardels of Books; nor shall any searcher, or other Officer of the Custom-house, upon pain of losse of his place, suffer the same to passe, or to be delivered out of his hands or custody, before the said Bishops, or one of them, shall have appointed some Scholar, or learned Man, and one or more of the Company of Stationers be present at the opening to view the same; and if any heretical, seditious, scandalous, schismatical Book, or any part thereof, printed in English be found, they shall forthwith be brought to the said Bishops, or one of them, to the end the person, &c. who importeth, or cause the same to be im∣ported, be proceeded against, as an offender against the Act, and such further course taken against such offensive Book or
Books, as by the said Bishops shall be thought fit for the suppres∣sing of the same. V. No person shall within this Kingdom, or elsewhere im∣print, or cause to be imprinted, import, or cause to be imported into this Kingdom, or out of any the Kings Dominions, or any other parts beyond the Seas, any Books, Forms of blank Bils, or Indentures for any his Majesties Islands printed beyond the Seas, or elsewhere, which any person by virtue of any Letters-Patents granted, or by force of any entry thereof, duly made or to be made in the Register-book of the Company of Stationers; or other Register afore-said, shall have the right, priviledge or authority solely to print without the consent of the owners of such Books, Copies, &c. nor shall bind, stitch, or put to sale any such Books, Form or Forms, without the like consent upon pain of forfeiture of the same; and upon further forfeiture of 6 s. 8 d. for every such Book, Form, &c. one moiety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to the owner, if he shall sue for the same within six moneths after such imprinting, importing, binding, &c. and for default of such suit by the owner, &c. the same moiety to the use of such person, as shall within one year next after such Offence committed sue for the same, to be recovered by action of Debt, &c. in any the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed to the De∣fendant. VI. Every person, &c. that shall hereafter print, or cause to be printed any Book, Ballad, Chart, or Pourtracture shall thereunto, or thereon set his own name, or shall declare the name of the Author thereof, if he be required by the Licencer, and by, and for whom such Books, Ballad, Chart, Pourtracture, &c. is or shall be printed, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Books, Ballads, Charts and Pourtractures, and other things print∣ed contrary to the tenor of the Act: And the Presses, Letters, and instrcments for printing thereof to be defaced and made unserviceable; and no person shall print, forge, put, or coun∣terfeit, in or upon any Book, or Pamphlet, the name or mark of any other person, who shall have lawfull priviledge, or allow∣ance of sole printing the same, without consent of the party so priviledged, upon pain of losse of all such Books, Pamphlets, &c. and shall be further proceeded against, as an offender against this Act. VII. No Haberdasher of small-wares, Ironmonger, Chandler, Shop-keeper, or other person, not being licenced by the Bishop
of the Diocesse, nor having been seven years Apprentice to the Trade of a Bookseller, Printer or Bookbinder; nor being a Free∣man of London by Patrimonial right, as Son of a Bookseller, Print∣er or Bookbinder, nor being a Member of the Company of Sta∣tioners, shall within London, or any other Market-Town, or else∣where, receive, take, or buy, to barter, sell again, change or do away any Bibles, Testaments, Psalm Books, Common-prayer Books, Primmers, Abcees, Licenced Almanacks, Grammars, School-Books, or other Book or Books, upon pain of forfeiture of the same. VIII. No Merchant, Bookseller, or other person, shall Imprint, or cause to be Imprinted beyond the Seas, or Import, or knowingly assist, or consent to the Importation into this Kingdom, any Eng∣lish Book, or Books, or part of any Book which the greater part thereof is, or shall be English, or of the Eng∣lish Tongue; whether the same have been formerly printed, or not, upon pain of forfeiture of such Books, &c. and no Alien, or Forreigner shall bring in, or are suffered to sell here within the Realm, any Book or Books printed beyond the Seas, in any Lan∣guage whatsoever, either by himself, or his Factor, except only such as be Free-printers, or Stationers of London, without the special Licence of the Bishops afore-said, or one of them, upon pain of forfeiture of such Books, so Imprinted, or sold contrary to the intent of the Act. IX. No person, &c. within the City of London, or elswhere, shall Erect, or cause to be Erected, any Press or Printing-house, Vault, Cellar or Room for a Printing-house, or place to print in, unless he or they, who Erect such Presses, &c. shall first give notice to the Master or Wardens of the Company of Stationers, of the ere∣cting of the same; and no Joyner, Carpenter, or other person shall make any Printing-presse; no Smith shall forge any Iron-work for a Printing-presse; No Founder shall cast any Letters which may be used for Printing, for any person whatsoever, nor shall any person, &c. bring or cause to be brought from beyond the Seas, any Letters Founded or Cast, nor buy any such Letters for Printing, Printing-presses, or other materials, belonging to Print∣ing, unless he or they shall acquaint the Masters and Wardens of the Company of Stationers, or some of them, for whom the same Presses, Iron-works, or Letters, are to be made, Forged, Cast, or Imported, upon pain every offender, for such offence shall forfeit  l. one moiety to the King, &c. the other to the use of such per∣sons, as shall sue for the same.
X. For the time to come, no man shall be admitted to be a Master-Printer, till they who are now actual Master-Printers, shall be by death or otherwise reduced to the number of twen∣ty, and from thenceforth the number of twenty shall be conti∣nued, and no more, beside the Kings Printers, and the Printers allowed for the Universities; and but four Master-Founders of Letters for Printers. The which Master-Printers and Master-Founders shall be appointed and allowed by the Bishops of Canterbury and London for the time being: And in case of death, or of forfeiture, or avoydance of any of their places and privi∣ledges to Print by virtue of that Act, for any offence contrary to the same, or otherwise, the said Bishops for the time being, or one of them, shall and may appoint other persons to succeed and supply the places of such Master-Printers or Founders. And every person allowed, or permitted to have a Press or Print∣ing-house before such allowance obtained, shall be bound with Surties to the King in the Kings Bench, or before Justices of Assize, or Justices of the Peace in their Quarter-Sessions, in 300 pound, not to Print, or suffer to be Imprinted in his house or Press, any Books whatsoever, but such as shall be lawfully Licensed. XI. None of the Master-Printers to be allowed, shall keep a∣bove two Printing-presses at once, unless he hath been Master or upper Warden of the Company, who are allowed to keep three Presses and no more, unless for some great and special occasion for the publick, he have for a time leave of the said Bishops or one of them, to have the use of one or more above the number afore∣said, as their Lordships shall think fit. XII. No Printer or Printers (except the Kings Printers) not Founder, &c. of Letters for Printing, shall take or retain greater number of Apprentices than as followeth, viz. Every Master-Printer, and Master-Founder of Letters for Printing, if he hath been Master or Warden of his Company, three Apprentices and no more: Every Master and Founder that hath been of the Li∣very of his Company, two Apprentices: Every Master-Printer and Founder of the Yeomanry of his Company, one Apprentice; and no more, neither by Co-partnership, nor any other way whatsoever. Nor shall it be lawfull for any Master-Printer, or Founder, when one Apprentice is run away, or put away, to take another in his room, unless the Name of him or them so gone away, be raced out of the Hall-Book, and never admitted a∣gain.
XIII. The severall Master-printers and Founders to be al∣lowed, are to take care that all Journeymen-printers, and Jour∣neymen-Founders of Letters for Printing, who are lawfully Free of the respective Mysteries, be set on work and employ∣ed in their respective Trades; and if any such, being of honest and good behaviour, and able in his Trade, do want employ∣ment, he shall repair to the said Master-printers and Founders respectively for the time being, who shall receive him, or them into work, if he hath not a Journeyman already, although the said Masters respectively with their Apprentices, be able with∣out the help of such Journeyman, to discharge his own work; upon the pain of every such Master so refusing to receive such Journeyman of 5. pound, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, &c. in any Court of Record, &c. wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed, one moity to the King, &c. the other to the Infor∣mer who will sue for the same within six moneths after the of∣fence committed; and if any Journeyman shall refuse such em∣ployment, being offered by any Master-printer, or Founder, &c. or neglect it when they have undertaken it, shall suffer three moneths Imprisonment: and no Master-printer, or Master-Founder of Letters, shall employ to work either at the Case or Press, or otherwise about his Printing, any person, than only such as are Englishmen, and Freemen, or Apprentices to the said Trade of Printing, or Founding of Letters for Printing, re∣spectively. XIV. One or more of the Messengers of his Majesties Cham∣ber, by Warrant under his Majesties Sign Manual, or under the Hands of his principall Secretaries of State, or the Master and Wardens of the Company of Stationers, with a Constable with them, shall have power to search all houses and Shops, where they shall know, or suspect any Books, or Papers to be Printed, Bound, or Stitched, especially Printing-houses, Book-sellers Shops and Warehouses, and Book binders houses and Shops, to view what is there Imprinting, Binding, &c. and to examine whether the same be Licenced; and demand a sight of the Licence; and if the Book imprinting, &c. shall not be Licenced, to seize upon so much thereof as shall be found im∣printed, together with the Offenders, and to bring them before a Justice of the Peace, who may commit such Offenders to Prison till they shall be tryed, convicted or acquited for the said offences; and if the Searchers find any Papers, or Books, or part of Books unlicenced, which they suspect to contain
matters contrary to the Doctrine, or Discipline of the Church of England, or against the State or Government, then to seize up∣on such Book, &c. and to bring the same to the said Bishops for the time being, or one of them; or the Secretaries of State, or one of them, who shall take course for suppressing the same. XV. All Printers of Books, Founders of Letters for Printing, and every other person, &c. working in the said Trades, who after 10 of June 1662. shall offend against the Act, or any clause or Article therein, and shall be convicted by verdict, confession or otherwise, shall for the first offence be disabled from exer∣cising his respective Trade for three years, for the second offence shall for ever be disabled the said use and mystery of his said Trade and Mystery, and receive such further punishment by fine, imprisonment, or other corporal punishment not extending to life, as the Justices of the Courts of Kings Bench, or Justices of Oy∣er and Terminer, or Justices of Assize in their Circuits, or Justices of Peace in their Quarter-Sessions shall think fit to be inflicted up∣on them. XVI. Every Printer shall reserve three Copies of the best and largest Paper of every Book new Printed, or Re-printed with Additions, and shall before publick venting of the said Book, bring them to the Master of the Company of Stationers, and deli∣ver them to him, one whereof shall be delivered to the Keeper of his Majesties Library, the other to be sent to the Vice-Chancellors of the two Universities respectively, for the use of the publick Libraries. 1. Provided, Nothing in the Act shall extend to the prejudi∣cing of any the just rights and priviledges of the two Universities of this Realm, touching the Licensing, or Printing of Books in the Universities. 2. No search shall be made in the Houses of any of the Peers of the Realm, or any other person, &c. not being free of, or using any of the Trades in the Act mentioned, but by special Warrant from the King, or hand of one of the principal Secretaries, or for other Books, than such as are in Printing, or shall be Printed after 10 June 1662. 3. Not to extend to prohibit any Bookseller, who hath served seven years and is a Freeman of the Company of Stationers, from importing into the Realm any Books ready bound, not formerly prohibited, which have been Printed ten years before the impor∣tation.
4. Not to be construed to prohibit any persons to sell Books or Papers, who have sold Books or Papers within Westminster-Hall, Palace of Westminster, or in any Shop within twenty yards of the great Gate of Westminster-Hall, before 20 Novemb. 1661, but that they may sell Books and Papers as they did before 1661, within the places aforesaid, but not elsewhere. 5. Not to extend to prejudice the just rights, or priviledges granted to his Majesty, or any his Royal Predecessors, to any per∣son under his Great Seal or otherwise, but that they may use such rights, &c. according to their respective grants. 6. Not to extend to prohibit John Streater Stationer, from Printing Books, or Papers, but that he may still follow the Art and Mystery of Printing, as if this Act had never been made. 7. Not to extend to restrain the keeping and using of a Printing-press in the City of York, so as all Books of Divinity there Printed, be first Licenced by the Bishop of York, or such as he shall appoint, and all other Books respectively to whom the Licensing thereof shall appertain: and so as no Bibles be there Printed, nor other Book whereof the original Copy is be∣longing to the Company of Stationers of London, or any Member thereof. This Act to continue in force two years, to commence from the 10. of June 1662. and no longer. Purveyance. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24. From henceforth no mo∣nies or other thing shall be taken, rated, or levyed for any Pro∣vision, Carryages, or Purveyance, for the King, his Heirs, &c. and no person by any authority under the Great Seal, or otherwise, by colour of purveying for the King, Queen, or any their Children for the time being, or for his, or any of their Houshold, shall take any Timber, Fuel, Cattel, Corn, Grain, Mault, Hay, Straw, Victual, Cart, or Carriage, or any other thing from any Subject, without his full consent first obtained, without menace or inforcement; nor shall summon, warn, use, or require any Subject to find Oxen, Horses, Cattel, Carts, Ploughs, Wains, or other Carriages for the King, his Heirs or Successors, or of the Queen, or
their Children, for carrying their Goods respectively without full and free consent of the Owners, &c. II. No pre-emption shall be allowed to the King, his Heirs, &c. or persons above mentioned of the Royal Family, in Mar∣ket or out of Market, but it shall be for ever hereafter free for all Subjects to dispose of his Goods as he pleaseth; any pretence of making provision of Victual, or Carriages as aforesaid, or any pretence of pre-emption in their behalfs notwithstanding: and if any person shall make any Purveyance, or impress any Car∣riages, or other things, by colour of any such authority as be∣fore is mentioned, contrary to the Act, the Justices of the Peace, two, or one of them next adjourning, and the Constable of the places where such shall happen, at the request of the party grie∣ved, shall commit the party offending to the Goal, untill the next Sessions, there to be indicted, and proceeded against for the same; and the party grieved, shall have his Action against the Offender, and therein shall recover trebble damages, and treb∣ble costs; and if any person shall procure any Action at Law, grounded upon the Act, to be delayed before Judgement, or procure execution thereupon, to be stayed after judgement, by any order, except by Writ of Error, Attaint, or order of such Court where the cause depends, the person so offending, shall incur the danger of pains of a Praemunire, made by the Act of 16. R. 2. 1. Provided, This Act shall not prejudice the King in his Rights, Titles, or duties out, in, or to, or out of any Tin in the Stannaries of Devon and Cornwal, not extend to prejudice the antient duties of Batlerage and prizage of Wines, but they are to continue as before the making of the Act. III. There shall be paid to the King, His Heirs and Succes∣sors for ever hereafter, in recompence of Purveyance, the Rates and Imposition of Excise, mentioned in the Act, for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries, viz. to the purpose, Title, Ex∣cise.
Quakers. I. Enacted, 13, & 14. Car. 2. Cap. 1. If any person or per∣sons, who maintain that the taking of an Oath, in any case what∣soever (although before a lawfull Magistrate) is altogether un∣lawfull, and contrary to the Word of God, after the 24. of March 1661. shall wilfully, and obstinately refuse to take an Oath; where, by the Laws of the Realm, he or she be bound to take the same, being lawfully and duly tendred, or endeavour to per∣swade any other person, to whom such Oath is duly tendred, to refuse and forbear the taking of the same: Or go about to maintain, that the taking of an Oath, in any case whatsoever, is unlawfull; and if the persons called Quakers shall after the said 24. of March depart from the places of their several habitations, to assemble themselves, to the number of five, or more, of the age of sixteen years, at any one time in any place, under pretence of Joyning in a Religious Worship, not authorized by the Laws of the Realm; In every such cases, the person offending, being thereof convicted of twelve men, or his own confession, shall for the first offence, lose and forfeit to the King, &c. 5 l. for the second offence thereof, being convicted 10 l. to be levyed by distress, and sale of the parties goods, by Warrant from the parties before whom they shall be convicted; and for want of distress, or not payment of the penalty, to be committed to the common Goal, or house of Correction for three moneths; for the second offence, for six moneths, there to be kept at hard labour; for the third offence, having been twice convicted before, he or she shall abjure the Realm, or otherwise, the King, &c. may cause him or them, to be transported to any the Kings Plantations be∣yond the Seas. II. All Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Goal-delivery, and Justices of the Peace, in their open and general Sessions, are to enquire, hear, and determine all and every the said offences within the limits of their Commissions, and make process for the execution of the same, as they may do against any person In∣dicted before them of Trespass, and thereof lawfully convicted. III. Any Justice of Peace, Mayor, or Chief Officer of any Corporation, may within their several Jurisdictions commit
to the Common Goal, and bind over with Sureties to the Quar∣ter-Sessions, any persons offending in the Premisses in order to their Conviction. 1. Provided, If any person, &c. after such Conviction take such Oath, or Oaths, for which he or she stands committed, and also give security, that he for the time to come, shall forbear to meet at any such unlawfull assembly as aforesaid, from thence∣forth such person, &c. shall be discharged from all the penalties aforesaid. 2. All the Lords of the Parliament, for every third offence committed against the Tenor of the Act, shall be tryed by their Peers and not otherwise. Restitution. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 25. Whereas, the Advowsons, Re∣ctories Impropriate, Tithes, and Gleab-Lands, of many of the Kings Subjects, were by the pretended power of the Long-Par∣liament, but were by them appointed for the pretended Delin∣quency of the said Subjects, without any consideration, taken from them, as well for the Augmentation of certain Viccaridges, as for other matters in the preamble of this Act mentioned: It is Enacted. I. That all Grants, Feoffments, Bargains, Sales, Releases, Confirmations, and other Conveyances and Assurances in Law, had or made by any such pretended Delinquents, their Heirs, Executors, &c. or by any person having any estate or interest in Law or Equity in trust for them; or having any estate or in∣terest, Joyntly or in common with them, or in reversion or re∣mainder, of any such Advowsons, Rectories Impropriate, Gleab-Lands, Tithes, &c. as part, or in full of their compositions, for such pretended Delinquency, and all securities touching the same, are adjudged trivial and void in Law, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, saving to all others (other than the said Trustees and their Heirs) all such rights, &c. as hath accrued to them before 19. of May 1662. II. All Tenants, Leassees and Occupiers of all such Ad∣vowsons, Rectories Impropriate, Gleab-Lands, Tithes, &c. so Granted upon such Trusts, for the uses aforesaid, shall pay all such Rents, as hereafter shall grow due, to such
persons only unto whom the right and interest of, in, and to the same Advowsons, Rectories Impropriate, Gleab-Lands, Tithes, &c. before the said Conveyances or Assurances did, or should of right belong or appertain. III. Whereas the said pretended Conveyances so made, were some of them of Estates in Fee-simple, and some of them long terms for years, made to the Trustees, who re-devised the same under yearly Rents appointed for augmentation of Vicaridges and maintenance of Ministers; Since which time many of the said Rectories and Lands, &c. have been absolutely sold, and the Re-devises granted and assigned by the Owners thereof, for the benefit of the Purchasors: Enacted, That the said Purchasors, their Heirs, &c. shall pay, and the said former Owners shall have, hold, and enjoy the said Rents and Sums of Monies so reserved for the augmentation of Vicaridges, &c. and shall have and take the like remedies by Distress or Debt for the recovery thereof, as the said Trustees who re-devised the same, might, or ought to have had. Repeal. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 29. That the Act of Parliament, Entituled, An Act for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Stafford of High Treason; and all and every Clause, Article, and Thing therein contained, is Repealed, Revoked, and Reversed: And all proceedings in Parliament relating to the said Attainder, be wholly Cancelled and taken off the File, or otherwise defaced and obliterated, to the end, the same may not be made visible in after-ages, to the prejudice of any person whatsoever. This Act not to extend to the questioning of any persons how∣soever concerned, or who had any hand in the disorderly pro∣curing the said Act of Attainder. Enacted, Anno 13 Car. 2. Cap. 2. That an Act of Parliament, made in the 16th year of the Reign of the late King Charles the First, Entituled, An Act for disabling all persons in Holy Orders to Exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority; and every Clause, Matter, or Thing therein be Repealed, Annulled, and made void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
Revenue. I. Enacted, 14. Car. 2. cap. 10. After 25. of March, 1662. every dwelling, and other House and Edifice, and all Lodgings and Chambers in the Inns of Court, Inns of Chancery, Colledges and other Societies that now are, or shall be hereafter erected with∣in England, Wales, Berwick (other than what are excepted,) shall be chargeable, and are charged, with an annual paiment to the King, his Heirs, &c. for every Fire-hearth and Stove within every such House, Edifice, Chamber, Lodging 2 s. by the year, to be paid yearly and every year, at the Feast of St Mi∣chael, and the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary, by equal por∣tions. II. Every Owner, Occupier of such House, Edifice, Lodgings and Chambers, shall respectively within six dayes after notice given him by the Constable or Officer within whose Precinct the said House, Edifice, Chambers or Lodgings shall be; or by the Treasurers, or Officers of Inns of Court, Chancery, or other re∣spective Colledges, deliver unto the Constable, or other such Officers as afore-said, a true and just accompt in writing, of all the said Hearths and Stoves which are within their respective Houses, Edifices, Lodgings and Chambers. III. The said Constables, and other respective Officers, shall by the last day of May 1662. require the several Oc∣cupiers of every such House, Edifice, Lodging and Cham∣ber to deliver them accompts in writing under their hands, of all such Hearths and Stoves in their respective Houses, Edifices, &c. and upon receipt of the same, or upon de∣fault of such accompt, in case there be no Occupiers, then within six dayes after notice fixt to the door, requi∣ring such accompts to be made, the Constable, or other Officers respectively, shall enter the houses in the day time, and compare the accompts, and see if truly made, or not, and if no accompt be given, to take information by their own view of all such Hearths, &c. upon pain every Con∣stable, or Officer, who shall neglect the same, shall
forfeit 5 l. and for every false return, shall lose for every hearth false returned 40 s. IV. The several Constables and other Officers, who are to take the accompt aforesaid, of the hearths within their particular li∣mits, shall at the next Quarter-sessions after the last of May, deliver all such accompts in writing as they shall receive, reform or take by their own view, to the Justices of the Peace of their respective Quarter-sessions for the Counties, with a true note of the names of all such persons as shall refuse or neglect to give them an ac∣compt of the hearths and stoves within their respective Houses, Edifices, &c. V. The Justices of the Peace of the several Counties, shall cause all the accompts of the several respective hearths, &c. within their Counties, to be enrolled by the Clerk of the Peace of the re∣spective Counties, and a duplicate thereof in parchment under their hands and seals of three or more of them, to be returned into the Court of Exchequer within one moneth after the accompt delivered to them, upon pain every Clerk of the Peace offending therein to forfeit to the King, his Heirs, &c. 200 l. for the first moneth, for the second moneth to forfeit his place and office, and the same to become void; the forfeiture and penalty to be reco∣vered as the Act directs. VI. The respective Treasurers and other Officers of the Inns of Courts, Chancery and other Societies, Constables and other Officers within their respective limits, shall every half year within six dayes after the said duty shall grow due, collect, ga∣ther and receive the same from the several Occupiers of the said Hearths and Stoves, and upon paiment thereof, shall give ac∣quittances to the parties, which shall be a full discharge to such as shall pay the same, against the King, his Heirs, &c. so as no person who hath such acquittance shall be sued, or put to any charge; But if such person who is charged to pay any sum as aforesaid, shall refuse, or neglect to pay the same; every such person who is to collect the same, may levy the same by distresse and sale of the persons Goods so refusing, or neglecting, re∣turning the overplus, after the charges first deducted to the Owner. VII. The Constables and other Officers who are to collect the said duties, shall within 20 dayes after the said duties shall be due to the King, &c. pay to the High Constables of the seve∣ral Hundreds, all such moneys as they shall receive for the afore-said duties, receiving an acquittance, and deducting 2 d. in
every pound for their pains in collecting the same, and shall then in writing under their Hands deliver to the High Constables the names of the persons of whom they receive the same; and the names of such who ought to have paid the same where no distress can be had. VIII. The High Constables of the several Hundreds, and respe∣ctive limits, shall within ten days next after their several receipts from the Constables and other Officers, pay to the High Sheriffs of every County, all such moneys they shall so receive, deducting 1 d. in the pound for their pains, and shall then deliver to the said High Sheriffs, the several returns which they received from the Constables and other Officers: and the Sheriffs shall within thirty dayes after they shall receive the moneys, return the same, with the names of such who are defaulters, into the Court of Exchequer, deducting 4 d. out of every 20 s. 3 d. to be for his own use, and 1 d. to be paid to the Clerk of the Peace for his pains. IX. The High Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for London, and so much of Middlesex as lies within the Bils of Mortality, (other than the Inns of Court and Chancery) and the High She∣riff of Surrey for the Borough of Southwark, and all other She∣riffs of any other City or Town, being a County of it self, are made Collectors within their respective limits; and in those pla∣ces only the Constables and other Officers shall deliver to the Sheriffs of the said Cities and places Duplicates of the same ac∣compts of Hearths and Stoves: And the said Sheriffs of the Ci∣ties and places last before-mentioned, are to levy the said Duties, and give Acquittances as fully and amply as in this Act is to be done by any other Collectors; and the said Sheriffs shall with∣in fourty dayes after the Duties shall be payable, make paiment of the Moneys levied into the Court of Exchequer, with a List of the Names of such as shall make default, where no distresse can be found; and they shall deduct 4 d. out of the pound for their pains, 3 d. for themselves, and 1 d. for the Clerk of the Peace. X. The Kings Officers of Exchequer shall discharge all per∣sons who paid their Duties without taking any Fees, and shall issue out Processe to levy the said Duty upon such persons who shall fail in paiment thereof where no Distresse can be found. XI. The Revenue arising by the Act (except what is allowed to Officers) shall be duly and constantly paid and answered into the
Exchequer, and shall not be particularly charged, or chargeable, either before or after, with any Gift, Grant or Pension whatsoe∣ver. And all Grants of such Pensions, and every Non obstante there∣in contained shall be void; and all persons to whom such Grants are passed, shall be made Accomptants to the King, his Heirs, &c. and shall pay back all sums of money received by pretence of such Grant, and the Court of Exchequer shall issue out Processe accordingly. XII. If any Action, Bill, Suit or Information shall be commen∣ced or prosecuted against any person, &c. for what he or they shall do in pursuance of the Act, such person may plead Not guilty, and give the Act and special matter in Evidence; and the Plaintiff shall be Non-suit, or suffer a Discontinuance; or Verdict passe against him, or Judgment against him upon a Demurrer, the Defendant shall recover treble costs. XIII. Where any increase or decrease of Hearths or Stoves shall hereafter happen, an accompt in writing shall be made thereof, as before is directed: To be first taken, returned and enrolled, and a Duplicate thereof sent into the Exchequer, and from thence∣forth the Owner or Occupier of such House, where such decrease is, shall be discharged proportionably without any further plead∣ing in the Exchequer: And no person shall be charged, or brought to accompt for any Duty or Arrerages raised by the Act, unlesse the Suit be commenced within two years, and be brought to Judgment within four years, and the Duty levied within five years after the same shall grow due. XIV. No person who by reason of poverty, or smalness of estate is exempted from usual Taxes and Contributions towards the Church and poor, shall be charged or chargeable with any the Duties imposed by this Act: And if the Churchwardens and O∣verseers of the Poor, and the Minister or two of them, whereof the Minister to be one, shall under their hands certifie that the house wherein the party dwelleth, is not of greater value than 20 s. per ann. upon improved Rent, and that the inhabitant hath, useth, or occupieth any Lands of their own or others of the value of 20 s. per ann. upon such Certificate made to the two next Justices of the Peace, and allowed by them, the person on whose behalf the Cer∣tificate is made, shall not be returned by the Constable or Officer; and the house for that year is discharged from all the Duties im∣posed by the Act. XV. If any person or persons, Bodies politick or corporate, shall at any time hereafter procure, or accept from the King, his Heirs,
&c. any Pension, Gift or Grant for years, life, or other estate, or any summe of money out of the Revenue arising by this Act, such person or persons, &c. shall forfeit double the value of such Pen∣sion, Gift, Grant, &c. one moiety to the use of the Poor of the Pa∣rish where the offenders be or inhabit, to be recovered by the Churchwardens; the other moiety to him who will sue for the same by action of Debt, Plaint or Information. 1. Provided, The Act not to extend to charge any Blowing-house, Stamp, Furnace, or Kiln, or private Oven within any the houses hereby charged; Nor any Hearth or Stove within the Scite of any Hospital or Almshouse for the relief of poor people, whose Endowment and Revenue doth not extend to 100 l. per annum. 2. That the paiments and Duties charged by the Act, shall be charged onely on the Occupier for the time being, whereto such Hearth or Stove shall be belonging, his Executors, &c. and not on the Land-lord who let, or devised the same, his Heirs, &c. 3. No person, &c. indebted for any the Duties aforesaid, shall be priviledged as a Debtor to the King, his Heirs, &c. to sue any per∣son in the Court of Exchequer, or to assign any debt to the King, his Heirs, &c. towards satisfaction of the same. Sewers. I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. cap. 8. That Commissions of Sewers, shall and may at any time before the 23th day of October next, and not after, be directed according to the manner and form expressed in the Act of 23 of King H. the 8th to such persons as the Lord Chancellor, the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, the Chancellor. of the Dutchy of Lancaster, the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and the Justices of either Bench, or three of them, whereof the Chancellor to be one, shall nominate and ap∣point which Commissioners shall have power to do and execute all matters and things as fully in all respects as any Commissioners of Sewers at any time heretofore named by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the two Chief Justices, or three of them had, or might have by vertue of the said Statute, or any other Law now in force.
1. Provided, This Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to repeal, or make void any clause, article, sentence or power expressed or comprized in the said Statute made in the 23 year of King Henry the 8th concerning Sewers, from and af∣ter the 23 of October next ensuing. 2. It is declared, that his Majesties assent to this Act, doth not, nor shall determine this present Session of Parliament. Ship-money, Ships and Shipping. I. Enacted. 17. Car. 1. cap. 14 That the charge imposed up∣on the Subject, for the providing and furnishing of Ships, com∣monly called Ship-money; and the Extrajudicial opinions of the Justices and Barrons, and the Writs and every of them, and the said greater opinion of the said Justices and Barrons, and the Judgment given against John Hampden Esquire, for the paiment of Ship-money, were and are contrary to, and against the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, the right of property, the Liberty of the Subjects, former resolutions of Parliament, and the Petition of Right made in the third year of his Majesties Reign that now is. II. That all and every the particulars prayed and desired in the said Petition of Right, shall from henceforth be put in Execution, and shall be firmly and strictly holden and observed, as in the said Petition they are prayed and expressed. III. That all and every the Records, and Remembrances of all and every the said Judgments against the said John Hampden, and all and every the proceedings whatsoever upon, or by co∣lour of any the said Writs, called Ship-writs, and all and every the dependants upon every of them, shall be adjudged to all intents, constructions, and purposes, to be utterly void; and that all and every the said Judgments, Inrolments, Entries, Pro∣ceedings and Dependants of what kind soever shall be vacated and cancelled, in such manner and form, as Records use to be vacated. I. Enacted. 12 Car. 2. cap. 18. That from and after 1. December, 1660. and thence forward, no goods, or commodi∣ties whatsoever shall be imported into, or exported out of any Lands, Islands, Plantations or Territories to his Majesty be∣longing, or be in the possession of his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, in Asia, Africa, or America, in any other Ship, or Ships, Vessel, or Vessels whatsoever, but in such Ships, or Vessels as do truly, and without fraud belong only to the peo∣ple of England, or Ireland, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; Or are of the built of and belonging to any of the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Territories, as the Proprietors, and right owners thereof, and whereof the Master, and three fourths of the Mariners, at least, are English, upon penalty of forfeiture of all the Goods and Commodities which shall be Imported into, or Exported out of any the afore∣said places, with all the Guns, Tackle, Ammunition and Ap∣parel, one third part thereof to his Majesty, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors, one third part to the Governor of such Lands, Planta∣tions, Islands, or Territories, where such default shall be com∣mitted, in case the Ship, or Goods be there seized, and the other third part to him that shall seize, inform, or sue for the same in any Court of Record, by Bill, Information, Plaint, or Acti∣on, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or wager of Law shall be allowed. II. All Admirals, and other Commanders at Sea of any the Ships of War, or other Ships having Commission from his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, are authorized and required to seize, and bring in as Prize all such Ships, or Vessels as shall have offended contrary to the clause afore-said, and deliver them to the Court of Admiralty, to be proceeded against, and in case of Condemnation, one moiety of their forfeitures shall be to the use of such Admirals, or Commanders, and their Companies, to be divided amongst them, according to the Orders of the Sea in case of Ships taken prize, and the other moiety to the use of his Majesty, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors. III. No Alien, or person not born within the Allegiance of the King, his Heirs or Successors, or naturalized, or made a free Denizon, shall from and after 1 February, 1661. exercise the Trade, or Occupation of a Merchant, or Factor, in any the places afore-said, upon the pain and forfeiture of all his Goods and Chattels, which are in his possession; one third part to his Majesty, &c. one third part to the Governor of the place, where such person shall so offend, and one third part to him, or them that shall inform, or sue for the same, in any of his Majesties Courts in the Plantation where such offence shall be committed, and the Governor shall before their entrance into
their Government, take an Oath to do their utmost, that the be∣forementioned clauses, and all the matters therein contained, shall be punctually, and bona fide observed according to the true intent and meaning thereof. IV. No Goods, or Commodities whatsoever, of the growth, production, or manufacture of Africa, Asia, or America, or any part thereof, shall be Imported into England, Ireland or Wales, Islands Guernsey, Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in any other Ship or Ships, Vessel, or Vessels whatsoever, but in such as do truly without fraud belong to the people of England or Ireland, Dominions of Wales, or Town of Berwick, or of the Lands, Islands, or Plantations, or Territories in Asia, Africa or America to his Majesty be∣longing, as the Proprietors and right owners thereof, and where∣of the Master and three fourths at the least of the Merchants are English, under the forfeiture of all such Goods and Com∣modities, and the Ship in which they were Imported, with all the Tackle, Furniture, Ammunition, &c. one moiety to the King, his Heirs and Successors; the other moiety to him or them who shall seize in forme, or sue for the same in any Court of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Information, or Action, wherein no Session, Protection or Wager of Law shall be al∣lowed. V. That where any ease, Abatement or Priviledges is given in the Book of Rates, to Goods or Commodities Imported or Ex∣ported in any English built shipping (which is intended of the places in the precedent clause) it is always to be understood, that the Master and three fourths of the Marriners of the said Ships, at least be English; and that the true intent and meaning is, that they should be such, during the whole voyage, unlesse in case of sicknesse, death, or being taken prisoners in the voyage, to be proved by the Oath of the Master, or other chief Officer of such Ships. VI. No Goods or Commodities of the growth, production or Manufacture of Muscovy, or of any the Countreys, Domi∣nions or Territories of the Duke of Muscovy or Russia, as also that no Masts, Timber or Boards, forreign Salt, Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Hemp, Flax, Raisons, Figgs, Prunes, Olive, Oyles, Corn or Grain, Sugar, Pot-Ashes, Wines, Vinegar, Aqua∣vitae, or Brandy-wines, from and after the 1. of April, 1661. shall be imported into England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick, in any Ships or Vessels, but in such as do truly, and without
fraud belong to the people thereof, or some of them, as the true owners thereof, whereof the Master and 3 fourths at least of the Mariners are English. VII. No Currants, or Commodities of the growth, product∣ion or Manufacture of any the Countreys, Dominions, or Terirtories to the Othoman or Turkish Emperour belonging, from and after the 1 September, 1661. shall be imported into any of the places, in the clause precedent mentioned, in any Ship, or Vessel, but which is of English built, and navigated as aforesaid, and in no other, except only such forreign Ships, and Vessels as are of the built of that Countrey, or place of which the said goods are the growth, production, or Manu∣facture respectively. VIII. All Wines of the growth of France or Germany, which after the 20 day of October, 1661. which shall be imported into any the Ports, or places of England, &c. aforesaid, into any other Ship, or Vessel, than which doth truly without fraud, belong to the places aforesaid, and navigated as aforesaid, shall be deemed aliens goods, and pay all strangers, customs, and duties to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as to the Port, or Town to which they shall be imported; And so shall also all sorts of Masts, Timber, or Boards, Salt, Pitch, Tar, and other goods particularly named in the 7 clause, of the growth of Spain, the Islands of the Canaries, Portugal, Madera, Western Is∣land, and of the growth, &c. of Muscovy, or Russia, which after the 1 day of April. 1661. shall be imported into any the places aforesaid in any other than such Shipping, and all Currants, and Turky Commodities imported after 1 September, 1661. in any er than English built Shipping, and Navigated as aforesaid, shall be deemed Aliens goods, and pay accordingly to his Majesty &c. and to the Port, or Town into which they shall be imported. IX. From and after the 1 of April., 1661. no forreign built Ship, or Vessel whatsoever, shall pass to England, Ireland, Wales, &c. or any of them, or enjoy the priviledge of such a Ship, or Vessel, until he or they claiming the said Ship to be theirs, shall make it appear to the chief Officer, or Officers of the Customs in the Port, next to the places of his or their a∣bode, that he or they are not Aliens, and have taken an Oath that such Ship or Vessel was bona fide, by him or them bought for a valuable consideration, expressing the sum, time, and place, and person from whom it was bought, and that no
forreigner directly, or indirectly, hath any part, or interest, or share therein; and upon receiving such Oath, and Certificate under the Hand and Seal of such Officer, or Officers, such Ship, or Vessel, may for the future pass for a Ship belonging to the said Port, and enjoy the priviledge of such a Ship or Vessel. X. If any Officer of the Customs shall after the said 1 day of April, 1661. allow the priviledge of being a Ship, or Vessel of England, &c. to any forreign built Ship, or Vessel until such Certificate be before them produced, or such proof, or Oath taken before them; or if any Officer, &c. of the Customs, shall allow the priviledge of an English built Ship, or other Ship to any the aforesaid places belonging to any English, or forreign built Ship coming into the Port, and making entry of any Goods, until Examination, whether the Master and 3 fourths of the Marriners be English; or allow to any forreign built Ship bringing in the Commodities of the growth of the Countrey where it was built, the priviledge by this Act to such Ship given; before examination, until examination and proof, whether it be a Ship of the built of that Countrey. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to restrain, or prohibit the Importation of any Commodities of the Streights, or Levant-Seas loaden in English built Shipping, navigated as aforesaid, from the usual Ports, or places for lading of them within the Streights, though they be not of the growth of the said places. 2. Provided, This Act nor any thing therein contained extend not to the Restraining the Importing of any East-India Commo∣dities loaden in English built Shipping, whereof the Master and 3 fourths of the Marriners be English, from the usual pla∣ces of lading of them in any part of those Seas, to the South∣ward and Eastward of Cape bona speranza, though the Ports be not the very places of their growth. 3. That it may be lawful for any of the people of England, Wales, Berwick, Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, in Ships be∣longing to them, navigated as aforesaid, to bring in from any the Ports of Spain, or Portugal, the Islands called Azores, Madera, or Canary Islands all sorts of goods, or Commodities of the growth, production, or Manufacture of the Plantations or Dominions of either of them. 4. This Act not to extend to Bulloin, nor to any goods taken, or that shall be bona fide taken by way of Reprisal of any Ship belonging to England, Ireland, &c. navigated as
aforesaid, having Commission from his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors. 5. Not to extend, or be construed to extend to lay Aliens duties upon any Corn of the growth of Scotland; or any Salt made in Scotland, nor to any fish caught, saved, and cured by the people of Scotland, and imported directly from Scotland, in Scotch built Ships navigated as aforesaid, nor to any Seal Oyl of Russia, Imported from thence into England, Ireland, &c. in Shipping bona fide to some of the places belonging, navi∣gated aforesaid. XI. Every Ship, or Vessel belonging to any the Subjects of the French King, which from and after the 20 day of October, 1660. shall come into any Port, Creek, Harbor, or Road of En∣gland, &c. and shall there lade, or unlade any goods, or Commodities, or take in any Passengers, shall pay to the Col∣lector of his Majesties Customs, in such Port, Creek, &c. for every Tun of which the said Ship, or Vessel is of burthen computed by the Officers of the Customs appointed, 5s. of cur∣rant English money, and no Ship to be suffered to depart out of such Port, Creek &c. until the said duty be fully paid, this du∣ty to be collected & paid for such time as a certain duty of 50 Sols, per Tun, lately Imposed by the French King, shall continue to be Collected upon the Shipping of England lading in France, and 3 moneths after, and no longer. XII. No Sugars, Tobacco, Cotten-wool, Indicoes, Ginger, Fustick or other dying wood of the growth, production, or Manufactures of any English Plantations in America, Asia, or Africa, from and after 1 April, 1661. shall be Shipped, Con∣veyed, or Transported from any the said English Plantations; to any Lands, Dominion, Port, or place whatsoever, o∣ther than to such other English Plantations, as do belong to his Majesty, &c. or to the Kingdome of England, Ireland, Wales, &c. there to be layed on shore, under the penalty of the forfeiture of the said goods, or the full value there∣of; one Moity thereof to his Majesty, &c. the other moity to him, or them that shall seize, inform, or sue for the same, in any Court of Record by Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or wager of Law shall be allowed. XIII. For every Ship, or Vessel, that after the 25▪ day of December, 1660. shall set sail out of, or from England, Ire∣land, Wales, &c. for any English Plantation in America,
Asia, or Africa, sufficient Bond shall be given to the chief Offi∣cer of the Custom-house, to the Port or place from whence such ship shall set sail, to the value of 1000. l. if the Ship be less burthen than 100 Tun; and of 2000 l. if it be of greater bur∣then; That in case the said Ship, &c. shall load any of the said Commodities at any of the English Plantations, that the said Commodities shall be by the said Ship brought to some part of England, Ireland, Wales, &c. and shall there unload, and put on shore the same, the danger of the Seas only excepted; and every Ship, &c. which shall load, or take on board any of the aforesaid goods, until such Bond given, or Certificate produced from the Officers of any Custom-house of England, Ireland, Wales, &c. that such Bond hath been duly given, shall be forfeited, with all her Guns, Tackle, &c. to be recovered in manner as aforesaid. I. Enacted, 13. Car. 2 Cap. 9. For the better Government of his Majesties Navies, Ships of War, and forces at Sea; that every of the Articles following, be orderly, and reverently per∣formed; in the several Ships. I. That Prayers and Preaching be by the respective Chaplains in holy orders of the respective Ships, diligently performed, and the Lords day be observed according to Law. II. Every person in his Majesties pay, using rash Oaths, Cursings, Drunkenness, or scandalous actions in derogation of Gods honour, shall be punished by fine, imprisonment, or o∣therwise as the Court-Marshal shall think fit. III. If any Officer, Marriner, or Souldier, in the Fleet shall give, hold, or entertain intelligence to or with any King, State, &c. or to any in rebellion against his Majesty, without leave from the Kings Majesty, the Lord Admiral, or Commander of any Squadron, every person so offending shall be punished with death. IV. If any Letter or Message from any King, forreign Prince, or State, Enemy to the King, his Heirs, &c. or on their behalf be conveyed to any inferior Officer or other in the Fleet, and the said Officer or other do not within twelve hours (having opportunity so to do) acquaint the superior Commander with it; or if the superior Officer, being acquain∣ted therewith by an inferior Officer, or other, or himself receiving a Letter or Message from any such Enemy or Rebel, shall not in convenient time reveal the same to the Admiral, Vice-Admiral, or the Commander of the
Squadron, every such person shall be punished with death, or such other punishment, as the Court-Marshal shall think fit. V. No person in the Fleet shall relieve an Enemy or Rebel in time of War, with Money, Victuals, Powder, Shot, Arms, Ammunition, or other supply whatsoever, directly, or indirectly; upon pain of death, or such other punishment, &c. VI. All Papers, Charter-parties, Bills of lading, Pasports and other Writings that shall be taken, seized, or found aboard any Ship, which shall be seized as Prize, shall be preserved and not torn, or made away, but the originals, without fraud sent up to the Court of Admiralty; or others appointed for that purpose to be viewed, made use of and pro∣ceeded upon according to Law, upon pain to lose all their Shares of the Takers, and such other punishments upon the offenders therein, to be inflicted, as the quality of the offence shall be found to deserve; and the Court-Marshal impose. VII. None in his Majesties pay, shall take out of any Prize, or Ship, or goods seized for Prize, any Money, Plate, Goods, Lading, or tackle before Judgement first past in the Admiral Court, but the entire accompt of the whole, with∣out imbezelment shall be brought in, and Judgement past intirely upon the whole, in the Court of Admiralty; ex∣cepting, that it shall be lawful for all Captains, Seamen and others serving as aforesaid, to take to themselves as pil∣lage without accompt to be given, all such Goods and Mer∣chandizes (other than Arms, Ammunition, and Stores of Ships) as shall be found by them, in any Ship they shall take in fight, or Prize, and not otherwise. VIII. None shall imbezel, steal, or take away any Cable, Anchors, Sales, any of the Ships furniture, Powder, Arms, or Ammunition of the Ship, upon pain of death, or other punishment, as the quality of the offence shall deserve, &c. IX. If a forreign Ship shall be taken as Prize that shall not fight, or make resistance, none of the Captains, Masters, or Marriners being Forreigners, shall be stripped of their cloaths, beaten, or evil intreated upon pain the person so offending shall forfeit double damages; but the Ship and all the goods so taken
shall be preserved entire, to receive Judgement in the Court of Admiralty. X. Every Captain, or Commander, who upon signal, or order of fight, or view, or sight of any Ships of the Enemy, Pirate or Rebel, shall not put all things in his Ship in fit po∣sture for fight, and shall not in his own person encourage the inferior Officers, and common men to fight couragiously, shall be cashiered, and if he or they shall yield to the Enemy, or cry for Quarter, he or they so doing shall suffer death, or other punishment as the offence shall deserve. XI. Every Commander, Captain, Officer, Sea-man or Sol∣dier of any Ship or Vessel of War shall duly observe the com∣mands of the Admiral or other his Superior or Commander of any Squadron, as well for the setting upon any Fleet, Squa∣dren or Ships of the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels; or joyning bat∣tel with; or making defence against them, and all other the Commands of the Admiral, or other his superior Commander, upon pain to suffer death, or other punishment, as the quality of his neglect, or offence shall deserve. XII. Every Captain, and all other Officers, Marriners and Soldiers of every Ship, or Vessel of war, that shall in time of any fight, or engagement keep back, or not come into the fight, and engage to do his utmost to take, fire, kill, or endamage the ene∣my, and resist and relieve all and every his Majesties Ships, shall for such offence of cowardize, or disaffection be tryed, and suffer pains of death, or other punishment as the circumstances of the offence shall deserve, and the Court-Martial shall think fit. XIII. The Captains, Officers and Seamen of all Ships appoin∣ted for convoy, and guard of Merchants Ships, or any other, shall diligently attend that service without delay according to their instructions; and whosoever shall not faithfully perform the same, and defend the Ships, and goods of their convoy, or refusing, or neglect to fight in their defence, if they be set upon, or running away cowardly, and submitting those in their convoy to hazard and peril, or shall exact any money, or other reward from any Merchant, or Master for conveying any such Ships belonging to his Majesties Subjects, shall be condemned to make reparation of the damage to the Merchants, owners, and others, as the Court of Admiralty shall adjudge, and be punished criminally, according to the quality of their offences; by pains of death, or other punishment as shall be judged fit by the Court-Marshal.
XIV. Whatsoever person in, or belonging to the Fleet either through cowardize, or disaffection shall forbear to pursue the chase of any Enemy, Pirate, or Rebel, beaten or flying, shall not relieve or assist a known friend in view, to the utmost of his pow∣er, shall be punished with death; or as the Court-Martial shall find fit. XV. When at any time service or action shall be comman∣ded, no man shall presume to stop, put backward, or discourage the said service, by pretence of arrears of wages, or upon any pretence of wages whatsoever, upon pain of death. XVI. All Sea-Captains, Officers, and Seamen, that shall betray their trust, or turn to the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels, and either run away with their Ship, or yield up the same to the Enemy, Pirat, or Rebells, shall be punished with death. XVII. All Sea-Captains, Officers, or Marriners, as shall desert the service, or their imployment in the Ships, or run away, or entice any others so to do, shall be punished with death. XVIII. All persons that shall come, or be found in the nature of Spies, to bring any seducing Letters, or Messages from any Enemy, or Rebel, or shall attempt, or endeavour to corrupt any Captain, Officer, Marriner, or other of the Navy, or fleet, to betray, his, or their trust, and yield up any Ship, or Ammu∣nition, or turn to the Enemy, or Rebel, shall be punished with death. XIX No person in, or belonging to the Fleet, shall utter any words of sedition, or mutiny, nor make, nor endeavour to make any mutinous assemblies upon any pretence whatsoever, upon pain of death. XX. No person in, or belonging to the Fleet, shall conceal any traiterous, or mutinous practices, designes, or words, or any words spoken by any, to the prejudice of his Majesty, or Government, or words, or practises tending to his hindrance of the service, but shall forthwith reveal them to the superior; that a meet proceeding may be had thereupon; upon pain of such punishment, as a Court-Martial shall find to be Just. XXI. None shall quarrel with his superior Officer, upon pain of severe punishment, nor strike any upon pain of death, or otherwise, as the Court-Marshal shall find the matter to deserve.
XXII. If any of the Fleet find cause of complaint of the un∣holsomness of his Victuals, or upon other just ground, he shall quietly make the same known to his Superiour, that such present remedy may be had as the matter shall require, and the same Superiour is to cause the same to be presently re∣medied accordingly; but no person upon such, or other pre∣tence shall privately attempt to stir up any disturbance upon pain of punishment as the Court-Marshal shall find meet to inflict. XXIII. None shall quarrel or fight in the Ship, nor use provoking speeches tending to make any quarrel or disturbance upon pain of imprisonment, and such other punishment as the offence shall deserve. XXIV. There shall be no wastful expences of Powder, Shot, Ammunition, or other Stores in the Fleet, nor any imbezel∣ment thereof, but that the Stores and Provisions be carefully preserved, and upon pain of fine, imprisonment, or otherwise, as the Offenders, Abetters, Buyers and Receivers, as by a Court Marshal shall be found just. XXV. Care to be taken in the conducting and steering of Ships that through wilfulness, negligence, or other defaults, none of his Majesties Ships be stranded, or run upon any rocks, or sands, or split, or hazarded, upon pain that such as shall be found guilty therein, be punished by fine, imprisonment, or o∣therwise as the offence by a Court-Marshal shall be adjudged to deserve. XXVI. All persons that shall willingly burn, or set on fire any Ship, Magazine, or Store of Powder, Boat, Ketch, Hoy, or Vessel, or Tackle, or Furniture thereunto belonging, not ap∣pertaining to an Enemy, or Rebel, shall be punished with death. XXVII. No man in, or belonging to the Fleet, shall sleep upon his watch, or negligently perform the duty imposed upon him, or forsake his station upon pain of death, or other pu∣nishment, as the circumstances shall require. XXVIII. All murthers and wilful killing of any persons in the Ship, shall be punished with death. XXIX. All robbery and theft committed by any person in, or belonging to the Fleet shall be punished with death, or o∣ther punishment as the Court-Marshal upon consideration of the circumstances shall find meet.
XXX. No Provost Marshal belonging to the Fleet, shall refuse to receive or keep any prisoner committed to his charge, or suffer him to escape being once in his custody, or dismiss him without order, under pain of being liable to the same pu∣nishment that should have been inflicted upon the party dis∣missed, or permitted to escape, or other punishment as the Court-Martial shall think meet. XXXI. All Captains; Officers and Seamen, shall do their endeavours to detect, apprehend and bring to punishment all Offenders, and shall assist the Officers appointed therein upon pain to be punished by the Court-Martial at discre∣tion. XXXII. If any person in, or belonging to the Fleet, shall commit the unnatural and detestable sin of buggery, or sodomy with man or beast, he shall be punished with death without mercy. XXXIII. All other faults, misdemeanors; and disorders committed at Sea, not mentioned in this Act, shall be pu∣nished according to the Laws and Customs used in such cases at Sea. XXXIV. That the Lord Admiral for the time being, have full power and authority to grant Commissions to inferiour Vice Admirals, or Commanders in chief of any Squadron of Ships, to call and assemble a Court Martial consisting of Comman∣ders and Captains, and no Court-Martial where the pains of death shall be inflicted, shall consist of less than five Cap∣tains at least, the Admirals Lieutenant as to this purpose esteem∣ed as a Captain: And in no case wherein sentence of death shall pass by vertue of the Articles aforesaid, or any of them (except in case of mutiny) there shall be execution of such sentence of death without the leave of the Lord High Admiral, if the offences be committed in the narrow Seas. But in case of any of the offences aforesaid to be committed in any voyage beyond the narrow Seas, where sentence of death shall be given in pursuance of the Articles aforesaid, execution shall not be done but by order of the Commander in chief of that Fleet or Squadron wherein the sentence of death was passed. XXXV. That the Judge-Advocate of any Fleet for the time being, have power and authority to administer an Oath to any person or witness in order to the examination or tryal of any the offences aforesaid: and in absence of a Judge-Advocate,
the Court-Marshal shall have power to appoint any person to administer an oath to the purpose aforesaid. Provided, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to give to the Lord Admiral of England, for the time being, or to his Vice Admirals, or Judges of the Admiralty, his, or their Deputy, or Deputies, or any o∣ther Officers of the Admiralty, or any other claiming any Admi∣ral power or jurisdiction within this Realm, or Wales, or any other the Kings Dominions, any other power, right, jurisdi∣ction or authority, than he, or they, or any of them lawfully have, had, or ought to have or enjoy before the making of this Act, other than for such of the offences specified in the several Articles contained in this Act, as hereafter shall be done upon the main Sea, or in Ships, or Vessels hovering in the main stream of great Rivers only beneath the Bridges of the same Rivers nigh to the Sea, within the jurisdiction of the Admiralty and and in none other places whatsoever, and committed only by such persons as shall be in actual service and pay of his Maje∣sties Forces and Ships of War. Statutes Confirmed. Enacted, 13 Car. 2 Cap. All Acts of Parliament made or mentioned to be made by the King (with the advice of the Lords and Commons) since 25 of April, Anno 12. of the King are comfirmed, viz. 1. One Act of free and general Pardon, Indempnity, and Ob∣livion. 2. An Act entituled, A Subsidie to the King of Tonnage and Poundage upon Merchandize exported and imported. 3. An Act for the continuing the Excise until 20 August 1660. 4. An Act for continuing the Excise till 25 Decem. 1660. 5. An Act for speedy provision of Money, for disbanding and paying off the Forces of the Kingdom both by Sea and Land. 6. An Act for the confirmation of the judicial proceedings. 7. An Act for the speedy disbanding of the Army and Garri∣sons of the Kingdom. 8. An Act for supplying and explaining defects in an Act for the speedy provision of Money for the disbanding and paying off the Forces of the Kingdom both by Sea and Land. 9. An Act to prevent frauds and concealments of Customs and Subsidies.
10. An Act for the raising 140000 l. for the compleat disban∣ing of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy. 11. An Act entituled A grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors for the encrease of his Majesties Revenues during life. 12. An Act for the taking away the Court of Wards and settle∣ing a Revenue on his Majesty in lieu thereof. 13. And Act for the better ordering and selling of Wines by retail, and preventing abuses therein, and for setting the prices of the same. 14. An Act for the levying of the Arrears of 12 Months Assess∣ment beginning the 24 of June 1659. and the Assessment begin∣ning the 25 of December 1659. 15. An Act for the granting to the King 420000 l. by Assess∣ment 70000 l. per Month for 6 Months for disbanding the re∣mainder of the Army, and paying off the Navy. 16. An Act for the supplying and explaining certain defects in an Act Entituled, An Act for the speedy provision of Money for the disbanding and paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea. 17. An Act for the raising of 70000 l. for the further supply of his Majesty. 18. An Act for the Attainder of several persons guilty of the murder of the late King Charles the first. 19. An Act for the erecting and establishing a Post-Office. 20. An Act for the putting in execution an Ordinance menti∣oned in the Act. Anno 13 Car. 2. Cap. 11. 1. An Act for the raising 70000 l. for the further supply of his Majesty. 2. An Act for the confirmation of Marriages. 3. An Act for a perpetual Anniversay thanksgiving on the 29. of May. Anno 13. Car. 2. Cap. 14. 1. An Act for the encouraging and encreasing of Shipping and Navigation. 2. An Act prohibiting exportation of Woolls, Woollsels, Fullers-earth, or any kind of Scouring-earth. 3. An Act for the Master of the Rolls to make Leases for years, in order to new-build the old Houses to the Rolls belonging. 4. An Act for prohibiting the planting, setting, or sowing To∣bacco in England and Ireland. 5. An Act for the restraining the taking of excessive Usury. 6. An Act for present nominating Commissioners of Sewers.
7. An Act for the incorporating the Master and Wardens of the Company of Haberdashers London, to be Governours of the Free-school and Alms-houses in Newport, in the County of Salop. Suits and Arrests. I. Enacted, 13. Car. 2 Cap. After the 12 of February 1661. no person, &c. who shall be arrested by any Sheriff, Bailiff of a Franchise or Liberty, Coroner, or other person whatsoever, within the Realm, by force of any Writ, Bill, or Process issu∣ing out of any the Kings Courts at Westminster, in which Writ, &c. the true cause of Action is not expressed particularly, and for which the Defendant is Bailable by the Statute of 23. of Henry 6th. shall be compelled to give security, or enter into bond with Sureties for the appearance of the party arrested in any penalty or sum exceeding 40 l. conditioned for such ap∣pearance, and the Sheriffs and all other Officers, &c. shall let to Bail, and deliver out of Prison, and from their custodies re∣spectively every such person so arrested upon security of 40 l. given, and no more, for the appearance of such person arrested unto the Sheriff or other Officer, according to the said Statute 23. H. 8. II. That upon appearance in the Term, wherein the said Writ is returnable, for the person by Attorney, in the respe∣ctive Courts from whence the Writ &c. issued, the bond given for appearance be discharged, and after such appearance entred, no amercements be set or estreated upon, or against any Sheriff or other Officer, concerning want of such appearance made, unless the Plaintiff shall put into the Court his Bill or Declara∣tion in some personal action or Ejectione firme of lands before the end of the Term next following after appearance, a nonsuit may be entred against the Plaintiff, and the Defendant in every such Writ shall have judgement to recover costs against the Plaintiff to be taxed in such manner as is provided for costs by the said Statute of 23 H. 8. Provided, This Act not to extend to any arrests to be made upon or by vertue of any Writ of Capias ut lagatum, attachment upon rescous, attachment upon any contempt, or attachment of priviledge, at the suit of any priviledged person, to be issuing out of any the said Courts, where no particular certainty of the case or action is contained; but that no Sheriff or Officer shall dis∣charge
any person taken upon Capias ut lagatum out of his custody, without a lawful supersedeas received first for the same; and upon the Writs of attachment such course be ta∣ken for security for appearance therein, as heretofore hath been used. III. Every person against this, &c. whatsoever, who now hath, or hereafter shall have cause of any personal action a∣gainst a prisoner in the Fleet, may sue forth an original of such Prisoner, and have a Habeas Corpus to the Warden of the prison, to have the body of the Prisoner before the Justices of the Common Pleas at a day certain in any Term to answer the Plaintiff upon his action, and if the Plaintiff put in∣to the said Court his Declaration against the prisoner be∣ing present at the Barr, the prisoner shall appear in person, or by Attorney: and unless the Defendant plead upon a rule given to be out in eight daies after appea∣rance, judgement by Nihil dicit may be entred against such Defendant as appearing in person; and such charge in Court by Declaration signified by rule to the Warden shall be a good cause of detention of the Prisoner, from which he shall not be discharged without a lawfull supersedias or rule of Court, and if the Warden do otherwise, he shall be respon∣sible to the Court, and to the party grieved by action upon the case. IV. In all actions of debt, and other personal actions; and in all actions of Ejectione firme for Lands Tenements, &c. depending, or which shall depend in any of the said Courts by original Writs, after issue joined to be tryed by Jury; and after any judgement had or obtained, there shall not need to be fifteen daies between the Teste and the return of any Writ of Venire facias, Habeas Corpora Juratorum. Distringas, Writs of Fieri facias, or Capias ad satisfaciendum, and the want of fifteen daies between the Teste and day of re∣turn of such Writs, shall not be assigned for any cause of Error. Provided, The Act not to extend to any Writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum, wherein Exigent after Judgement is to be a∣warded, nor to any Capias ad satisfaciendum, in order to make any Bail liable, but that the same continue as if the Act had not been made.
V. From and after 20 January, 1661. No Execution shall be stayed in any of the said Courts by any Writ or Writs of Errour or Supersedeas thereupon after Verdict and Judgement obtained in any Action of Debt, grounded upon the Statute of 2 Edw. 6. for not setting out of Tithes; Nor in any Action up∣on the Case upon Assumpsit for payment of Money; Actions of Trover, Covenant, Detinue, and Trespass, unlesse a Recogni∣zance in the same Court to prosecute the said Writ of Errour with effect, according as is directed by the Statute of 3 King James. And if any person shall sue, or prosecute any Writ of Errour, for reversal of any Judgement whatsoever, after Verdict given in any the said Courts, and the said Judgement shall af∣terwards be affirmed, such person, &c. shall pay to the De∣fendant in the Writ of Errour double costs to be assessed by the Court where the Writ of Errour shall be depending, for delaying of Execution. Provided. This Act not to extend to any popular Action, nor other which is or shall be brought upon any poenal Law or Statute (Except the said stat. of 2 E. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes) Nor to any Indictment, Inquisition, Information, or Appeal, any thing in the Act notwithstanding. Taxes and Assessements. I. Enacted 12. Car. 2. Cap. 15. That the sum of 140000 l. is given to the King for disbanding of the Army and part of the Navy, viz. The summ of 70000 l. by the month for two months from 1 November 1660. shall be assessed and paid within the several Counties and places within England, Wales, and Ber∣wick, according to such Rates, and by the Commissioners (Except such as are disabled by the Act of Indempnity) and with the like powers, as by an Ordinance by the Lords and Com∣mons for an assessment of 70000 l. by the month upon England for three months: and of an Act of putting in Execution an Ordinance therein mentioned are expressed. II. All the moneys to be raised, shall be paid into Guild-Hall London, to Sir Richard Brown, Knight, and others particular∣ly named, appointed Treasurers thereof, and their Acquittance or any three of them, shall be a sufficient discharge in that be∣half.
III. All monies received by the said Treasurers, shall be is∣sued according to such directions as they, or three of them shall receive from the Commissioners named in an Act for the speedy disbanding of the Army and Garrisons of this Kingdom, which monies are totally to be employed for the disbanding of the Army in the first place, and after for the paying off such part of the Navy as return into Harbour before the 8th. of Septem. 1660. IV. If any person shall lend to the Treasurers any monies for the uses aforesaid, he shall be allowed 6 per Cent. for the same out of monies by the Act received; and the Treasurers are to repay the monies so lent. The said whole sum of 140000 l. shall be paid in before 25. December 1661. And the Commissioners or any two of them in their respective places are to signe and Seal a Duplicate of their Assessments, and before the said 25 day certifie the same into the Guild-Hall to the Treasurers with the names of the Receivers General. Enacted, 12 Car. 2 Cap. 25. Whereas great sums of Monies remain uncollected, and several sums remain in the Collectors hands, due on the 12 months assessment, beginning the 24 of June, 1659. and upon the 6 months assessment, beginning the 25 of Decem. 1659. for the disbanding of the Army: That the Commissioners (nominated in an Act for the provision of mo∣ney for the disbanding and paying off the Forces by Land and Sea) do forthwith cause all the said Arrears to be levyed in such manner as formerly: And all such monies as remain in any Collectors hands, to be paid to James Nelthorp, and John Lawson, Treasurers at War for the purpose aforesaid. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2 Cap. 26. Whereas it was hoped, that the monies Enacted to be raised by several Acts of Parlia∣ment, would have sufficed for the disbanding of the Army and Navy; but by the slow coming in of the said monies, it cannot be effected without further supply; Therefore by this Act the sum of 420000 l. is given to the King, viz. 70000 l. per month, for six months, from 1 January, 1660. to be taxed and levyed in England, Wales, and Berwick, according to such Rules, and by the same Commissioners as are in an Act Entituled, An Act for the raising of 140000 l. for the complete disbanding of the Army, and paying part of the Navy. II. That 210000 l. the moiety of the said Assessment shall be paid to the Receivers general, appointed by the said Com∣missioners,
on, or before 1. Febr. 1660. and the other moiety on or before 1. April 1661. and all the said monies shall be paid at Guild-Hall, London, unto Sir George Cartwright and other per∣sons particularly named in the Act, Treasurers on that behalf, who, or any three of them are enabled to give Discharges of Mo∣nies received by vertue of the Act. III. If any person of London, or other place, who have advan∣ced Monies upon the Act of 70000 l. before mentioned, shall continue the loan thereof upon the Credit of this Act, and de∣clare the same under Hand and Seal to the Treasurer before 31 December, 1660. And if any other person shall advance 100 l: or more upon the same Credit, and before the 10th. of January, 1660. pay it to the Treasurers, it shall be repayed by the Treasurers out of the last 110000 l. raised by this Act with Interest at 10 l. per Cent. from such Declaration and Ad∣vancement respectively; and the Treasurers are to receive no more Monies, than what with the Monies so to be continued, will amount to 80000 l. IV. All the Monies above mentioned, shall be issued accord∣ing to such Directions as the Treasurers, or any three of them shall receive from the Commissioners in the Act for the speedy disband∣ing of the Army, or three of them to be only employed for the disdanding of the Army and Garrisons according to Rules in the last mentioned Act contained; and the rest of the money towards the paying off the Fleet and Navy. V. An accompt of the said Monies shall be given by the Treasu∣rers to this and other succeeding Parliaments, or such as they shall appoint. VI. No Mannors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments for∣merly taxed towards former Land-Taxes, and now in the pos∣session of the King, Queen, Ecclesiastical persons, or their re∣spective Tenants shall be exempted from the payment of the Monies in this Act comprized, but shall be Rated as for∣merly. This Act not to extend to prejudice the Peers in their Rights. Enacted, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 16. That the sum of 70000 l. for the present supply of his Majesty for one Moneth only from 29 September, 1660. shall be levyed and paid in England, Wales, and Berwick in such manner and form, and by the same Com∣missioners (other then such as are disabled by the Act of In∣dempnity) as by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
just before the Kings Restaurtion for 70000 l. by the Moneth, up∣on England for 3 moneths, is limited and appointed and the Com∣missioners are by the Act required to sign and seal a duplicate of their Assessements, and before 1 November to certifie the same in∣to the Exchequer, together with the names of the respective Recei∣vers general. Term. Enacted, 16 Car. 1. Cap. 6. That in Michaelmas Term, there shall be but 6 common daies of Return only, the first called A die St. Michaelis in tres Septimanas the second called A die St. Michaelis in unum mensem, the third called In crastino ani∣mare, the fourth called In crastino St. Martins, the fifth called In Octabis St. Martini, the sixth called A die St. Martini in quin∣decem dies; and that the said Term of St. Michael yearly for ever, from and after the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch-Angel next coming, begin in, and upon the said Tres Septimanas St. Martini whensoever it shall happen to fall (except it be on the Lords Day commonly called Sonday, and then on the morrow next after) for the keeping of the Essoines, Proffers and Returns; and other Ceremonies; and that the full Term of Saint Michael, shall be yearly for ever after the Feast of Saint Michael next com∣ing, in all the High Courts of Record of the King to be holden at Westminster, or at other places, by the Assignment and ap∣pointment of the King, his Heirs, and Successors, shall yearly for ever take its Commencement upon the quarto die of the said Tres Septimanas St. Michaelis, and not before (except it be on the Lords Day, commonly called Sonday) and then on the morrow, next after. Theft and Rapine. I. Enacted, 14 Car. 2. Cap. 22. From and after the Feast of Saint Michael, 1662. and during the term of 5 years ensuing the Date of this Act, the Justices of the Peace of the respe∣ctive Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland, or the Major part of them, at their General Sessions to be holden for the Respective Counties, may make an Order in open Sessions, for charging according to their
several proportions, all and every the inhabitants of the said respective Counties for the safeguard and securing of the said several Counties and inhabitants from all injury, violence, spoil and rapine of the Moss-troopers. Provided, the County of Northumberland be not charged above the sum of 500 l. per annum, nor the County of Cumberland above 200 pounds per annum. II. The several Justices of the said respective Counties are au∣thorized at their general quarter Sessions, to appoint any per∣sons to have the conduct and command of a certain number of persons, not exceeding the number of 30 men in the County of Northumberland, and 12 in the County of Cumberland; whereby, the Malefactors aforesaid, viz. Moss-troopers, may be searched out, pursued, apprehended, and brought to trial at Law. III. The Justices of the Peace of the said respective Coun∣ties, at their general Sessions, are impowred to make, and is∣sue out Warrants, under their respective Hands and Seals, for the levying and collecting any sum of money ordered to be paid, for, and towards the safeguard, and securing the said Counties respectively as aforesaid, and to levy the said monies by Constables, and other Officers of all and every the Inhabitants of the respective Counties, according to their proportionable estates in Lands, or Goods, by distress and sale of Goods, ren∣dering the overplus to the owners; and also to examine any complaint made against the Collectors, Constables, or other Offi∣cers, that at any time hereafter shall refuse, neglect, or fail to give obedience to the Act, or to do any thing in disturbance, or ob∣struction thereof; and to bind over such persons to the quarter Sessions, to be proceeded against, according to Justice. IV. The respective Justices in the behalf of the said Coun∣ties respectively, are to appoint a Treasurer to receive from the Collectors, the moneys collected, and to pay over the same ac∣cording to the orders they shall receive from the Justices at the General Sessions for the respective Counties, and they may agree with such persons as they shall think fit to employ in the said service, and take sufficient security of them for the faithful and effectual performance thereof; and in case any person employed in the border service, in pursuance of this Act, shall wilfully, and corruptly neglect, or forbear to discover, or apprehend, or bring to Tryal any of the said persons, called Moss-Troopers; and shall be convicted thereof, he shall be made uncapable ever
after to take upon him the said imployment; and suffer such Fine and Imprisonment according to the quality of his offence, as the Justices of the peace at their General Sessions shall think fit to inflict. 1. Provided, The said respective Justices, may at any time hereafter, moderate or lessen the said charge if they see cause. 2. This Act to continue in force for 5 years and no longer. 3. That the Statutes made in the 4. and 7, years of King James, for suppressing and punishing of Moss-Troopers, shall be revived and put in execution. Tobacco. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2 Cap. 33. No person whatsoever, from and after the first of January 1660. shall set plant, im∣prove to grow, make, or cure any Tobacco, either in seed, plant, or otherwise, in, or upon any ground, earth, field, or place, within England, Wales, Islands of Guernsey; Jersey, Berwick, or within the Kingdom of Ireland, upon pain of the forfeiture of all such Tobacco, or the value thereof, and of the sum of 40 s. for every pole of ground so planted, set, sown, &c. and so proportionably for a lesser, or greater quantity; one moity to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other moity to him who will sue for the same, to be recovered in any Court of Record, wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed. II. All Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, Mayors, Bayliffs, Con∣stables, and every of them, upon complaint made to them, or any of them, by any Officers of the Customs, or other person whatsoever, that there is any Tobacco set, sown, planted, or growing within their Jurisdictions, or Precincts, shall within 10 daies after such complaint, cause to be burnt, plucked up, consumed, or destroyed all such Tobacco so set, planted, &c. III. If any person shall resist, or make opposition against any person or persons in the due execution of this Act, such per∣son shall forfeit 5 l. for every such offence, to be recovered as a∣foresaid, and if they shall not pay the sums of money by them to be paid by the Act, distress shall be made, and sale thereof, returning the overplus to the Owner; and if no distress be to be found, every such person shall be committed to the Common Goal of the County, there to remain for 2 months without bail or mainprize.
Provided, This Act not to extend to the hindering of the plant∣ing of Tobacco in any Physick-Garden of either University, or other private Garden for Physick, or Chyrurgery, so as the quantity so planted exceed not one half of one Pole in any Place or Garden. Uniformity of Prayer. Anno 14. Car. 2. Cap. 4. Whereas in the 1. year of Queen Eliz. there was one uniform Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, compiled by the Reve∣rend Bishops and Clergy; which Uniformity and Order, was by Act of Parliament in the said first year of the said Queen: Enti∣tuled An Act for the Ʋniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, enjoyned to be used. And whereas by the neglect of Ministers in using the said Order, or Liturgy set forth, many people have been seduced into Factions and Schismes. And whereas the King that now is, granted Commission under the Great Seal of England, to several Bishops and other Divines to review the said Book of Common-Prayer, and to prepare some alterations and additions as they thought fit to offer, and afterwards the Convocations of both the Provinces of Canterbury and York, viz. the Presidents of both the said Convocations, Bishops and Clergy have reviewed the said Book, and upon full and mature Deliberation have made some alterations, and some additional Prayers to the said Book, to be used upon proper and emergent occasions which they have presented to the Kings Majesty in one Book, Entituled, The Book of Common-Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, appointed to be sung, or said in Churches, and form of making, ordaining and consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. I Enacted, That all and singular Ministers in any Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parish-Church, or Chappel, or other place of publick worship, within the Realm of England, Wales, Ber∣wick, shall be bound to use and say the Morning-Prayer, Even∣ing-Prayer Celebration and administration of both the Sacra∣ments,
and all other the publick and Common-Prayer, in such Order and Form as is mentioned in the said Book, annexed and joyned to this Act, and Entituled, The Book of Common-Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, &c. and the morning and evening prayers therein contained, shall upon every Lords day, and all other daies and occasions, and at all times therein ap∣pointed, be openly read by all and every Minister, or Curate, in every Church, Chappel, or other place of publick worship within the Realm of England, &c. II. Every Parson, Vicar, or other Minister whatsoever, who hath any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion, within England, &c. shall in the Church, Chappel, &c. belonging to his Bene∣fice, or Promotion, upon some Lords day before the Feast of Saint Bartholomew, 1662. openly and publickly read the Morning and Evening Prayer appointed to be read according to the said Book, before the Congregation there assembled, and declare his assent and consent to the use of all the things therein prescribed, in these words, and no other, viz. I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained and prescribed in, and by the Book Entituled, The Book of Common-Prayer and administration of the Sacra∣ments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England; together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, appointed as they are to be sung, or said in Chur∣ches: and the form, or manner of making, ordaining and consecra∣ting of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. And all and every person, &c. (without some lawful impedi∣ment to be allowed by the Ordinary) who shall neglect, or refuse so to do, within the time aforesaid (or within one moneth after such impediment removed) shall ipso facto be deprived of all his spi∣ritual promotions; and it shall be lawful for the Patrons, &c. to present, or collate as if such person were dead. III. Every person who shall be presented, or collated to any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or promotion within England, &c. shall in the Church, &c. belonging to his said Benefice, or promotion, within 2 Moneths after he shall be in the actual possession thereof, upon some Lords-day read the said Book at the times appointed therein, before the Congregation there assembled, and declare his assent and consent to all things therein contained, and prescribed, and who shall neglect, or refuse so to do (with∣out some lawful impediment allowed as aforesaid) shall ipso facto be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical Benefices, &c.
IV. In all places, where the Incumbent of any Parsonage, or Vicaridge, or Benefice, with cure doth reside in his Living, or keep a Curate, the Incumbent himself, (having not lawful impediment) shall once in every moneth, openly, and pub∣lickly read the Common Prayers, and service in the said Book, and (if occasion be) Administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church in manner, as in the Book is prescribed and appointed, upon pain of forfeiture of 5 l. to the use of the poor of the Parish for every offence, upon conviction by confession, or Oath of two witnesses before 2 Justices of the peace of the County, and in default of pay∣ment within 10 daies, the same to be levyed by distress and sale of the goods of the offendor, by a Warrant of the Ju∣stices to the Church-wardens, or Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, rendring the overplus to the party. V. Every Dean, Canon, Prebendary of every Cathedral, or Collegiate Church: All Masters, Heads, Fellows, Chaplains, Tutors of any Colledge, Hall, Hospital, publick Professor and Rea∣der in the Universities, Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, School-Master of a School, publike or private, or teacher of Youth as a Tutor, or School-Master in a private Family, who 1 May, 1662. or at any time hereafter shall be Incumbent, or have pos∣session of any Deanry, Canonry, Prebend, Master-ship, Head∣ship, &c. Parsonage, Vicarage, or other Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Promotion; or any Curates place, Lecturer or School, &c. shall before the feast of St. Bartholomew, 1662. at or before he shall be admitted to be Incumbent, &c. shall subscribe this Declaration, viz. I A. B. do declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretence whatsoever, to take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traiterous position of taking Arms by his authority against his person, or against those that are Commissionated by him; and I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by Law established; and I do declare, I do hold there lies no obligation upon me, or any other person from the Oath, called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavour any change, or alte∣ration of Government, either in Church, or State, and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and liberties of this King∣dom. The said Declaration to be subscribed by the Masters, Heads, Fellows Chaplains, Tutors of Colledges, Halls, Houses of Learn∣ing,
Prefessors and Readers in the Universities, before the Vice-Chancellor of the respective Universities; and before the respective Arch-Bishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocess, by every other person upon pain of loss and forfeiture of their re∣spective Deanry, Canonry, Prebend, Parsonage, Vicaridge, &c. and ipso facto be deprived of the same, and the same to be void as if he were dead. VI. If any School-Master, or other person, instructing Youth, in any private house or family, shall instruct any such Youth before Licence obtained from the Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocess, and before such subscription, &c. as aforesaid, every such School-Master, &c. for the first offence shall suffer such Imprisonment, and forfeit 5 l. to the King, &c. and after sub∣scription made, every Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, shall procure a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Ordinary of the Diocess, and shall publikely read the same with the De∣claration within three moneths then next after in his Parish Church where he is to officiate, upon pain to lose his Parso∣nage, Vicaridge, Benefice, Curates place, or Lecturers place, and be (ipso facto) deprived of the same, and the said Benefice shall be void, as if he were dead. 1. Provided, That after 25 of March, 1682. there shall be omitted out of the said Declaration and acknowledgment, these words, viz▪ (And I do Declare that I hold there lies no obli∣gation on me, or on any other person, from the Oath called the So∣lemn League & Covenant, to endeavour any change, or alteration of Government, either in Church or State, & that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of the Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom) so as none of the persons aforesaid, shall be from thenceforth ob∣liged to subscribe, or read that part of the Declaration, VII. That after the feast of St. Bartholomew, 1662. no person who now is Incumbent, and in possession of any Parsonage, Vica∣ridge, or Benefice, and who is not already in Orders by Episcopal Ordination; or shall not before the said feast be ordained Priest, or Deacon by Episcopal Ordination, shall hold, and enjoy the said Parsonage, Vicaridge, or other Ecclesiastical promotion, within England, Wales, &c. but shall be disabled, and (ipso facto) de∣prived of the same, and the same to be void, as if he were dead. VIII. No person whatsoever after the Feast of St. Bartholo∣mew aforesaid, shall be capable of any Parsonage, Vicaridge, or
other Ecclesiastical Promotion, or Dignity whatsoever; nor shall presume to consecrate and administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, before he shall be ordained Priest, according to the form & manner by the Book prescribed, unless he hath been for∣merly made Priest by Episcopal ordination, upon pain of forfei∣ture for every offence 100 l. one moity to the King, the other to be equally divided between the Poor of the Parish where the offence shall be committed, to be recovered by debt, Bill, &c. in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed. 1. Provided, The penalties extend not to Forreigners, or Ali∣ens of Forreign reformed Churches allowed, or to be allowed by the King, his Heirs, &c. 2. Provided, No Title to confer, or present by lapse, shall ac∣crue by any avoydance, or deprivation ipso facto; but after 6 months after notice of such deprivation, or avoydance given by the Ordinary to the Patron, or such sentence of deprivation pub∣lickly read in the Parish Church of the Benefite, Parsonage, or Vicaridge, becoming void. IX. No form, or order of Common-Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, Rites, or Ceremonies shall be openly used in any Church, Chappel, &c. or in any Colledge, or Hall in either Universities, Eate; Winchester, or Westminster, than what is pre∣scribed, and appointed to be used by the Book; and the present Governors of any the said Colledges, &c. within one moneth after St. Bartholomew, 1662. and the Governors which shall af∣terwards be elected within one moneth after his election, or collation, and admission to the Government, shall openly in the Church, or Chappel of the same Colledge, &c. in the pre∣sence of the Fellows, and Schollars of the same, or the major part of them, subscribe the 39 Articles of Religion mentioned in the Statute of the 13 of Eliz. and to the said Book, and de∣clare his assent, to, and approbation of the said Articles and to the said Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites, and Ce∣remonies, forms and orders in the same prescribed and con∣tained, upon pain to lose, and be suspended of and from the Be∣nefits, and Profits belonging to the Government, by 6 moneths by the Visiter of the Colledge, &c. and if any Governor sus∣pended for not reading the Articles, or Book, or not Reading Morning Prayer, shall not at, or before the end of 6 moneths after such suspension, subscribe to the Articles, and Book, and declare his consent thereunto or Read the Morning Prayer, and
service, such Government, &c. shall be (ipso facto) void. Prov. It may be lawful to use the morning & evening Prayer, and other Prayers prescribed in the Book in the Colledges, and Halls & in Westminster, Winchester, & Eaton Colledge respectively, and in the Convocation of the Clergy in either Province, in La∣tine, any thing in the Act to the contrary notwithstanding. X. No person shall be, or shall be received as a Lecturer, or permitted, suffered, or allowed to preach as a Lecturer, or to preach, or read any Sermon, or Lecture in any Church, Chap∣pel, &c. unless he be first licenced by the Arch-Bishop of the Province, or by the Ordinary of the Diocess, under his Seal, and shall in the presence of the same Bishop, or Ordinary read the 39 Articles of Religion mentioned in the Statute of 13 Eliz. with a declaration of his assent to the same, and every person who is, or shall be hereafter licenced, assigned, appoint∣ed, or received as a Lecturer, to preach upon any day in the week, in any Church, Chappel, &c. the first time he preach∣eth, before his Sermon shall read the Common-Prayers in, and by the Book appointed to be read, and then declare his assent unto, and approbation of the said Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained; and shall upon the first Lecture day of every moneth, before his Lecture or Sermon, read the Common-Prayer, and de∣clare his assent to the said Book, and who shall refuse, or neg∣lect to do the same; shall be disabled to preach the said Lecture, or any other Lecture, or Sermon in other Church, Chappel, &c. until he conform in all points, to the things appointed and prescribed▪ Provided, If the Sermon, or Lecture be to be preached in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, &c. it shall be suffici∣ent for the Lecturer at the time to declare his assent and consent to all the things contained in the Book. XI. If any person who is disabled to preach any Lecture, or Sermon, shall, during the time he shall continue so disabled, preach any Sermon, or Lecture; for every such offence, the person so offending shall suffer 3 months imprisonment in the Common Goal without Bail or mainprize. And 2 Justices of the peace of any County, of the places, and the Mayor or chief Magistrate of any City, or Town Corporate, upon Certi∣ficate from the Ordinary of the place made to him are requi∣red to commit the person, or persons so offending to the Com∣mon Goal of the same County, City, or Town Corporate ac∣cordingly.
XII. At all times when any Sermon, or Lecture is to be preached, the Common-Prayers and service in and by the Book appointed for that time of the day, shall be read by some Priest, or Deacon in the Church, where the Sermon or Lecture is to be preached, before such Sermon or Lecture be preached, and the Lecturer then to preach shall be present at the reading thereof. This Act not to extend to University Churches in the Univer∣sities of this Realm, but that the same Sermons and Lectures may be preached, or read in such sort and manner as the same have heretofore been preached or read. XIII. That the good Laws and Statutes which have been formerly made, and are now in force for the Uniformity of Prayer, and administration of Sacraments within this Realm, shall stand in full force to all intents, for establishing and confirming; The Book of Common-Prayer, administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, and the making, ordaining, and consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, esta∣blished by this Act, and shall be applyed and put in use for the punishing of all offences contrary to the said Laws, with relati∣on to the said Book, and no other. XIV. In all those Prayers, Letanies and Collects, which do in any way relate to the King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, that the names be changed and altered from time to time, and fitted according to the present occasion, according to direction of law∣ful authority. XV. A true Printed Copy of this Book, Entituled, The Book of Common-Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, and of the making, ordaining, and conse∣crating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, established by this Act, shal at the cost and charges of the Parishioners of every Parish-Church and Chappelry, Cathedral Church, Colledge and Hall be gotten before the Feast day of St. Bartholomew, 1662. upon pain of forfeit of 3 l. per mensem, for so long time as they shall then be unprovided thereof by every Parish, or Chappelry, Ca∣thedral, or Collegiate Church, Colledge, or Hall making de∣fault therein. XVI. The Bishops of Hereford, St. Davids, Asaph, Bangor and Landaff, shall take order that the Book aforesaid be truly and exactly translated into the Welsh-Tongue to such a number, so that every Cathedral, Parish-Church and Chappel may have
one to be used; and that before 1 May 1665. and the whole Divine service shall be used by the Ministers and Curates throughout all Wales in the Welsh Tongue, in such manner as is prescribed in the Book, for which Book, the Church-wardens shall pay out of the Parish-money, and shall be allowed the same on their accompt. XVII. The respective Deans and Chapters of every Cathedral or Collegiate Church in England and Wales, shall at their costs and charges before 25 December 1662. obtain under the Great Seal, a true and perfect printed copy of the Act, and of the Book annexed to it, to be by them kept & preserved for ever, & to be produced in any Court of Record, as often as they shall be lawful∣ly required, and they shall be delivered into the respective Courts at Westminster, and into the Tower of London, to be kept and preserved for ever among the Records there, which Books so exemplified, shall be taken and adjudged to be good and a∣vailable to all intents and purposes, and shall be accounted as good as the Book it self annexed to the Act. Provided, This Act shall not be prejudicial to the Kings Pro∣fessor of the Law within the University of Oxford, for, or, con∣cerning the Prebend of Shipton within the Cathedral Church of Sarum united to the place of the same Kings Professor, by the late King James. XVIII. All subscriptions hereafter to be made unto the 36 Articles agreed upon by the Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in Anno 1562. or hereafter to be made by a∣ny Deacon, Priest, Ecclesiastical person, or other person what∣soever, shall be construed and taken to extend and be applyed for and touching the 36. Article unto this Book, containing the manner of making, ordaining & consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, in the Act mentioned, in such sort and manner as the same did heretofore in the Book set forth in the time of King E. 6. mentioned, in the said 36. Article, any Law, Statute, &c. to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided, That the Book of Common-Prayer and admini∣stration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, together with the form of ordaining and consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons heretofore in use, and established by Act of Parliament in the 1 and 8 year of Queen Elz. shall still be used and observed until the Feast of St. Bartholomew, 1662.
Usury. 1. Enacted 12 Car. 2 Cap. 13. No person, or persons what∣soever from and after 29 Septem. 1660. upon any contract shall take directly or indirectly for the loan of any Monies, Wares, Merchandize, or other Commodities whatsoever above the va∣lue of 6 l. for the forbearance of 100 l. by the year, and so af∣ter that rate for a greater or lesser sum, or for a longer or shorter time. And all Contracts Bonds and Assurances whatso∣ever made after the time aforesaid for the payment of any prin∣cipal; or Money to be lent, or Covenant to be performed up∣on or for any Usury, whereby there shall be reserved or taken a∣bove the rate of 6 l. in the hundred, shall be void. II. All and every person, and persons whatsoever which shall after the time aforesaid upon any Contract to be made, take, accept, and receive by way of means of any corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange, Chievesance, Shift, or interest of any wares or other things whatsoever, or by any deceitful way or means, or by Covin Engine or deceitful Conveyance for the forbearing or giving day of payment for one whole year of and for their money, or other thing, above the sum of 6 l. for the forbearance of 100 l. for a year, and so for a greater or lesser sum, or for a longer or shorter term, shall lose for every such offence the tre∣ble value of the Monies, Wares, Merchandize, &c. so lent, bar∣gained, sold, exchanged or shifted. III. All and every Scrivener, Broker, Solicitor, driver of Burgains for Contracts, who shall after 29 September, 1660. take or receive directly or indirectly any sum of Money, or o∣ther Reward or thing for brokage, soliciting, driving or pro∣curing the Loan, or forbearing of any sum of Money over and above the rate or value of 5 s. for the loan, or the forbearing of 100 l. for a year, and so rateably; Or above 12 d. for ma∣king or renewing the Bond, or Bill thereof, or for any Counter bond concerning the same, shall forfeit for every offence 20 l. and have imprisonment half a year, one moity to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to him who will sue for the same in the same County where the offence is committed. and not els∣where by Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, where no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed.
Wines. I. Enacted, 12 Car. 2 Cap. 24. No person, or persons whatsoever, after 25 of March 1661. (unless authorized as in the Act is appointed) shall sell, or utter by retale, viz. by Pint, Quart, Pottle, or Gallon, &c. any kind of Wines to be drunk, or spent in his or their mansion houses, or other places in his or their tenure or occupation, or without such house, by any co∣lour, craft, or mean whatsoever upon pain to forfeit for every such offence 5 l. one moity to the King, the other to the Infor∣mer to be recovered by Action of Debt, &c. in any of the Kings Courts of Record, wherein no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed. II. It shall be lawful for the King, his Heirs, &c. from time to time to issue out under the great Seal of England Commissi∣on, or Commissions to two or more persons, authorizing them to give authority to such person or persons as they shall think fit, to sell and utter by Retale any kind of Wines, as well to be spent within the house or other place of the party so licenced, as without in any City, Town, or other place within the Kingdom of England, Wales, or Berwick, and such persons as shall be so commissionated, shall have power and authority to treat and contract for Licence, Authority, and Dispensati∣on to be given and granted to any person or persons for the sel∣ling and uttering of Wines by Retale in any City, Town, or other place, according to the rules and directions of this Act and not otherwise. III. Such persons as shall be commissionated by the King, &c. as aforesaid, shall be called the Kings Agents for the granting Licences, &c. which Agents are enabled under their Seal of Office to grant Licence for the selling and uttering of Wines by Retale to any person or persons for any time or term, not ex∣ceeding 21 years, if such persons shall so long live, and for such yearly Rent as they can, or shall agree, so as no Fine be taken for the same; But that the Rents and sums agreed upon, be paid and answered half-yearly by equal portions during the whole term. IV. Such Licences shall not be given or granted but to such as personally use the Trade of retailing and uttering of Wines, or to the Land-lord or owner of the house where such person
or persons shall utter wine by retale: Nor shall the same be assignable, or any ways beneficial, or extensive to indempni∣fie any person against the penalty of the Act, Except the first Taker. V. The King, his Heirs, &c. may appoint Officers, viz. a Receiver, Register, Clerk, Comptroller, Messenger, or the Officers for the carrying on of the service; so as the sallaries wages of such Officers, together with the sallary of his Agents do not exceed 6 d. in the pound of the Revenue that shall hence arise. VI. The Rents, Revenues, and sums of Monies arising by this Act (Except what shall be allowed for wages and sallaries) shall be duly and constantly paid and answered to the Kings Receipt of the Exchequer, and shall not be charged, or charge∣able either before or after it is paid into the Exchequer with any gift or pension. And the Kings Agents are to return into the Exchequer every Michaelmas and Easter Term, upon their Oaths, a book fairly written containing a true and full accompt what Licences have been granted the preceding half year, what monies are thereupon received and have been paid, and what are in arrear, with the securities of the persons in arrear, that speedy Process may be made out according to the course of the Exchequer, for recovery of the same. Provided, This Act shall not be prejudicial to the priviledge of the 2 Universities, nor to the Chancellor, nor Schollars of the same, but that they may use and enjoy such priviledges as here∣tofore they have lawfully used and enjoyed, nor to the Masters Wardens, Freemen and Commonalty of the mystery of Vint∣ners of the City of London, or any other City or Town Cor∣porate, but that they may-use and enjoy such liberties and pri∣viledges, as heretofore they have lawfully used and enjoyed; nor to extend to debar or hinder the Mayor and Burgesses of St. Albans in the County of Hertford, from using and exercising such liberties, powers and authorities granted to them by seve∣ral Letters Patents by Queen Eliz. and King James; for erect∣ing and licencing of 3 Taverns within the Borough of St. Albans for, and towards the maintenance of the Free-School there, but the same be hereby established and confirmed, and shall remain to them and their Successors for the charitable uses aforesaid. VII. It shall not be lawful for any Officer to be appointed by the King for the carrying on of this service, to take, demand,
or receive any fees, rewards, or sums of monies whatsoever, for, or in respect of this service, other than 5 s. for a licence, 4 d. for an acquittance, 6 d. for a Bond, under the penalty of 10 l. one moity to the King, the other for such as will sue for the same, by Debt, Bill, &c. wherein no wager of Law, &c. shall be allowed. VIII. No Merchant, Vintner, Wine-Cooper, or other person selling, or Retaling Wine, shall mingle, or utter any Spanish Wine mingled with French, or Rhenish Wine, Sider, Perry, Ho∣ney, Sūgar, Sirrups of Sugar, Molasses, or other Sirrups what∣soever, nor put in any Isinglass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, juyce of Raisins, Water, or other Liquor, nor Ingredients, nor any Cla∣ry, or other Herb, nor flesh whatsoever: Nor shall any persons mingle, or utter any French Wine, mingled with any Rhenish Wines, Sider, Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, or other mixtures as aforesaid; nor any Rhenish Wine mingled with French, or Spanish Wine, Sider, and other Mixtures as aforesaid; And all and every person, and persons committing any of the offences a∣foresaid, shall incur the pains following, (viz.) every Mer∣chant, Wine-Cooper, or other person selling any sorts of Wines mingled, or abused as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every offence 100 l. Every Vintner, or other person, selling any sorts of Wines by Retale mingled and abused as aforesaid, shall forfeit for eve∣ry offence, 40 l. one moity of the forfeitures to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to him who will sue for the same in any Court of Record, by action of Debt, Bill, &c. wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed. IX. From and after 1 September, 1661 no Canary Wines, Muskadine, Alegant, or other Spanish, or sweet Wines shall be sold, or uttered by any person, or persons, within England, Wales, Berwick by Retale, for above 18 d. a quart, and no Gascoign, or French Wines whatsoever, for above 8 d. the quart, and according to these Rates (for a greater or lesser quantity) all Wines shall be sold, upon penalty that every person, shall forfeit for every Pint, Quart, Pottle, Gallon, or other greater, or lesser quantity: the sum of 5 l. one moity to the King, &c. the other to him who will sue for the same, to be recovered in manner as aforesaid. Provided, The Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices, five, four, or three of them are e∣very year between 20 November, and the last of December,
and no other times, to set the prices of all and every the said Wines to be sold by Retaile at higher or lower Rates then is therein contained, so as they cause the prizes by them set to be written, and proclamation thereof to be in the Chancery in Term-time, or in the City, Towns Corporate, &c. where all and every the said Wines may be sold by Retaile at such prizes as by them, five, four, or three of them shall be set for the space of one whole year from 1. February after the selling thereof, and no longer. Parliament. Enacted 12 Car. 2. Cap. 1. That the Parliament begun, and holden at Westminster 3 November. 16. Car. 1. is dissolved, and determined, and that the Lords, and Commons, now sitting in the present Parliament, are declared and adjudged to be notwith∣standing the want of the Kings Writ of summons or any other de∣fect whatsoever, as if it had been summoned by the Kings Writ, and in his name, as if he had been present at the commencement thereof. 1. Provided, that it may be dissolved by the King, after the usu∣al manner, that the Kings assent to this Bill, shall not determine this present Session. Customs and Subsidies. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. Cap. 17. If any person after the first of September, 1660. shall cause any Goods for which Customs, Sub∣sidies, or duties are due; by vertue of an Act, passed this Parlia∣ment, Entituled, A Subsidie granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage, &c. to be landed and conveyed away without due entry thereof, and the Customer agreed with, in such case upon Oath made before the Lord Treasurer, any of the Barons of Ex∣chequer, or chief Magistrates of the Port, where the offence is committed; it shall be lawful for them respectively to issue out a Warrant to any person, or persons, enabling him, or them, with the assistance of a Sheriffe, Justice of the Peace, or Consta∣ble, to enter such house in the day time, where such Goods are suspected to be concealed; and in case of resistance, to break
open such house, &c. and to seiz and secure the Goods con∣cealed. 1. Provided, No house to be entred into by the Act, unless it be within one moneth after the offence supposed to be com∣mitted. 2. Provided, If the information whereupon any house come to be searched, shall be proved to be false, then the party inju∣red shall recover his full damages and costs, against the infor∣mer by action of trespass to be brought. The Act to continue unto the end of the first Session of the next Parliament and no longer. Customs, Subsidies and Impositions upon Goods and Merchandizes Imported and Exported. I. Enacted, 12. Car. 2. No person or persons whatsoever after 14. January, 1660. shall directly or indirectly Export, Transport or procure to be Exported, &c. out of, or from the Kingdoms of England, Ireland, Wales, Berwick, upon Tweed, Jersey, Guernsey, Sarke and Alderney being under the Govern∣ment of Guernsey, or any of them, or to any parts, or out of the said Kingdoms or Dominions thereof, any Sheep or Wool what∣soever of the breed or growth of the Kingdoms, &c. aforesaid; Or any Woolfels, Mortlings or Shorlings, or any Yarn made of Wool, or any Woolflocks, Fullers-earth or Fulling-clay what∣soever, or Pack, Load, or cause to be Packed, or Loaded upon any Horse, or layd aboard any Ship, or Vessel within the King∣doms, Isles or Dominions aforesaid, to the intent or purpose to Export or Convey, or to cause to be Exported or Conveyed out of the Kingdoms, Isles, &c. or with intent that any person should carry the same into any parts or places out of the King∣dom of England, Ireland▪ &c. into the Kingdom of Scotland or forreign parts. II. No wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers-Earth, or Fulling-Clay after 14. January, 1660. shall be exported out of the Kingdoms of Eng∣land, Ireland, Wales, Berwick or any place of the said Kingdoms respectively, unto the Isles of Jersey and Alderney, except as by the Act shall be appointed. III. All the Offenders aforesaid, shall be lyable to the penal∣ties
and forfeitures following, viz. The Sheep, Wools, Mort∣lings, Yarn, Fullers Earth and Clay, so exported, conveyed, packed or loaden contrary to the Act shall be forfeited. 2. The Offender shall forfeit 20 s. for every Sheep, 3 s. for every pound of wooll, Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay so exported, &c. 3. The Owners of the Ships or Vessels knowing such of∣fence shall forfeit their interest in the Ships, &c. with their apparel and furniture; 4. The Masters and Mariners knowing thereof and assisting thereunto, shall forfeit all their Goods and Chattels, and have imprisonment for 3 moneths, without bail, &c. one moity of the forfeitures or penalties to the King; the other to the Informer who will sue for the same in the Kings Courts of Record, or before Justices of Assise, or the general Quarter Sessions of the Peace. IV. If any Merchant or other Person after the said 14. Ja∣nuary, shall transport or cause to be transported any Sheep, Wooll, Woolfels, woollen Yarn, Fullers Earth, &c. contrary to the Act, and be thereof convicted, he shall be disabled to re∣quire any accompt of any Factor or others, for or concerning any debt or estate properly belonging to the Offender. V. Every offence done contrary to the Act, shall be enquired of in the County where such Sheep, Wooll, &c. shall be pack∣ed, &c. or else in the County where the parties shall be ap∣prehended, as if the offence had been wholly and altogether done at and in such County: and no person shall be impeached for any offence aforesaid, unless he be prosecuted within one year next after the offence committed. VI. Any person, &c. may lawfully seize, take or challenge to his own use, or to the use of the King, his Heirs, &c. all man∣ner of such Sheep, Wooll, Woolfels, Yarn, &c. as he shall so find, know or discover to be layed on board any Ship, Vessel, &c. or layed on shore, at or near the shore of any navigable River, to the intent to be transported out of the Kingdoms of England, Ireland, or Dominions thereof, or to be packed upon any Horse or other Carriage to the intent to be conveyed into the Kingdom of Scotland, and such person, &c. as shall seize, &c. the same shall have the full moiety thereof. Provided, such person as shall make such seizure shall not be allowed to give in evidence upon his Oath against any person which shall be indicted or questioned by vertue of this Act. VII. Every Ship, Vessel, Boat, &c. whereof any alien born, or whereof any natural born Subjects not inhabiting within
England, shall be Owner, or part Owner, and wherein any Sheep, Wooll, Yarn made of Wooll, &c. shall happen to be shipped or laid on board, shall be forfeited to the King, &c. 1. Provided, This Act not to extend to any Lamb-skin ready drest, fit and useful for furr or linings. Nor to the carrying, or conveying away any Woolfels, or Pelts with such Wooll upon them, or to any Beds stuffed with Flocks which shall be car∣ried in any Ship, or Vessel for necessary use, onely in or con∣cerning the Ship, &c. or for the necessary use of the persons passing in such Ship, &c. and which shall not be sold in any forreign parts, nor to the conveying of any Weather-Sheep, or the Wooll growing upon them to be carried alive in any Ship, &c. for the onely necessary food or diet of, or for the company, or passengers, or other persons therein. 2. Not to extend to any such Wooll to be exported out of, or from the Port of Southampton onely to the Isles of Jersey or Guernsey by, or for the use of any the Inhabitants there; so as such person that shall Ship, or lay aboard such Vessel, do before the Shiping, &c. thereof, deliver to the Customer, Surveyor, or Searcher of the said Ports, a writing under the Seals of the respective Governors of the said Isles to which the Wooll is to be transported, or their Deputies, which writing shall express the party named therein, as authorized to export out of the Port aforesaid so much Wooll, expressing the number of the rods to be used or manufactured in the said Isles, and that the party so authorized hath before the making of such writing en∣tred Bond to the King for the landing of the said Wooll in that Isle: and the Wooll exported out of the said Port of Southamp∣ton, shall not exceed this quantity, viz. to Jersey 2000 tods, unkembed, Guernsey 1000 tods, Alderney 200 tods, Sark 100 tods and no more, every tod not exceeding 32 pound. VIII. That the Governour of the respective Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, or his Deputy for whom he will answer, shall not make any writing or writings to any person or persons to ap∣point or authorize such person or persons to fetch or export out of the said Port of Southampton, unto the respective Isles in one year, accompting the year from 14 January, 1660. aforesaid, any greater quantity of Wooll into the said respective Isles and places, than is by the true meaning of the Act limited and ap∣pointed, upon pain the respective Governour or Governours of such Isles, shall forfeit and pay to the King 20 l. for every tod of Wooll which shall be so licenced to be exported over and a∣bove
the rate and proportion by the Act limitted and appoint∣ed. IX. That the Customer of the Port of Southampton shall keep a true accompt of the quantity of Woolls so by him per∣mitted to be loaden, and shall not permit any greater quantity of Woolls than in the Act is prescribed, to be loaden in any one year to either of the said Islands under any pretence whatsoever, upon penalty of forfeiture of his place and the sum of 100 l. one moyety to the King, the other moyety to him who will sue for the same in any Court of Record, wherein no essoin, &c. shall be allowed. X. That the respective Governors or their Deputies, or any their Clerks, Officers or Servants for the making, granting, or sealing of every such writing of licence, and for the entring of a remembrance of the same into some Book which they shall keep for that purpose, shall take 12 d. and no more, upon pain of forfeiture to the party grieved 5 s. for every penny shall be ta∣ken above the said 12 d. the penalty to be recovered by Bill, or Information in any Court of Record at Westminster, wherein no injunction, essoin, &c. shall be allowed. Corporations. I. 13. Car. 2. Cap. 1. For the prevention of all questions as may arise concerning the validity of elections of Magistrates and other Officers and Members in Corporations, Enacted, That before 20. February next, Commissions shall be issued un∣der the Great Seal to such persons as the King shall appoint, for the executing of the powers in the Act expressed, and the persons to be named Commissioners respectively, for, and within the se∣veral Cities, Corporations, Boroughs, Cinque Ports, and their Members and Port Towns within the Kingdom of England, Wales, Berwick, shall be Commissioners respectively. II. No Charter of any Corporations, Cities, Towns, Bo∣roughs, Cinque Ports, or their Members and other Port Towns in England, Wales, &c. shall at any time hereafter be avoid∣ed for or by reason of any act or thing done, or omitted before the 1. day of this Parliament. III. All persons who upon 20. December 1661. shall be May∣ors, Aldermen, Recorders, Town-Clerks, Common Councel men, and other persons bearing Office of Magistracy, or
places, or trusts, or other employment relating to the govern∣ment of the said respective Cities, Corporations, Boroughs, &c. shall at any time before 25. March, 1663. when they are required by the respective Commissioners, three or more of them, take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy: and the Oath following, viz. 1. I. A. B. Do declare and believe, that it is not Lawful upon any pretence whatsoever, to take up Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that traiterous position, of taking Arms by his authority against his Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him. 2. Shall subscribe, viz. I. A. B. do declare that there is no obligation upon me, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant; and that the same was, and is in it self an unlawful Oath, imposed upon the subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: and such of the said Mayors and other persons, &c. who shall refuse to take and subscribe the same, shall from and after such refusal be ipso fa∣cto removed off and from the said Offices and places respective∣ly, and the said Offices and places are hereby adjudged void to all intents, &c. as if the parties so refusing were dead. IV. That the said Commissioners, five or more of them shall have power by warrant under their Hands and Seals to remove any of the persons aforesaid, from their said respective offices places, or trusts, if they or the major part of them present shall deem it expedient for the publick safety, though such persons have taken and subscribed, or be willing to take and subscribe the said Oath and Declaration. V. The respective Commissioners, 5 or more of them shall have power to restore such persons as have been illegally or un∣duly removed, into the places out of which they were removed, and so put into the offices and places which shall be void re∣spectively, some other persons then being, or which have been Members and Inhabitants of the said respective Cities, Corpo∣rations, &c▪ who shall before the respective Commissioners, 3 or more of them, take the Oaths of Obedience and Supremacy, and the other Oath, and subscribe the Declaration before men∣tioned; and that the said persons after the taking and subscrib∣ing thereof shall enjoy the said offices and places as if they had been elected according to the Charters and former usages of the respective Cities, Corporations, &c. VI. The respective Commissioners 3 or more of them, shall have power during the continuance of their Commissions to ad∣minister
the Oaths and tender the Declaration aforesaid, and from and after the expiration of the said respective Commissi∣ons, the said 3 Oaths and Declaration shall from time to time be administred to such persons as are to take the same, by such person or persons respectively, who by the charters or usa∣ges of the respective Cities, Corporations, &c. are to admini∣ster the Oath for due execution of the said place; and in de∣fault of such, by 2 Justices of the Peace of the said Cities, Cor∣porations, &c. for the time being, if any such be there, or other∣wise by 2 Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties, &c. VII. The Commissioners, Justices of the Peace and other persons authorized to administer the said Oaths, and tender the said Declaration respectively, shall cause entries to be made of all Oaths and Subscriptions made before them, and deliver the same once in a year to the respective Town-Clerks, or o∣ther Register of the respective Cities, Corporations, &c. who shall cause the same to be entred into Books belonging to the said respective Cities, Corporations, &c. VIII. From and after the expiration of the said Commissi∣ons, no person or persons shall for ever hereafter be placed, ele∣cted, or chosen in or to any the said offices or places that shall not within one year next before such election have taken the Sacrament of the Lords Supper according to the Rites of the Church of England, and every such person, &c. so elected, shall take the aforesaid 3 Oaths and subscribe the said Decla∣ration at the same time when the Oath for the execution of the said offices or places shall be administred, and in default there∣of such election shall be void. 1. Provided. Every person placed in any Corporation, shall take the Oath or Oaths usually taken by the Members of such Corporation. 2. That the powers granted to the Commissioners shall con∣tinue and be in force till 25. March, 1663. and no longer. 3. If any Bill, plaint, &c. shall be brought or commenced a∣gainst any person nominated a Commissioner for any matter done in pursuance of the Act; such person shall plead the ge∣neral issue and give the Act in evidence, and if the verdict shall pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or suffer any discontinuance thereof, the Judge before whom the matter shall be tryed, shall allow to the Defendants their trebble costs, for which the Defendant shall have like remedy, as in other cases
where by the Laws costs are given to the Defendants. 4. This Act shall not extend or be to the prejudice of any person whatsoever, that hath any reversion of any the offices or places belonging to the City of London, by force of any or∣der, grant, designation, or nomination of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, made or granted to him before the late Wars, for or in respect of such grant, designation or nomina∣tion onely. Taxes. I. Enacted, 13 Car. 2. Cap. 3. That the sum of 70000 l. by the moneth for 18 moneths, beginning from 25. December, 1661. shall be assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid by six Quarterly payment in the several Counties, Cities, Bo∣roughs, Towns and places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick, according to several Rates and proportions in the Act expressed: and what particular sums are to be paid by the several and respective Counties, Cities, Towns, &c. are expresly set down in the Act: And several persons particu∣larly named in the Act, who shall be Commissioners of, or for the said several respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and places. II. That the several Commissioners shall meet together at the most usual place of meeting within each of the said Counties and places respectively on or before 20 January next following, and so many of them as shall be present at the first general mee∣ting, or the major part of them, are to put the Act in Executi∣on according to the best of their judgements and discretions; and shall sub-divide themselves into other numbers, as two or more may be appointed for the service of each Hundred, or o∣ther Division. III. That the Commissioners at the first general meeting, or the major part of them may set down in writing what number of them shall act in each of the said Hundreds, or Divisions, to the end there be no failer in any part. IV. The Commissioners within the several Divisions, or Hun∣dreds, two or more of them are to cause the several proporti∣ons charged in the respective Divisions, and in every Parish and place therein for the said 10 moneths to be equally assessed, and to appoint two or more Assessors in every Parish or place, who are to assess the same equally by a pound Rate upon all
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Annuities, Rents, Parks, War∣rens, Goods, Chattels, Stocks, Merchandizes, Offices, and all o∣ther Estates both real and personal within the limits and bounds of their respective Parishes and places. V. That the sum of 210000 l. the first of the six Quarterly payments be assessed, collected, levied and paid unto the Re∣ceivers General of the several Counties, who are to transmit, or cause the same to be paid into the Kings Receipt of Exche∣quer, before 25 of March, 1662. the sum of 210000 l. the second of the quarterly payments, on or before 24 June, 1662. The sum of 210000 l. the 3d. of the said quarterly payments, on or before 29 September, 1662. The sum of 210000 l. the 4th. of the quarterly payments, on or before 25 December, 1662. The sum of 210000 l. the 5th. quarterly payment, on or before 25. March, 1663. The sum of 210000 l. the last of the said quarterly payments, on or before the 24th. of June, 1663. VI. To the end the said sums charged upon the respective Counties, Cities, &c. may equally and indifferently be asses∣sed, and the Monies duly collected, and true Accompts there∣of made, the Assessors are to deliver one Copy of their respe∣ctive Assessments, fair written, and subscribed by them to the Commissioners, who are to seal two Duplicates of the same, and the one of them to deliver to one or more honest person or per∣sons to be Sub Collector, or Sub-Collectors, which the Commissi∣oners are to appoint for each Parish or place, with warrant to collect the said 18 moneths Assessments, so as the said several sums may be paid in to the Head-Collectors, so timely as they may by them be paid to the Receivers General, and by them in∣to the Receipt of the Kings Exchequer at the respective times aforesaid: And the Commissioners are to deliver the other of the said Duplicates of each Parish, &c. to the Receiver General of each County or place respectively, to be by him transmitted to the Lord Treasurer of England, VII. The Commissioners in their respective Divisions, two or more of them, are under their Hands and Seals to appoint an honest and responsible person to be Head-Collector, to whom the Monies by the Sub-collectors within the Division received shall from time to time be paid, and the Head-collector upon the Re∣ceipt thereof is to pay the same forth-with to the Receiver Ge∣neral of each County respectively. VIII. The particular Collectors and Sub-collectors are to pay
in all the sums so by them received to Receivers general, who are to transmit, or cause the monies by them received to be paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, and the Lord Treasurer is to allow the Receiver General of each County, City, and Town, in case he hath returned up a Duplicate of the assessment of each Parish, &c. for which he is appointed Receiver General, a sa∣lary not exceeding 1 d. in the pound upon the cleering of his Accompt. IX. The Sub-Collector of every Parish or place, upon the collection of the whole sum to be collected by them, and payment thereof, shall receive for their pains in collecting and paying the Monies, one penny in the pound which the Head-Collectors shall pay unto them; and the Head-Collectors upon payment of the whole sum for their Hundred and Division, to the Receiver General, shall have and receive for their pains in receiving and paying the said Monies, 1 d. in the pound, which the Receiver General is to pay unto them accordingly. And upon the receipt of the whole Assessment of the County, City, Town, &c. in case he hath received the several Dupli∣cates of each Parish or place therein, and not otherwise, to allow and pay according to such warrants as shall be given by the Commiss. or 3 of them, 1 d. in each pound for the Commiss. Clerks for their pains, in writing the Assessments, Duplicates, and Copies. Provided, No Head-Collector shall be appointed for any City or Town which is by the Act particularly charged with the payment of any sum towards the Assessment thereby to be levy∣ed, and for which a Receiver General is to be appointed, ex∣cepting within the City of London. X. If any person shall refuse, or neglect to pay the sum of money whereat he is rated or assessed, the Collectors, Sub-colle∣ctors, or any of them are to levy the sum assessed by distress and sale of the persons goods so refusing or neglecting, returning the overplus to the Owner, reasonable charges of distraining de∣ducted; and in the day time to break open any house, and upon Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two of the Commissio∣ners or more to break open any Trunk, or Box, or Chest, where such goods are, and to call to their assistance the Constable, or Tything-man within the Counties, Cities, &c. where any such resistance shall be made, or refusal, who are to be ayding and assisting in the Premisses; And if any difference happen upon the taking of such Distresse, the
same shall be ended by the Commissioners, two or more of them; and if any person shall convey away his goods, whereby the sum cannot be levyed, the Commissioners or two of them are to imprison the party (except he be a Peer) and to keep him in Prison till the Money assessed, and charges in the bringing in the same be paid, but no longer: And the Tenants of all Hou∣ses and Lands which shall be rated, are authorized to pay such sum of monies, and to deduct out of their Rents so much of the said rates, as of every such House and Lands the Land-lord shall or ought to pay and bear. XI. Every Tenant paying the Assessment, shall be discharged of so much money as the Assessment doth amount unto, as if the same had been actually paid to such person to whom his Rent should be paid; and the differences which shall arise betwixt Land-Lord and Tenant concerning the Rates, the Commissio∣ners in their several Divisions, two or more of them shall set∣tle the same as they shall think fit. And if any person shall finde himself agrieved that he is over-rated, and within 6 dayes after demand of the money, complain to the Commissioners who allowed such Assessment, the Commissioners shall have pow∣er to relieve such person, and to charge the same on such o∣ther person as they shall think fit. XII. In case the proportion set upon the respective Coun∣ties, Cities, Towns and places shall not be fully levyed and paid; Or if any of the Assessments imposed, shall be rated and imposed upon any person not of ability to pay the same, or upon any empty or void house where the same cannot be col∣lected or levied; Or that through wilfulness, mistake, or other accident, the Assessment charged upon each County, City, Town, &c. happens not to be paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, in every such case the Commissioners, Assessors, and Collectors are to assess or re-assess, levy and pay every such sum of money upon the respective Counties, Cities, Towns, &c. upon any of the Divisions, Hundreds and Parishes therein, as to the Commissioners shall seem most agreeable to Equity and Justice. The said new Assessments to be paid in such manner as in the Act is directed. XIII. If any person or persons shall wilfully neglect or re∣fuse to perform his or their duty in the due and speedy Execu∣tion of the Act, the Commissioners, three or more of them may impose upon such person or persons so refusing or neglecting, such Fine as to them shall be thought fit, the same to be levyed
by distress or sale of their Goods; No Fine imposed for one of∣fence to exceed 20 l. which shall be paid to the Receivers General, and by them into the Receipt of the Exchequer. XIV. If any Receiver General, Collecter, or Sub-Collector, shall neglect or refuse to pay any sum of money which shall be by him received, and shall not pay in the same as by the Act is directed, but shall detain in his hands any money received by him or them, the Commissioners of each County, City, &c. two or more of them in their respective Divisions are impow∣red to imprison the party, and seize and secure his Estate real and personal, their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, where ever the same can be discovered and found: And the Commissioners who shall so seize or secure the Estate, shall ap∣point a time for the general meeting of the Commissioners of such County, City or Town, and there notice to be given ten days at least before such general meeting; and the Commissioners pre∣sent at such general meeting, or the major part of them, in case the Monies detained by the general Receivers, Collectors, &c. be not paid, as ought to be, to sell and dispose of all such Estates, & satisfie and pay such County and place the sums that shall be detained, and return the overplus to such general Recei∣ver, Collector, &c. their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators. XV. At the expiration of the respective times prescribed for the full payments o the said quarterly Assessments, the respe∣ctive Commissioners, or any 2 of them within the Division and Hundred, are to call before them the chief Collectors & Sub-Col∣lectors to examine and assure themselves of the full payment of the particular sums of money charged upon the said Division, Hundred, and every Parish therein, and of the due return of the same into the hands of the general Receiver of the County, Ci∣ty, Town and place respectively, and by such Receivers to the re∣ceipt of the Exchequer, to the end there may be no failure of pay∣ment of any part of the Assessment, nor any Arrerages remain chargeable upon any of the said Counties, Cities, Towns, &c. And in case of any failure, the Commissioners or two of them are to cause the same to be forthwith levyed and paid. XVI. If controversies arise concerning the Assessments, or the apportioning or payment thereof which concern any of the Commiss. the Commiss. concerned shall have no vote, but with∣draw at the time of the debate till it be determined by the rest. XVII. No priviledged place or person, body politick or cor∣porate, shall be exempted from the Assessment, but they and all
Fee-farm Rents, and all other Rents, payments, sums of Mo∣nies, and Annuities issuing out of any Lands within the Coun∣ty, shall be lyable to be taxed and levyed; and all the Tenants of such Rents and Annuities, &c. are to pay them proportionably, and shall be saved harmless by the Act from any farther pay∣ment either to the Exchequer or other person, to whom such Rents should or ought to be paid. 1. Provided, This Act not to charge any Mr. Fellow, or Scho∣lar of any Colledg in the Universities, Eaton, Winchester, Westmin∣ster, or other Free-Schools, Reader, Officer, or Minister of the said Colledges, &c. in respect of any stipend growing due to them; or in respect of the several Employments in the said U∣niversities, Colledges, &c. Nor to charge the houses or Lands, belonging to Christ-Church, St. Bartholomew, Bridewel, S. Tho∣mas, and Bethlehem Hospitals in London or Southwark for any Rents or Revenues payable to them, being received and dis∣bursed for the relief of the poor of the said Hospitals. 2. No Tenants that hold Lands or Houses by Lease or Grant from any the said Hospitals to enjoy any exemption by the Act, but shall be rated and assessed for so much as they are yearly worth over and above the Rents payable to the Hospitals. 3. Where any person dwelling in London, hath his dwelling house in one Parish, and hath any office, goods, &c. in one or more other Parishes, to be assessed for his office, goods, &c. in the Parish where he dwelleth, and not elsewhere. If he dwel∣leth without the City, and hath any office within the City, to be assessed for his office in the place where he dwelleth. 4. No clause or proviso in the Act shall extend to the lessen∣ing of the full sum to be levyed and paid, but the same to be ful∣ly assessed, levyed & paid in the several respective Counties, Ci∣ties, and Towns in such manner as is declared by the Act; and the Commissioners shall from time to time accompt for all their doings to the Lord Treasurer, or such as the King shall appoint. XVIII. That in case the way of assessing by a pound rate shall prove prejudicial or obstructive to the speedy bringing in of the Assesment, the respective Commiss. or 2 of them, are to direct the Assessors, who are to assess the respective sums charged on the respective Counties, Cities, Towns, &c. according to the most usual way of Rates held in such Counties, Cities, Towns, &c. respectively. XIX. That the apportionment of the assessment, according to the rates and proportions in this Act, upon the Counties, Ci∣ties,
Towns assessed, shall not be drawn into president for the future; and nothing herein shall be drawn into Example, to the prejudice of the Ancient Rites belonging to the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, Clergy of the Realm, Universities, Colledges, Schools or Hospitals; nor to al∣ter, determine, or make void any contracts, covenants or usages between Land-Lords and Tenants touching the payment of taxes or assessments. XX. If any action, plaint, &c. shall be commenced or pro∣secuted against any person, &c. for what he or they shall do in pursuance and execution of the Act, such person may plead the general issue, and give the act and the special matter in evidence, & if the prosecutor be nonsute, or suffer a discontinuance or ver∣dict pass against him, the Defendant shall recover treble costs. 1. Provided, No future aid or supply of money to the King by Parliament in charge of the people, shall at any time hereaf∣ter be granted or levied by way of monthly assessment. 2. No Auditor of the Exchequer or other Officer, shall upon allowance to be made to any person, assessed for any Fee-farm Rent, to the King or Queen Dowager, take any other fee for the same than 4 d. for any debt upon such allowance. Militia. I. Enacted. 14. Car. 2. Cap. 3. That the King, his Heirs &c. shall (as occasion shall require) issue forth Commissions of Lieutenancy to such as he shall think fit for the Countries of England, Wales, and Berwick, to call together at all such times all persons; and to Arm and Array them, and to form them in∣to Companies, Troops, and Regiments, and in case of Insurrecti∣on, Rebellion, or Invasion, to lead, conduct, and employ them within the Counties and places for which they shall be Com∣missionated for the suppressing of such insurrections, &c. accor∣ding as they shall receive directions from the King, his Heirs, &c. and the said Lieutenants shall have power to give Com∣missions to such persons as they shall think fit to be Collonels, Majors, Captains, and Commission officers of the persons so to be armed and arrayed, and to present to the King, his Heirs. &c. the names of such persons as they shall think fit to be Deputy Lieutenants; and the said Lieutenants respectively, and in their absence out of their Lieutenancies, the Deputy Lieutenants, 2 or more of them, to train, exercise, lead, and conduct the per∣sons armed, and arrayed to the purposes expressed in the Act.
II. The Lieutenants within the several Counties, Cities, and places, and their Deputies, or the major part of such Lieu∣tenants, and Deputy Lieutenants then present, or in the ab∣sence of the Lieutenants, the major part of the Deputy Lieu∣tenants; 3 at the least, have power to charge any person with Horse, Horse-men and Arms, or with Foot-Soldier and Arms in the same County, City, Town, &c. where his, her, or their estates lie, not exceeding these proportions, viz. no person to be charged with finding a Horse, Horse-man and Arms, unless he have 500 l. per annum in lands, in possession, or 6000 l. in Goods or Means besides the furniture of their houses, and so propor∣tionably for a greater or lesser estate. 2. Not to charge any per∣son finding a Foot-Soldier or Arms, that hath not 50 l. per annum in possession or personal estate of 600 l. (other than the Stock upon the Ground): And so proportionably for a greater or les∣ser estate; and shall charge no person with finding both Horse and Foot in the same County. 1. Provided, they or 3 of them may impose the finding and providing of Horse, Horse-men, and Arms, by joyning 2, 3, or more persons together in charge as shall appear most conduceable to the service of the King∣dom. 2. Provided, no person, that hath not 100 l. per annum in possession, in Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or coppi∣hold, or 1200 l. personal estate, shall be compellable to contri∣bute to the finding of any Horse, or Horse-man. III. The Lieutenants and Deputies, or 3 of them, in their respective Counties, &c. shall require all persons charged with Horse, , Horse-men and Arms to allow 2 s. per diem to the Trooper that serve with their Horse and Arms, for the main∣tenance of the Man and Horse; and 12 d. per diem for the Foot-Soldier (if they serve not in their own persons) for so many daies as they shall be absent from their dwelling, by occasion of muster or exercise. IV. The Lieutenants and Deputies, or 3 of them, shall have power to lay fitting rates upon the respective Counties and place (not exceeding the fourth part of one months Assess∣ment, after the rate of 70000 l. by the month; which monies are to be assessed and paid by such persons, according to such directions as shall be given by the Lieutenants and Deputies, or 3 of them, under the like penalties as are prescribed in an Act of Parliament, Entituled, An Act for raising 70000 l. for the further supply of the King) and in case of invasions, insurrecti∣ons, or rebellions, the persons so charged shall provide each
their Soldier with pay in hand (not exceeding one months pay) as shall be directed by the respective Lieutenants, or in their absence by their Deputies, two or more of them, for payment of which monies, and for satisfaction of the Officers for their pay during such time as they shall be with their Soldiers in such said actual service, provision shall be made by the King and his Heirs, out of his or their publick Treasury or Revenue. Provided, in case a months pay shall be provided and advanced as aforesaid, no person who shall have advanced his propor∣tion, shall be charged with any other like months payment, till he hath been re-imbursed the said months pay. V. The Lieutenants and their Deputies or chief Officers up∣on the place in the respective Counties, &c. may charge Carts, Wagons, and Horses for the carrying powder, match and other materials, allowing 6 d. per mile, for every Cart, &c. with 5 Horses, and for every Horse employed out of Cart, &c. for the uses aforesaid, 1 d. so taken upon the marching of any Regi∣ment, Company, or Troop, upon occasion of invasion, insurre∣ction, &c. And the Lieutenants or their Deputies, or chief Offi∣cers may imprison mutineers, and such Soldiers as do not their duties as Soldiers, at the day of their musters and training, and may inflict for such offence a pecuniary mulct, not exceeding 5 s. or imprisonment not exceeding 20 dayes. VI. If any person so to be assessed by the Lieutenants and Deputies or 3 of them, shall refuse or neglect by a reasonable time appointed to provide and furnish such Horse, Horse-men and Arms, and other furniture, or to pay such sums of money for the furnishing as aforesaid, the said Lieutenants and De∣puties, 3 or more of them, may for every such offence inflict a penalty upon such persons, not exceeding 20 l. and by War∣rant under the hands and seals of 3 or more of them, levy such sums of money, or the value of such Horses, Arms and Fur∣niture and such penalty inflicted, by distresse and sale of the persons goods so refusing or neglecting, rendring the overplus to the party, necessary charges in the levying deducted. VII. If any person to be armed, arrayed and weaponed, shall detain, or imbezle his Horse, Arms, or Furniture, the respe∣ctive Lieutenants, and in their absence their Deputies, 2 or more of them may imprison such person and persons, till they have made satisfaction for the Horse, Arms or Furniture so de∣tained or imbezled▪ and if any person so to be horsed and wea∣poned, shall not appear and serve compleatly furnished with
Horse, Arms and furniture at the beat of Drum, sound of Trumpet, or other summons, the Lieutenants and their Depu∣ties, 2 or more of them, may imprison such person or persons five dayes, or inflict the penalty, if a Horse-man 20 s. if a Foot∣man 10 s. to be paid down without delay: and if any person as∣sessed, shall refuse or neglect to send his Horse, Arms, and Furni∣ture upon summons or notice, the respective Lieutenants and their Deputies or 3 of them, may inflict a penalty not exceed∣ing 5 l. to be levyed by distress and sale of such persons goods, rendring the overplus, necessary charges for levying de∣ducted. VIII. The respective Lieutenants are to appoint one or more Treasurers, or Clerks for the receiving and paying of the monies levyed, of which receipts and disbursements they are every 6 months to give their accompt in writing and upon Oath to the Lieutenants and their deputies, or any 2 of them (which Oath they have power to administer) and the accompt so taken shall be forthwith certified to the Lords of the Kings Privy Councel and a duplicate thereof shall be certified to the Justi∣ces of the Peace at the next general quarter Sessions. IX. The respective Lieutenants or 2 or more of their Depu∣ties, are by warrant under their hands and seals to employ such persons as they shall think fit (of which a commissionated Of∣ficer, and the Constable or his Deputy, or Tythingman shall be one) to search for and seiz all Arms in the custody and posses∣sion of any persons the Lieutenants or their Deputies shall judg dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdome, and to secure such Arms, and thereof to give accompts to the Lieutenants and in their absence to their Deputies or any 2 of them. Prov. no such search be in any house between sun-setting and sun-rising, other than in Cities, and their Suburbs, Towns Corporate, and Mar∣ket-Towns, where it may be lawful to search in the night time by Warrant, and in case of resistance to enter by force. No dwelling house of any Peer of the Realm shall be searched, but by immediate Warrant from the King under his sign Manual, or in the presence of the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieu∣tenants of the same County; and in all places where search is to be made, it shall be lawful in case of resistance to enter by force, and the Arms so seized, may be restored to the Owners, if the Lieutenants or their Deputies or two of them shall think fit. X. The Constables and other Officers within the Counties,
Cities, and places are to be aiding and assisting to the Lieute∣nants and their Deputies in the execution of the premisses, and all persons who shall act or do any thing in execution thereof, shall be saved harmless, &c. and all persons who have hereto∣fore acted any thing in execution of any Commission of Lieute∣nancy issued by the King that now is, or by colour of them, or relating thereunto since 7. May 1661. till the 20. of May 1662. shall be saved harmless and indempnified. XI. Where any person shall be charged to find a Horse, and Hors-man and Arms, or a Foot Soldier and arms in such Coun∣ty, &c. where he doth not reside or inhabit, the Commissio∣ners and Deputies, or any 3 of them shall send notice of such charge, if any such person have lands in his own occupation, to such person as he doth employ as his servant in managing of the same, and in case all his lands or other estate be let to farm, then to one or two of the most sufficient Tenant or Tenants, who shall have the same in their occupation, who are to con∣vey the same to their Master or Land-lord, and shall bring an accompt of their Master or Land-lords answer to the Lieute∣nants and Deputies, and upon neglect or refusal of the Land-lord, to provide such Horse, Horse-man, Arms, or such Foot Soldier and Arms as is charged upon him, then the said Te∣nant or Tenants shall provide and do as the Land-lord in that behalf ought to have done, and if the Tenant or Tenants shall neglect to provide such Horse, Horse-man and Arms, or such Foot-Soldier and Arms charged upon his Land-lord, within the time limited, the Lieutenants and their Deputies, two or more of them, may by Warrant under their hands and seals levy all such penalties as are appointed by the Act, by distress and sale of the Offenders goods, rendring the over plus to the party distrained. XII. That it shall be lawful for the said Tenant or Tenants to detain out of such rent or rents as shall be next due to the Land-lords, all such monies as the said Tenant or Tenants shall lay out or expend in providing such Horse, Horse-man, Arms, or Foot-Soldier and Arms charged upon the Land-lords, or shall be levied upon him or them, any Commission, Reserva∣tion, Covenant, or Contract for the payment of his rent to the contrary notwithstanding, and shall be saved harmless by the Act, unless the Land-lord or Land-lords shall make it ap∣pear within 2 months after the levying such penalties before the Lieutenants or their Deputies, 2 or more of them, that the
default and penalty was occasioned by the wilful neglect of such Tenant or Tenants. XIII. No Peer of the Realm shall be capable of acting as Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenant, unless he shall first before six of the Lords of the Privy Councel, or such other person as shall be authorized by the King to administer the same, take this Oath, viz. I. A. B. do declare and believe that it is not law∣ful upon any pretence whatsoever to take Arms against the King, and I do abhor that traiterous position, that arms may be taken by his authority against his person or against those that are commissi∣onated by him in pursuance of such Military Commissions; and none under the degree of a Peer shall be capable of acting as a Lieu∣tenant or Deputy Lieutenant, Officer or Soldier, unless he take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the like Oath as the Peers are as above to take, which Oaths any one Justice of the Peace of the respective Counties. &c. is enabled to ad∣minister to the said Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, and the Lieutenants or their Deputies are enabled to administer the said Oaths to the Officers and Soldiers. XIV. That the Trained Bands and Forces now actually rai∣sed and in being shall so continue in each respective City and County of England and Wales until 25. of March, 1663. and no longer, unless an establishment according to this Act be no sooner had, any thing in the Act notwithstanding. XV. The ordinary times for training, exercising and muster∣ing the Forces shall be these, viz. 1. The general muster and exercise of Regiments not above once a year. 2. The training and exercising of single Companies not a∣bove four times a year, unless special direction be given by the King or Privy Councel. 3. Single Companies and Troops shall not at any one time be continued in exercise above two days. 4. At a general muster and exercise of Regiments, no Of∣ficer or Soldier shall be constrained to stay for above four days together from their habitations. 5. At every muster, every Musketeer shall bring with him half a pound of Powder at the charge of the person who is to provide the said Foot Soldier and Arms. 6. Every Horse-man to bring with him a quarter of a pound of Powder at the charge of such person as is to provide the Horse, Horse-man and Arms▪
The Arms offensive and defensive with the furniture for Horse are, viz. The defensive Arms, a Back, and a Brest and Pot: The Brest and Pot of Pistol proof, viz. The offensive Arms, a Sword and a Case of Pistols, the Bar∣rels not under 14 inches in length. The furniture of the Horse, a great Sadle, or Pad, with burs and straps to affix the Houlsters unto. 2. A Bit and a Bridle Pe∣ctorel and Crupper. 7. For the Foot, A Musketeer is to have a Musket, the Bar∣rel not under 3 foot in length. The gage of the Bre to be for 12 Bullets to the pound, a collar of Bandaliers with a Sword; and all Muster-Masters for the present shall admit, and allow of any Muskets already made which will bear a Bullet of 14 to the pound; but none henceforth shall be made, or allowed but such as are of the gage of 12 Bullets to the pound. 8. A Pikeman, is to be armed with a Pike made of Ash, not under 16 foot in length; a Back, Brest, Head-Peece, and Sword; Muster-Masters shall▪ for the present allow of Pikes already made that are not under 15 foot; but no Pikes which shall be hereafter made, are to be allowed of, that are under 16 foot in length. XVI. The Militia of the Island of Purbeck shall remain se∣perate from the County of Dorset, and the Kings Lieatenant of that Island, and his Deputies, 3 or more of them, shall have power of Levying, Arraying, Mustering, and conducting of such number of foot for the defence of the Island, and execute with∣in the Island all such powers, as any of the Kings Lieutenants or their Deputies; might in the respective Counties, Cities, &c. execute. XVII. In case of danger to the present Government, the King at any time or times the same shall happen during three years from 20 June, 1662. may raise such sums of money for defraying of the whole, or such part of the Militia, as he shall find himself obliged to employ in order to the quiet and secu∣rity of the Nation, not exceeding 70000 l. in one whole year, the same to be raised by the Lieutenants or their Deputies in the respective Counties according to the directions in an Act of this Parliament, for the raising 18 moneths assessment after the rate of 70000 l. per mensem; as also to continue for three years from the aforesaid 25 of June, and no longer. XVIII. All Constables and other Officers who since 24 June, 1660. have paid or disbursed or before this Militia esta∣blished,
shall pay or disburse any monies for buying of Arms, or defraying of charges of Soldiers, set, or to be set upon their respective Parishes, shall be re-imbursed the same by such as have refused to pay their proportions thereof; and in case he or they shall refuse to pay the same, then to be levied by distress and sale of goods, delivering the overplus to the owner. XIX. No person charged with the finding of Horse, or Foot, or with contributing thereunto, shall be compelled to serve in his proper person, but may according to such proportion as he shall be charged, finde one or more fit and sufficient man to be approved by his Captain; nevertheless to be allowed upon appeal to the Lieutenant, or his Deputy Lieutenants, or two of them: And every such person so found and provided, shall serve as Soldier in such manner and under such penalties as are appointed by the Act. XX. Every person or persons who shall serve in his own per∣son, or such person as shall be accepted in his stead, shall at the next Muster of the Troop, or company, give his Christian and Sir name and place of aboad, to such person as the Lieutenant or his Deputy Lieutenants, or two of them, shall appoint, to the end the same may be listed: And from thenceforth the party listed, shall not be exchanged or desert the service but by the leave and order of the Lieutenant or two Deputy Lieute∣nants, or his Captain, obtained in Writing under their Hands and Seals, upon pain he shall forfeit 20 l. to be levied of his Goods and Chattels; and for non payment, or want of distress to be committed to the common Gaol for 3 moneths without bail or main prize. XXI. The Act shall not extend to put a new charge of Arms upon the Tinners of the Counties of Devon and Cornwal, o∣ther than the tax in the former proviso; but the Warden of Stannaries, in pursuance of the Kings Commission, and such as he shall Commissionate under him, shall have the like powers, and Array, Assess, Arm and Muster the said Tinners within the Counties, according to the ancient priviledge and custom of the said Stannaries. XXII. The Kings Lieutenants that are or shall be Commis∣sionated for the City of London, shall continue to list and levy the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries of the City as to the number and quality of the persons in manner as was used in forming the present forces now raised by the Kings Commission. And the Kings Majesties Lieutenants of the said City by Warrant from
his Majesty shall and may impose and levy yearly so much mo∣ney as they shall find needful for the defraying the arrears of those which were raised for his Majesties Restauration; and the arrears and necessary charge of those that now are, and shall be raised, with the Ammunition and expences of their Militia, not exceeding in one year the proportion of one moneths tax which the City now pays towards the tax of 70000 l. by the moneth. XXIII. No Officer or Soldier of the Militia or Trained Bands belonging to any City, Borough, or Town Corporate being of it self a County, or other Corporate or Port Town, who have used to be Mustred onely within their own Precincts, shall be compella∣ble to appear out of their Precincts, at any Muster or Exercise onely; and every of the said Cities, Boroughs, &c. are hereby chargeable to find their usual number of Soldiers unless the Lieutenants find cause to lessen the same. 1. Provided, The Act not to extend, to avoid any Covenant or agreement that hath, or shall be made between any Land-Lord, or Tenant concerning finding of Horses or Arms, or the bearing or paying any taxes, rates, or other charges by any Tenant; but that the said rates and charges shall be born and paid by the Tenants, according to the Covenants and agree∣ments. 2. Not to extend to make any alteration in the Isle of Wight, as to the Militia in that place, either to raise Horse or Foot in the Island otherwise than formerly hath been. 3. That it shall be lawful for the Kings Constable or Lieute∣nant of the Tower to continue to levy the Trained Bands in the Division or Hamlets of the Tower in such manner, as to the num∣ber and quality of the persons, as was observed in the forming of the present Forces. 4. No matter herein contained shall extend to the giving, or declaring any power for the transporting any of the Subjects of the Realm, or compelling them to march out of the Kingdom, otherwise than by the Laws of England ought to be done. XXIV. No Peer of this Realm shall be charged with Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, or Foot Soldiers and arms in other man∣ner than is expressed, viz. That the King, his Heirs, &c. may issue out Commissions under the Great Seal, to so many Peers (not fewer than 12) as he or they shall think fit, who or any 5 of them shall have power to assess all and every, or any of the Peers of the Realm according to the limitations in the Act for
the finding of Horse, Hors-men and Arms, and Foot Soldiers and Arms, and shall have power to put in execution all the pow∣ers and authorities of the Act, as well for laying of assessments, as imposing of penalties; which shall be from time to time cer∣tified to the Lieutenants of each County, to the end the charge may be born and the penalties levied according to the Act, and if there be default in performance of any thing to be done or paid, the respective Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, or 3 of them, may cause disttesses to be taken in any the Lands of such Defaulter, within their counties or limits, and if satisfa∣ction shall not be given within one week after distress taken, then the distresses to be sold for the performance of the service and the charge incident thereunto. Statutes Continued. Enacted, 17. Car. 1. Cap. 4. That all Statutes and Acts of Parliament which have their continuance, or were by an Act of Parliament, made in the 3. year of the reign of his Majesty that now is, Entituled, An Act for the Continuance and repeal of divers Statutes, continued until the end of the first Session of the then next Parliament, shall by vertue of this Act be adjudged ever since the Session of Parliament in the said third year to have been of such form and affect, as the same were the last day of that Session, and from thenceforth until some other Act of Parliament be made, touching the continuance or discontinu∣ance of the said Statutes and Acts, in the said Act of the 3. year of his Majesties Reign continued as aforesaid. FINIS.
AN EXACT Abridgment Of all the Publick ACTS of PARLIAMENT Which were Pass'd June 3. and July 17. In the 15th year of the Reign of King CHARLES II. Cattel. NO person using the Trade of a Butcher, Enacted Anno 15 Car. 2. Cap. 6. shall at any time from and after the Feast of S. Michael next, sell, offer, or expose to sale, by himself, or any Servant, or Agent whatsoever, any fat Oxen, Steers, Runts, Kine, Heifers, Calves, Sheep, or Lambs alive, upon pain to forfeit the double value of the Cat∣tel so sold, offered, or exposed to sale, one moyety to the King, his Heirs and Successors, the other moyety to him who shall sue for the same in any of his Majesties Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt, or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.
EXCISE. Enacted Car. 2. Cap. 9. No common Brewer, Inn-keeper, Victualler, or other Retaler of Beer or Ale shall at any time af∣ter 1 September, 1663. without first giving notice thereof at the next Office of Excise, or to the Commissioners, Farmers, or Sub-Commissioners of Excise, or one of them, within the limits of whose Office he or they shall inhabit; erect, set up, alter, or enlarge any Tun, Fat, Back, Cooler or Copper, and shall make use of any of them for the brewing or making any Beer or Ale, or Worts, or make use of, or keep any private and con∣cealed Store-house, Cellar or other place for the laying in any Beer, Ale, or Worts in Cask, other than such as are al∣ready openly set up and made use of in his common and usual Brewhouse now openly known, upon pain of 50 l. for every Tun, Fat, Back, Copper, &c. set up and made use of without such notice given as aforesaid: And all and every person, &c. in whose occupation any House, Out-house, or other place whatsoever is or shall be, where such private and concealed Tun, Back, Cooler, or Store-house shall be found and discover∣ed, shall forfeit the sum of 50 l. to be levied as by the Act is directed: And every such private and concealed Tun, Fat, Back, &c. discovered and found, or altered or enlarged, with all Beer, Ale, and Worts therein, shall be taken up, seized, and carried away and delivered to the Overseers of the Poor, to be sold for the use of the Poor. II. From and after 8 November 1665. No person or persons whatsoever nominated to be in Commission for the regulating of his Majesties Revenue of Excise; or for the exercise of the Powers mentioned in an Act, Entituled, A Grant of certain Im∣positions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for the increase of his Majesties Revenue for life: Or an Act Entituled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries, &c. or in this pre∣sent Act, shall presume to farm the same Revenue, either directly or indirectly, by obtaining Letters Patents to him or themselves, or other persons in trust for them, or for their use or benefit: Nor any person whatsoever being a Farmer of the said Revenue, shall be capable to be nominated a Commissioner for the regulating of the said Revenue of Excise, or exercising
any powers concerning the same. But if any person disabled as aforesaid to be a Commissioner shall become a Farmer, and shall in either of the said cases presume▪directly or indirectly to act as a Commissioner, Farmer, or Sub-Commissioner, to exe∣cute the powers, either alone, or joyntly with other persons that are Farmers, or who are not Farmers, shall after such acting lose the benefit of his Farm, and be thenceforth for ever disabled to be either Farmer or Commissioner for the regu∣lating thereof and exercising the powers aforesaid. And all and every act done by any Commissioner, Farmer by himself, or joyntly with others not Farmers, shall be void: And all per∣sons, &c. any way molested or troubled by any such Com∣missioner, may bring his action at law for the same, in any of his Majesties Courts at Westminster, and thereby recover his damages. III. All and every Letters Patents to be made after the tenth of April 1663. making any Farmer of Excise to be a Commis∣sioner or Sub-Commissioner shall be utterly void. IV. If any Commissioner or Sub-Commissioner who by ver∣tue of any Letters Patents are now both Commissioners for re∣gulating the said Revenue, and likewise Farmers of the said Revenue, shall give any false or corrupt judgement in advance∣ment of the benefit of his or their Farm to the Brewers da∣mage, he or they shall forfeit for every such judgement, dou∣ble costs to the party so injured: And in case any person shall unjustly complain of any such judgement of the Commissioners, and so shall be found upon his appeal, he shall forfeit double costs to the Commissioners for such unjust vexation, to be re∣covered by Information, Bill, or Plaint in any Court of Re∣cord. V. From and after 1 September 1663. All and every Ga∣ger or Gagers of Excise, who take an account of any Beer or Ale brewed, or made by any common Brewer, shall weekly after such Brewer hath, or ought to have made his Entry at the Office of Excise, and not otherwise, make to such Brewer, or some of his servants in his behalf, a true Copy under his hand of such report as he or they have made thereof to the Commissioners of Excise, upon pain of forfeiture for every neglect 40 s. Provided, No such Brewer shall be sued or prosecuted for any penalty, for or by reason of any mis-entry, or short en∣try, if he or they shall within a week after the delivery of
such copy, certifie his or their entry according to the said return, or otherwise discharge himself. VI. From and after 1 September, 1663. as often as shall be occasion, two able Artists shall be appointed, one by his Maje∣sties Commissioners or Farmers for Excise, the other by the Brewers of any City or place, who shall take an Oath to take and compute the just contents and gage of all Tunns, Coppers, Fatts, and other brewing-vessels belonging to all or any Brewer of Beer or Ale to sell, and deliver and give under their hands one copy of the particular of such Vessels to the said Commis∣sioners or Farmers, and another to each and every respective Brewer, which computation shall answer and be according to the measures and proportions expressed in the said former Acts of Excise. VII. No Commissioner, Farmer, or Sub-Commissioner for the Excise, or common Brewer of Beer or Ale to sell, from and after 1 September 1663. shall have power to act in, or exe∣cute as a Justice of Peace, any of the powers or things con∣tained in any of the Laws made for and concerning the Excise, or in this present Act: And if any of the said persons shall pre∣sume to act or execute any thing contrary hereunto, all such things so acted or executed, are and shall be void to all intents and pur∣poses. VIII. From and after 1 September 1663. The Commissi∣oners, Farmers, or Sub-Commissioners in each County within England and Wales shall constitute or depute under their hands and seals, such persons as they shall think needful in each respe∣ctive Market-Town, to be there every Market-day in some publick place, for receiving the Entries and duties of Excise, and performing all other things touching the said duty, as to former Acts, and this present Act; which said persons so con∣stituted or deputed, shall attend at such Office on every Market-day in such Market-Town, and shall keep the said Office open from 9 of the clock in the morning, till 12 of the clock at noon: and from 2 of the clock in the afternoon, till 5 of the clock in the afternoon. And in case such Office shall not be so kept and attended in each Market-Town, the Commissioners, Far∣mers, or other persons so neglecting or refusing to do the same, shall for every Market-day forfeit 10 l. one moyety to the King, &c. the other moyety to him who will inform and sue for the same in any of the Kings Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection, &c. shall be allowed: And such persons as shall
come to make such entry, and shall tender the same according to the Acts, and be able to prove such tender by one or two witnesses, shall not be liable to any penalty imposed by the said Acts for such weekly entries, or payments as should have been made or paid upon such Market day. IX From and after 1 September, 1663. No common Brewer of Beer or Ale shall sell, carry or deliver out any Beer or Ale to any of his Customers, either in whole Cask, or by the Gallon, in any City, Town Corporate, or Market Town, before notice given to an Officer of the Excise: but between the hours of the day, viz. from 25. March, to 29 September yearly between three of the clock in the Morning, and nine of the clock in the Eve∣ning: and from the 29th. of September, to the 25th. of March, yearly between five in the Morning, and seven of the clock in the Evening, upon pain that every Brewer doing the contrary, to lose 20 s. for every barrel of Beer or Ale, to be levied and recovered, as in the Act is appointed. X. If any common Brewer, Inn-keeper, Victualler, or Retaler of Beer or Ale, shall after 1 September, after an accompt shall be taken by the Gager, of the quantity and quality of the Beer, Ale, or Worts found in his Tun, or other Brewing Vessels, convert any part of his small Beer, or small Worts, into strong Beer, or Ale, by mingling, letting down, and shall sell, deliver out or retale the same, or any part thereof, without giving notice to the same Gager of the quantity so mingled, or converted; Or if such Brewer or Retaler shall after the said time hide, conceale, or convey any Beer, Ale, or Worts, not gaged, from the view of the Gager appointed to take accompt of the same, whereby the King, His Commissioners, or Farmers, shall or may be defrauded of the duties due for the same, every such Common Brewer, Inne-holder, &c. for every barrel of Beer or Ale, by him so mingled, converted, sold, hid, delivered, or conveyed away, shall forfeit the sum of 20 s. to be levyed as in the Act is appointed. XI All and every the Brewing Vessels and Utensils for Brewing, in whose hands soever they shall come, and by what title soever claimed, shall be liable, and shall be charged with all and singular the Debts and Duties of Excise in arrear and owing by any persons made within the said Brewhouse; and be subject to all penalties, and forfeitures incurred by persons using the said Brewhouse, for any offence against the Laws, and Statutes for Excise: And it shall be lawful in all cases to levy debts
and penalties, and use such proceedings against the Utensiles as it may be lawful to do, in case the debtor or offender had been truly and really owner and proprietor of the same. XII. After the first of September, No common Brewer of Beer or Ale, or other person who hath, or shall compound for the du∣ties of Excise, for Beer or Ale by him brewed, or to be brewed, during the time of such composition, shall brew, make or suffer any Beer or Ale to be brewed within his Brewhouse for any other common Brewer whatsoever, without first giving notice of every such brewing to be made unto the Commissioners, or Farmers of Excise within the destricts of whose Office such common Brewer doth or shall inhabit, and paying down to the Commissi∣oners or Farmers, the full Excise of all the said Beer and Ale, up∣on pain as well the Brewer who shall brew the same, ae he for whom the Beer or Ale shall be brewed, shall lose for every barrel 5 l. one moyety to the King, the other to the Informer who will sue for the same. XIII. From and after the first of September, No person shall be permitted to sell or retale any Coffee, Chocolate, Sherbet, Tea, without License first had and obtained by order of the General Sessions of the Peace, in the several and respective Counties, Certificate being first shewed that they have given good securi∣ty for the payment of their dues to the King or the chief Magi∣strate of the place, in whose jurisdiction they shall inhabit, for the selling, or retaling of the same: Nor any License granted un∣til security be given by Recognisance; For which License and Recognisance 12 d. shall be given and no more; and every person selling or retaling such Liquors without License had, and security given, shall forfeit 5 l. for every moneth he shall continue selling or retaling the same. XIV. From and after the first of September, No Brewer or other person shall bribe, corrupt, or give any money, fee, or re∣ward whatsoever to any Gager, or other Officer to make any false return or report into the Office of Excise of any Beer, Ale, or other Liquors made, brewed, or to be made or brewed within their charge or division, or to forbear or omit the doing or executing of their places or imployments, upon penalty of 10 l. for every offence, and no sworn Gager or other Officer shall directly or indirectly take, or receive any bribe, or money, fee, gift, or reward of any Brewer or other person, for any cause relating to the Excise, upon penalty for every such Gager or Officer for every such offence to lose 10 l. All and every the
said offences to be proved by two credible witnesses before two Justices of the Peace, or chief Magistrates of the place where the offence shall be committed, who have hereby power to administer the said Oaths, and examine and determine the same, and cause such penalties to be levied by warrant under their hands and seals, by distress and sale of the offenders goods, and for want of distress to commit the offender to the common Gaol, for three moneths without bail, &c. XV No foreign imported Liquors shall be landed, or put on shore out of any ship or vessel from beyond the Seas, before entry be first made thereof, with the Officer or Collector appointed for the Excise; or before the duty of Excise due and payable for the same be fully satisfied and paid: And every warrant for the landing of such foreign Liquors shall be signed by the hand of the said Officer or Collector in the Port respectively, upon pain that all such foreign Liquors as shall be landed contrary to the meaning hereof, or without the presence of an Officer, or Waiter for the Excise, or the value thereof, shall be forfeited, one moyety to the King, the other to him who will seize, inform, or sue for the same, to be recovered of the Importer, or Proprietor thereof. XVI No person whatsoever bringing any exciseable Liquors (except Beer, or Ale, Sider, Perry, Metheglin) into any place of this Realm by Coast, Cocquet, or Certificate, nor any person to whom the same shall be consigned, shall land, or cause such exciseable Liquors to be landed, or put on shore without making due entry of the same with the Officers of the Excise for the time being, appointed within the Ports where the same shall be landed, upon pain to forfeit the double value of the Liquors landed, or put on shore. XVII. No appeal in any case of Excise whatsoever shall be admitted until the Appellant shall have first deposited the single duty of Excise in the hands of the Commissioners, or Far∣mers, within whose division the cause was originally heard, and given security to the Commissioners of Appeal, where such cause is finally to be determined, for all such fine, forfeiture, and penalty as upon such hearing was adjudged against him: and if upon hearing the original hearing shall happen to be reversed and made null, then the Commissioners, Farmers, &c. in whose hand the single duty was deposited, shall deliver back the same, or so much thereof as shall be adjudged to the Appellant, and the party originally prosecuting shall pay him double costs;
But if the first judgement shall be affirmed, shall pay the like costs to the Commissioners or Farmers complained of. XVIII. All and every person brewing, or making any Beer in a common Brewhouse, or otherwise for sale, or to convert to Vineger for sale: shall pay for every barrel of such Vineger-Beer the sums already imposed by any Act of Excise upon Vine∣ger-Beer brewed by any common Brewer in any common Brew∣house. XIX. Every Colledge and Hall in either of the Universities, which before the duty of Excise was imposed, did brew their own Beer and Ale within their Precincts; and size it out to their respective members, are not liable to pay any duty of Excise for the same. XX. All differences, appeals, and complaints that shall arise between party and party in order for the payment of the duty of Excise, shall be heard and determined in the proper County. XXI. No Farmer, Commissioner, or other Officer of Excise, shall directly, or indirectly take any money, fee, or reward for the taking any bond, or giving receipt in writing to the Excise, to or from any persons whatsoever, upon pain for every offence to for∣feit 10 s. XXII. The Justices of the Peace, two or more, or chief Ma∣gistrates in the several Cities, Counties, and places within Eng∣land and Wales respectively, shall meet once every moneth in their divisions to hear and determine all matters and offences against this or the former Acts. XXIII. One third part of all fines and forfeitures herein, not disposed of, shall be to the King, His Heirs, &c. the other third part to the poor of the Parish where the offence shall be com∣mitted, and the other third part to him who will sue for the same. XXIV. After the third of September, No appeal in any mat∣ter or cause of Excise within the limits of the chief Office of Lon∣don, nor within the limits of the present Farm of London, during the continuance of such Farm shall be admitted, unless brought within two moneths after the first judgement and notice given at the dwelling house of the party; nor any appeal in any cause of Excise in any other County, City, or place, unless the same be brought within four moneths after the first judgement and no∣tice as aforesaid. XXV. No Commissioner, Farmer, or other person em∣ployed,
or to be employed in the farming, collecting, or taking of accompt of the duty of Excise, do after 1. September next take upon such Office, or proceed in execution of such employ∣ment; till he have taken the Oaths appointed by the Act of Par∣liament, Intituled, A grant of certain impositions of Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for encrease of the Kings Revenue during his life, and hath entred his Certificate thereof, with the Auditor for Excise, under the penalty of 50. l. for every moneth he shall neglect the same. I. Anno. 15. Car. 2. cap. 10. Declared and Enacted, Where any Commissioners, Treasurers, and all other Officers which were heretofore employed in the receipt of Excise, Farmer or Collector which stand charged with, or accomptable for any duties of Excise, received, farmed, or detained from the per∣sons before named; and not pardoned by the late Act of Ob∣livion, Intituled, An Act of free and general pardon, &c. shall be deemed and taken to be lyable and answerable according to the nature of their respective securities, any doubt or questi∣on touching the construction of the said Act of general pardon notwithstanding. II. Where the Commissioners of Excise for the time being have issued out any summons, which hath been left at the house or usual place of residence, or with the wife, child, or servant menial, of the persons chargeable or accomptable, the same shall be a good and sufficient summons, and as legal and effectual notice, as if the same had been delivered to the proper hands of such person to whom the same was directed. FENS. Anno 15. Car. 2. Cap. Whereas certain Marshes and Fenn-ground, called the Great Level of the Fenns, extending into the Counties of Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Cambridge, Huntington, and the Isle of Ely, particularly bounden: 95000. Acres whereof were heretofore granted to Francis Earl of Bedford, his Adventurers, and Participants, his and their Heirs, &c. under certain Covenants, Conditions, and A∣greements to be dreined; and have been adjudged to have been dreined, but the same cannot be preserved without a per∣petual constant care, charge, and orderly Government; To
the end therefore that a work of this nature may receive a publick support and encouragement, I. Enacted, That William Earl of Bedford, Son of the said Francis Earl of Bedford, and the Adventurers, and Partici∣pants of the said Francis and William and either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall be a body Politick and Corporate in deed, and name, and have succession for ever by the name of Go∣vernour, Bailiffs, and Commonalty of the Company of Con∣servators of the Great Level of the Fens; which shall consist of one Governour, six Bailiffs; twenty Conservators and Commo∣nalty, particularly named in the Act, till Wednesday in Whitsun-week One thousand six hundred sixty and four, and from thenceforth until new Elections by the said Corporation, and be capable to sue and be sued, and to purchase Manors, Lands, &c. not exceeding 200. l. per annum, and Goods and Chattels, and to dispose thereof to the use of the said Corpora∣tion, and the said Governour, Bailiffs, and Conservators, five or more of them, whereof the Governour, or Bailiffs, or any of them to be two, to lay Taxes upon all the said 95000. Acres on∣ly for the support and preservation of the said Great Level, and le∣vy penalties for not payment thereof, not exceeding a third part of the Tax and other things due, in order to the support and preservation of the said Level and the works made, and to be made. II. Whereas 12000. Acres, parcel of the said 95000. A∣cres, was designed to the late King, who being in possession thereof, by his Letters Pattents, granted and set out by bounds 2000. Acres, parcel of the said 12000. Acres, to Jerome Earl of Portland, his Heirs and Assigns, which said Earl hath sold away 1500. Acres thereof in several parcels, to several per∣sons, their Heirs and Assigns; and the rest being about 500. Acres had granted to B. Weston, Esquire, and his Heirs, upon se∣veral Trusts: That the said 2000. Acres, or other Lands of equal value, shall be set forth in exchange of the same, in case the said 2000. Acres, or any part thereof, shall be adjudged to be un∣duly set out, are hereby vested, and setled, in the said respective persons to whom the said Earl hath conveyed the same, their Heirs and Assigns, or to every person, his Heirs and Assigns their respective share and shares, to be holden by each of them, his Heirs and Assigns, in severalty according to the intent of the Conveyances upon the same Trusts, for and concerning the 500. Acres granted to the said Benjamin Weston, to be holden of
the King his Heirs and Successors of the Mannor of East Greenwich in Free and Common Soccage, and not otherwise, sub∣ject to all Taxes conducing to the preservation of the said Level from Drowning. III. That the 83000. Acres remainder of the 95000. Acres, with all wayes, Passages, Cutts, Dreyns, over and above the 10000. Acres, residue of the 12000. Acres allotted to the Late King, are hereby vested in the Governour, Bayliffs and Com∣monalty and their Successors, in Trust for William Earl of Bed∣ford, the Adventurers and Participants of the said Francis and William, or either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, according to such portions and proportions as they now hold, lyable to the payment of all Taxes and Charges, to be holden of the Kings Majesty his Heirs and Successors, of the Mannor of East Green∣wich by Free and Common Soccage, and not otherwise: And the 10000. Acres residue of the 12000. Acres, are vested in the King his Heirs and Successors, subject with the residue of the 95000. Acres to the same Taxes and Charges. IV. The Governour, Bayliffs, &c. of the said Corporation five or more of them (whereof the Governour, Bayliffs, &c. or their Successors or any of them to be two) are constituted Commissioners of Sewers for the said Level, and impowered to exercise the power and authority of Commissioners of Sewers within the said Level, and of the works made or to be made without the Level, for the dreyning of the Waters by convenient Out-falls to the Sea, and touching all matters and things happening within the said Level inquirable or punishable by Commissioners of Sewers, and therein to proceed with one or more Juries inhabiting within any part, within the Boundaries of the Level though in several Counties, as if the said Le∣vel lay within one County only; which Juries are to ap∣pear at all times and places set and appointed, before the Com∣missioners, Bayliffs, &c. five or more of them; and are to try all matters within the said Level, and of and concerning the works made, or to be made without the Level for the dreyning of the Waters as aforesaid, as if the said Great Level were one distinct County of it self: And the Governour, Bayliffs, &c. shall have power for the Levying of Taxes, and to exercise within the Level, such and like Laws and Customs, and ap∣point such or like Officers, as are used in Rumney Marsh in the County of Kent; they who exercise the said power of Commis∣sioners, taking the Oath which Commissioners of Sewers are to take.
V. Every Bill, Plaint, Presentment and Indictment, of, for or concerning the Grounds within the said Level, or parcel thereof for any Offence, Trespass or Wrong done, shall be good in Law, though the County, Town or place, in such Writ, Bill, Plaint, Presentment, or Indictment be not rightly named, so as there be such cettainty thereof whereby the same may be known. VI. No other Commissioners shall intermeddle within the said Great Lovel, or with the works made, or to be made for the support, or preservation of the same within or without the said Great Level, otherwise than in the Act is pro∣vided. VII. All Conveyances by Indenture of the 95000. Acres, or any part thereof entred with the Register, in a Book kept for that purpose, shall be of equal force to convey the Freehold, or Inheri∣tance thereof, as if the same Conveyances were for valuable con∣sideration of money enrolled within one of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster; And no Lease, Grant out of, or upon the said 95000, Acres, or any part thereof, except leases for se∣ven years or under in possession, shall be of force but from the time it shall be entred with the Register; the entry whereof, en∣dorsed by the Register upon such Lease, Grant, Conveyance, or Charge, shall be as good and effectual in the Law, as if the Original Book of Entries were produced at any Tryal, or otherwise. VIII. The Governour, Bayliffs, &c. shall execute Estates ac∣cording to the Trust, under their Common Seal, the Taxes and Penalties in Arrear being first paid, which for not payment are to be levyed by sale of the Lands. IX. For the Levying of such Taxes and Penalties as are now in Arrear, or which at any time since 30. September, 1658. (other than such as are otherwise directed to be levyed) or which shall be set upon the 95000. Acres; and shall be arrear upon the respective proportions thereof, the Governour, Bayliffs, &c. five or more of them, whereof the Governour and Bayliffs, or one of them are to be two, shall on Wednesday and Thursday in Whitsun Week, every year at the Shire-house in Ely, have power to sell so much of such parts and proportions of the said 95000. Acres, as the said Governour and Bayliffs, five or more of them, shall judge to be sufficient to raise such Taxes and Pe∣nalties by any writing under the Seal of the Corporation; and the person to whom such Sale shall be made, shall be Lawful Pur∣chaser and Assignee of so much.
1. Provided, by colour of any sale for Taxes, or penalties, any Tenant at will, or Lease, upon any improved Rent, shall not be removed out of his, or their possession, until they shall have taken their Crop from off the premises sold, paying reasonable Rent proportionable to the time such possession after such Sales be continued; And such tenants may continue and hold out their Terms, paying their Rent to such a Purchaser: And the Corporation, nor their Successors, shall sell any part of the 95000 Acres for any Tax or Penalties in arrears, which shall not be arrear for the space of four moneths next before the sale, nor any more Lands than onely for the raising such Taxes and penalties. 2. The Corporation shall give publique notice of the parts of the said 95000 Acres, which for any Tax or Penalties is, or shall be arrear, by affixing openly at the Shire-house or Market-place in Ely, a Schedule upon the Seal of the Corporation, containing the parts, for which the said Taxes or Penalties is or shall be in arrear; with the names of the owners, entred upon the Tax-Roll, with the Corporation. X. That the Corporation may erect any new works within or without the said Level, for the conveying the Waters thereof, by convenient Out-falls to the Sea, so always that if they cut any several grounds they give full recompence for the same in such manner as is provided by the Act, and if any person shall cut down or destroy any the said works made, or to be made, the par∣ties offending shall answer treble damages to the Corporation, and costs of suit, to be recovered in an Action of Trespass by the Cor∣poration in any of His Majesties Courts of Record: and if such cut∣ting and destroying be maliciously done, the same shall be puni∣shed as for the cutting of Podyke in Marsh-Land. XI. The Earl of Bedford nominated Governour, and every other chosen into that Office, shall, before he take upon him the ex∣ercise of the said Office, take an Oath that he will well and truly execute that Office; & the Bailiffs, Conservators, Register, Receiver and other Officer, shall before they take upon him or them the exercise of the said respective Offices, take the like Oath; which Oath shall be administred by the Governour, Bailiffs, &c. two or more of them, without any Commission or further Warrant. XII. The Governor, Bailiffs, Conservators, &c. upon Wednes∣day in Whitsun-week yearly, shall at a publick meeting holden for the Corporation, by the greater humber then present, elect a new Governor, Bailiffs, &c. Provided none to be capable to be,
or continue Governor, or Bailiffs, &c. that hath not 400 Acres or more, of the said 95000 Acres, nor to be a Conservator, that hath not 200 Acres, or more thereof; nor any of the Commo∣nalty to have voice in the elections, that hath not 100 Acres or more thereof: And the Governor, Bailiffs, Conservators, shall and may be removed by the Governor, Bailiffs, Conservators and Commonalty, or the greater number of them present, at their meetings: and the Governor, Bailiffs and Commonalty shall have power to demand and receive accompt from all and every the Officers, Agents, and Servants, their Executors and Administra∣tors heretofore employed, or hereafter to be employed for the re∣ceiving and paying of money for, or in relation to the carrying on of the work of drayning, and shall sue for, and recover the same, and all arrearages of Rent upon any Contract, or Lease of the premises, or any part thereof; and if any suit be commenced against the Corporation, or any person for any matter done in pursuance of the Act, they may plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in evidence, which shall be as good in Law as if the same had been specially pleaded. XIII. Touching such part of the 83000 Acres, whereof any person attainted, or that shall be attainted, was or were in possessi∣on at any time since 29 of May 1649. under pretended sales there∣of, made by colour of a pretended Act, or any other title, or pretended title; the King, his Heirs and Successors shall have the same, and the benefit, advantage and interest in all and every the said parts of the said 83000 Acres, and no other, than as the per∣sons attainted, or which shall be attainted, could, or ought to have by vertue of this Act, in case they had not been so attainted, or shall not be so attainted. XIV. The Governor, Bailiffs and Commonalty, &c. and their Successors shall actually stand seized and possessed of all the shares, lots, parts and proportions which did belong and appertain to Samuel Sandys the elder, Sir William Terringham, Sir Richard Onslow, and others the Assignees and Trustees of Henry late Earl of Arundel, Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Thomas Lord Culpepper, Robert Phillips, Robert Scawen, and to divers other persons, the Participants of Francis Earl of Bedford, and parties to an In∣denture of 14 parts, in trust nevertheless to, and for the use of the said Samuel Sandys and the said other parties before named, their respective Heirs and Assigns, to and for the respective uses of the said other parties, the Participants of the said Francis Earl, and the parties to the said Indentures of 14 parts, and of their respective
Heirs and Assigns now out of possession of their respective shares, lots, and parts of the said 95000 Acres, as heretofore about the moneth of October in the 13. year of the late King Charles were respectively allotted, severed, or divided, for, or as their respective shares, &c. of such the Adventurers, the Participants of the said Earl Francis, parties to the said Indentures of 14 parts, from, and under whom, the said Samuel Sandys, and the other parties before named, and the said other parties, the Participants of the said Earl Francis, and their respective Heirs, Executors, &c. now out of possession of their respective shares, lots, &c. do respective∣ly claim and derive their said shares, lots, parts and proportions. And the Governor, &c. are to execute respective estates of the said shares, parts, &c. accordingly subject and lyable with the residue of the said 95000 Acres to equal proportion of all taxes and charges to be taxed and imposed by this Act, for preservation of the Level from drowning. XV. Whereas the persons now in possession of the last men∣tioned Shares, Lots, and Parts, have laid out and disbursed for Taxes, and towards the maintenance and repair of the works of the Level, more monies than the clear Rents and Profits of the said shares have amounted unto, since their respective estates were first taken and accepted: That the Chief Justice of K. B. Chief Justice of Common Pleas, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and Justices of Common Pleas, be Commissioners to hear, Judge and Determine, upon Bills exhibited, or otherwise, between the par∣ties now in possession, their respective Heirs and Assigns, and the said Sir Richard Onslow, and other the Assigns and Trustees of the Earl of Arundel, and the several other parties Participants of the said Earl Francis, their respective Heirs and Assigns, who are now out of possession of the said shares; And the said Commissio∣ners, two or more of them are to adjudge, decree, and determine to either of the said parties respectively, such recompence, as they or two of them shall see cause, and the said Commissioners shall have the like power and authority, as the High Court of Chan∣cery hath, in putting in Execution their decrees. XVI. In every Decree or Determination made by the said Commissioners, Judges, they shall have regard to the sums of mo∣nies actually expended by either party in the reparation of the said Level, and of the times of such disbursements, defalking the sums and Rents and Profits of the same. XVII. That at any time after six moneths after passing the Act, the said Sir Sam. Sandys, and other the Trustees of the late Earl
of Arundel, Earl of Anglesey, & other parties before named, and every their Heirs and Assigns, & the Participants of the said Earl Francis, their respective Heirs and Assigns, whose lands, shares, &c. of the said 95000 Acres were sold for not payment of Taxes by the pretended Act of 29 May, 1649, may bring their several Actions of Trespass and Ejectment in the Kings Courts of Kings Bench or Common Pleas, against any persons whatsoever holding or occupying the same, and such persons shall recover such lands, shares and parts as they shall make title and claim unto, as if the Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators, &c. had duly executed estates of such lands, shares, & parts according to the intent of the Act; and such persons, &c. shall have, hold and enjoy the said lands, shares, parts, &c. as effectually, as if the Governour, &c. had executed respective estates thereof, subject nevertheless to such De∣cree as the Commissioners or Judicatory shall make touching and concerning the premises, and subject to the payment of all taxes imposed by the Act. XVIII. Whereas there are several sums of money amounting to 4000 l. arrear in taxes imposed since 29 Sept. 1658. upon seve∣ral parts of the 95000 acres, and for penalties incurred, the Com∣mis. or Judicatory, or any two of them, are in such adjudication as they shall make, to direct and decree upon what persons or lands the said sums and penalties shall be charged, and the taxes and penalties shall be levied upon such person and lands, by such ways and means, as shall be ordered and decreed by the Judicato∣ry aforesaid, or any two of them. XIX. That Sir John Tracy Knight, and several other persons particularly named, for the several Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Huntington, Northampton and Lincoln, shall be Commissioners, & they, or any seven or more of them, are before 28. Sept, 1666. to give and make satisfaction out of the 95000 acres to such Parish, Township or persons whose lands or interests either within the Level or without, shall after 1 May 1663. be made worse in quality or condition by the dreyning, or works, than they were before the undertaking of the dreyning in the sixt year of K. Charles the first, and proportionably to the losses, the Owners of, or the persons interessed in the lands, made worse; and at any time within four years, from 24 of June 1663. alter, change and restore such parcels of the 95000 acres, as shall upon complaint be adjudged by the Commissioners, seven or more of them, to be unequally and inconveniently set forth, by reason of any allotting either of greater quantities, or as belonging to
other Counties, Parishes, or Manors, or in more convenient places then they were formerly allotted by a law of Sewers, made at St. Ives 12 Octob. 13 of Charles the First, notwithstanding any vest∣ing of the said 95000. Acrces or any part thereof in the King, or in the Governour, Bayliffs, &c. or other persons, or any estates executed by them or any of them. XX. That 93. Acres in Ravely and Upwood, 76. Acres in So∣thery, 44. Acres one Rood in Wicken, 88. Acres in Cowfenn, 282. Acres in Beezling, 37. Acres in Upwel, set out to be enjoyed as part of the 95000. Acres, since the making of the Law at St. Ives in lieu of like proportions altered, and restored to the Country, shall be held by the Corporation subject to the trust in the Act declared, as to the 83000 Acres, residue of the 95000 Acres, and shall be set forth to them in trust for the Participants or Ad∣venturers whose proportion shall be altered, or changed, in lieu of such part as shall be so altered, exchanged, or restored 3 And in case the said Earl of Bedford, or his Participants, or the Cor∣poration, shall by reason of their undertaking dreining in the sixth year of the late King, have done, or after shall do, any Acts to the prejudice of Navigation, and whereby Navigation in the Ri∣vers of Owse and Grant, and all other Rivers now Navigable pas∣sing through the Level, be, or hereafter shall be interrupted, ob∣structed and made worse, the Commissioners or seven of them (whereof the Vice-Chancellour of Cambridge, Mayor of Cam∣bridge, Mayor of Kings Lynne to be three) shall and may decree the same to be made good, and amended, at the charges of the said Corporation, within convenient time, as to their judgement shall seem meet: And if the Corporation shall refuse to repair and make good the same, the Commissioners, seven or more of them, to tax the said 95000. Acres in such sums of money they shall think meet, for the keeping the Navigation in any of the said Ri∣vers, as the same was in the sixth of Charles the First, the said sums to be taxed within twenty days after notice given to the Governor, or Treasurer of the Corporation, to be paid to such persons as the Commissioners shall appoint: And if the said Corporation shall refuse to pay the said sums, the Commissioners shall impower the persons to levy the said sums by distress, and sell the same, render∣ing the overplus to the Governour or Treasurer; which sums so to be taxed shall be expended in the preservation and keeping the said Navigation, and maintaining the same. XXI. The said last Commissioners named, seven or more of them, within 4. years after 24 June 1663. are to ascertain and divide the Precincts and Boundaries of such part of the respective Counties,
Lordships, Manors, and Parishes within the Level, as have been since the undertaking defaced, or made obscure, or by other means remain hard to be found out; and set such Bounds and divisions in writing, by marks and descriptions, and certifie the same under their hands and seals into the Chancery, which division after such Certificate, the extent of the respective Counties, Lordships, Pa∣rishes and places, shall for ever after be deemed to be, and none other; and in case 8000 acres lying together, or near together, or greater quantity within the Level, shall be drowned, and so con∣tinue twelve moneths together, the Commissioners, seven, or more of them to assess taxes or sums of moneys upon the 95000 acres for the raising moneys for dreining the same, with a penalty for not paying the said taxes, not exceeding a third part of the tax. And for default of paiment, the lot of such Participant, or Adventurer as shall be arrear for the said tax or penalty by two moneths after the day appointed for paiment thereof, shall be sequestred by the Commissioners, for and towards the paiment of such tax or penal∣ty in arrear, returning the overplus; which sequestration shall be under their hands and seals in writing. XXII. If the Governor, Bailiffs and Corporation shall neglect, or refuse to pay such tax, to be taxed and imposed by the last men∣tioned Commissioners, &c. whereupon the goods and chattels of any person, his or their Tenants of the 95000 acres, or any part thereof, shall be distrained and sold, or his, or their lands, seque∣stred. Or that such person, &c. his, or their Tenants, shall there∣upon pay the said tax, &c. the Governor, Bailiffs and Corporati∣on immediately after notice given thereof, shall assess and tax the whole 95000 acres for satisfaction and paiment of the tax, &c. and all damages that such person, or persons, his or their Tenants have paid, born and sustained; and if the Governor, &c. shall not within six moneths after demand by his person, &c. his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, whose own, or Tenants goods shall be distrained, sold, or lands sequestred, satisfie and pay to him or them, such sums of money and damages as they have paid or su∣stained: then such persons, &c. may bring his or their action in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster against the Governor, &c. and receive the same with costs of suit. XXIII. That the Commissioners last constituted, or hereafter to be constituted, seven or more of them, may inform themselves by examining witnesses upon Oath for the better execution of the power to them given, and for doing justice therein. Provided, The Commissioners before they take upon them the execution of any the powers given them (other than administring an Oath to ano∣ther)
shall take the Oath following, viz. I A. B. shall and will without favour or affection, hatred or malice, truly and impartially according to the best of my skill and knowledge, execute and perform all and every the powers established by this Act. Which Oath any of the Commissioners are authorized to administer. XXIV. All Judgments, Orders, Decrees, Alterations, Changes, Restaurations, and other Acts done by the Commissioners con∣stituted, or to be constituted, seven or more of them, pursuant to the powers by the Act given, shall be final, the first time and place of their meeting to be at, or before 22 Sept. 1663. at Ely. And after∣wards the usual places where they shall sit to hear and determine the matters to them referr'd: shall from 29. Sept. to 26. March every year, be in the Town of Huntington; and from 25. March, to 30. Sept. every year at Ely; unless the Commissioners shall appoint some other place being a Market Town. 1. Provided; None of the Commissioners shall vote or give his judgment in any matter or thing which concerns the division or bounds of the County for which he is Commissioner. 2. That no person who hath any part or share in possession or rever∣sion of & in any the lands within the Level, shal be a Commissioner: 3. In case of descent, gift, or purchase of any such share, &c. by any Commissioner, immediately after such descent, &c. the said descent, &c. shal be an avoidance of his being Commissioner, and make him incapable thereof whilst his interest doth remain. 4. The Commissioners, seven, or more of them, to have power to give and make satisfaction out of the 95000 acres to such persons whose lands therein shall be made worse in quality, condition, or value, than they were before the undertaking in the sixth year of K. Charles the First, proportionable to the loss they shall receive. XXV. It shall be lawful for any person or persons, bodies po∣litick or corporate, who are, or shall be Lords of Manors, or have right of common within the wasts within the Level, to improve, set out, divide and sever such proportions, as to them shall be ad∣judged to belong, to be allotted out of the Commons within the Level, Parish, Town, or Place within the works, and to hold such proportions in severalty, and all differences that shall arise con∣cerning the boundaries of the wasts, rights of Common; approve∣ments, divisions, and inclosures shall be adjudged, and finally end∣ed by the Commissioners, or seven of them, upon their view, or ex∣amination of Witnesses, or both; which determination and judg∣ment certified into the Petty-bag, there to be filed and kept on Record, shall be final, and conclude all parties: And the allotments, divisions, and proportions so adjudged to be held by the persons to
whom they are set out, shall be to them, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, according to his or their Tenures, Estates, or Interests they had in the Manors, &c. for which they claimed the said pro∣portions, paying such rents, and doing such services as they are to pay and do for the Manors or Lands for which they claim the same proportions. XXVI. It shall be lawful for such persons as were heretofore Owners of 175 acres in Sutton, North and South Meadland in the Isle of Ely set out by the Law of St. Ives, as a recompence for dreining the whole North and South Meadlands, to sue and im∣plead before the Commissioners, the Owners and Occupiers of the North and South Meadlands to draw them into contribution for their several proportions towards the said 175 acres, and the Com∣missioners shall thereupon adjudge and decree to the said Owners of the 175 acres, their Heirs and Assigns such recompence and sa∣tisfaction, either in ready money, rent, or Land, out of the re∣sidue of the North and South Meadlands, as they shall think meet, to be enjoyed by the said Owners of the said 175 acres their Heirs and Assigns. XXVII. That Sir John Watts Knight, and others who derive any interest under the Dreiners of the Fen called Londoners-Fen, his and their Heirs and Assigns, may sue every person, &c. their Heirs, Executors, &c. that have taken and received the Rent of his and their share of the said Fen, remaining from the share allotted by the Law of St. Ives, since the said Level was adjudged Dreyned, and to sue and recover the same in any the Kings Courts at West∣minster; and also that Sir John Watts, and the Participants afore∣said, his and their Heirs and Assigns heretofore Owners, in the se∣veral proportions in the said Fen, set out for the Adventurers re∣compence for dreining the low Grounds in Upwel, Outwel, and Welney, to sue before the Commissioners their claim, and to sue for release against the Owners or Occupiers of the Fenny and low sur∣rounded Grounds lying in Upwell, Outwel and Welney whose Grounds did not contribute, or not in equal proportion, to the 95000 acres, to draw them into Contribution in ease of Sir John Watts, and the said Participants, their Heirs and Assigns, and the Commissioners are to adjudge and decree to the said Sir John, and the Participants, their Heirs, &c. such proportions out of the said grounds which have not contributed, as to them shall seem meet. XXVIII. That the King his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, shall continue in the possession, usage and disposal of the Bank, called Dousedal-Bank, and to have such ancient Passages and Currents, as of right have been used for the avoidance of the water through the same into the River South-Ede,
XXIX. That every Archbishop, Bishop, Dean and Chapter, and all Colledges and Halls in the Universities, and all bodies Politick and Corporate, who have, or shall have right of Soil, or Common in the Wastes within the Level, or Towns, Parishes or places into which the works of the dreining, do or shall extend, may demise by Indenture all and every the said proportion, as to them shal, or may belong, out of the Commons and Wastes within the Level, which have not by express words under any particular Rent been for∣merly demised for any term of Years, not exceeding 21. years, so as upon every demise the fourth part of the true value be ascertained by the Commissioners, and payable yearly, during the Term to him, or them, or their Successors. XXX. Provided, And declared by consent of all parties concer∣ned, that this Act shall not extend to alter the possession of Thomas Chichley Esq of and from 671 acres, parcel of the Lot now claim∣ed to belong to the Trustees of Henry late Earl of Arundel, and 231 acres, parcel of the Lot now claimed to belong to Sir William Terringham, or any part thereof, by him the said Thomas Chicheley enjoyed under Purchasers, by Sales for non-paiment of Taxes; But that the Corporation shall execute Conveyances of the respective proportions to the said Thomas Chicheley, hIs Heirs and As∣signs. XXXI. That all such rights and titles, as any Lords of any Manors, Liberties, Hundreds, &c. have heretofore had within the respective Manor, &c. within and without the Level, to Waifes, Strayes, Felons-Goods, Priviledges, Escheats, or other Royalties not prejudicial to the dreining be saved to them, their Heirs, &c. Provided, This Act not to be interpreted to infringe or weaken an Act made in the fourth year of K. James, Entituled, An Act for dreining certain Fens and low grounds within the Isle of Ely; but that the said Act shall stand in force. XXXII. Whereas divers lands in, and adjoyning to the great Level, have been cut through for the conveying the waters from the same, without satisfaction to the respective owners of the lands for the damage they have sustained therein; the Commissioners se∣ven or more of them, upon complaint to them of the damage su∣stained without recompence for the same, to award and decree such recompence and satisfaction to the parties grieved, according to their respective damage sustained by such cutting; the said re∣compence to be made and given by the Corporation within six moneths after the award or decree made, and in default thereof the Commissioners to tax the 95000 acres, and to distrain thereup∣on for the rate, and to sell and dispose thereof as they shall think
fit for payment of the moneys and damages as shall be awarded. XXXIII. In case the Judicature hereby established, shall not within twelve moneths from 1. Aug. next, determine all matters to them referred concerning the 95000 Acres, all persons whose complaints are not determined, may apply themselves to the Barons of the Exchequer, who hereby are established a Court of Judicature to determine the same in as ample manner as the Ju∣dicature hereby established might have done, and such order and decree of the Court of Exchequer shall in all things be observed. XXXIV. The Lessees of the King, his Heirs, &c. of the 10000 Acres, or any part thereof, and the Assigns of such Lessees shall be capable to be elected into the Office or place of Governour, Bai∣liffs, and Conservators, and to vote in all such elections and in all other matters as any other members of the Corporation, so as such Lessees and their Assignees, be Lessors or owners of the double quantity of Acres required by the Act, to qualifie any person to be elected and chosen into the said Offices, and so as their claim be entred with the Register. XXXV. Provided, This Act shall not extend to make void any Obligation given to David Offley Gent. conditioned for his quiet enjoyment of a parcel of land purchased by him in the Level, but that he may sue and prosecute his action upon the Obligation, as if he had been evicted from his estate by course of Law. XXXVI. If any breaches happen in any of the banks, sluces or other works within the Level, or in the works made without the Level, the same shall be repaired & made good in convenient time, by, and at the charges of the Corporation and their Successors. XXXVII. Where any Participant under F. Earl of Bedford, their Heirs, &c. have exchanged his or their share, &c. for any lands which were claimed and held under pretended sales for not payment of taxes since 1649. such Participant, his Heirs, &c. may enter again upon the same lands given in exchange, and re∣tain the same in their possession, subject nevertheless to such judg∣ment and determination, as the Judicature hereby constituted shall make. XXXVIII. No ascertaining or dividing of rhe dreined, or new improved lands by the Commissioners, shall conclude the King, his Heirs, &c. or any other person as to the Bounds of Parishes to any other intent or purpose than subjecting the same to taxes and Episcopal Jurisdictions, and not as to the right of Tithes or other purpose whatsoever, nor shall be used in evidence concern∣ing the same. XXXIX. If any person having right of Common in any the
Mannors, Wastes, Commons, or Lands within the said Great Level, or any other person at any time after Division or Inclosure made shall break, throw down, or obstruct, or by any means hinder or lay upon any the Improvements, or Inclosures, or the Hedges, Ditches or Fences of the same shall destroy, and be convicted thereof by two credible Witnesses before two Justices of the Peace of the County where the disturbance is; he shall forfeit for every offence 40 l. to be levyed by distress and sale of the offenders goods, one moity to the Informer, the other moity to the person against whom the offence is committed, and for want of distress to be sent to the house of Correction for three Moneths. XL. That from 1 August, 1668 no tax exceeding 2 s. the Acre in any one year be layed upon the 10000 Acres, vested in the King, his Heirs and Successors, or upon the 2000 Acres hereby vested in the Earl of Portland his Assigns: But if the Taxes to be assessed upon the 83000 Acres shall not amount to so much as 2 s. an Acre acccording to the proportion of each Acre, then a proportionable abatement shall be made out of the 2 s. per A∣cre, which shall be charged by an equal rate upon every Acre of the said 10000 Acres. XLI. That the Assessing and levying of Taxes upon the 10000 Acres, or the 2000 Acres, after the first of August 1668. by the way of Tax-Acre, shall not extend to compel or conclude the Corporation to assess or levy any Tax upon the said 83000 Acres. vested in the Corporation, or any part thereof by way of Acre-Tax. Fishing. Enacted 15 Car. 2. Cap. 14. From and after 1. August 1664. No white or red Herrings of English catching shall be put to sale in England, Wales, Berwick, but what shall be packed in lawful Barrels, or Vessels, and which shall be well truely and justly laid and packed, and shall be of one time taking, salting and drying: and equally packed in the midst by a sworn packer, and the Bar∣rel, or Vessel marked by such Packer, with a mark or brand, de∣noting the gage, and the quantity, quality, and condition of Herrings packed therein. II. The Bailiffs of great Yarmouth for the time being: And the Mayor, Bailiffs, or Head Officer for the time being of every Port Haven, or Creek, out of which any Vessels do proceed to fish for Herrings: are authorized and required before 1. July 1664. in every year to appoint for their respective Haven, &c. a competent number of Packers experienced to view and pack all such white
Herrings of English catching, as shall be brought into their Port, &c. and truly to mark or brand the Barrels or Vessels with such mark as is directed; and to administer them an Oath for the well doing thereof: And in case the Bailiffs of Great Yarmouth, or other Bailiffs or Head-officer for the time being of any such Port, Haven, &c. shall appoint such Packers before such time in every year as is required by the Act, they shall for every default forfeit 100 l. one moyety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to him who will sue for the same in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed. III. From and after 25 of Decemb. 1663. no Ship or Vessel shall proceed upon a fishing voyage for Island or Westmony, out of any Port, Haven, or Creek, in England, Wales, Berwick, until the 10. day of March in any year, upon pain of forfeiture of such Ship or Vessel, with all her furniture, tackle, apparel, and all the fish caught in such Ship. IV. That no person whatsoever do collect, levy, or take, or cause to be levyed or taken in New-found-land any Toll or other duty of or for any God or Poor John, or other fish of English catching, under pain of loss of double the value of what shall be by them collected, levyed, or taken, or cause to be levyed or taken. And that no Planter or other person do cast, or lay any Seme or Net in or neer any Harbor in New-found-Land, whereby to take the spawn or young fry of the Poor-John, or for any other uses, except for the taking of bait only, upon pain of loss of all such Semes or Nets and of the fish taken in them, or the value thereof, to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts in New-found-Land, or in any Court of Record in England or Wales, by Bill, Plaint, or other Action, where no Essoin, &c. shall be allowed. V. That no Planter, or other person, shall burn, destroy, or steal any Boat, Cask, or Salt-nets, or other Utensils for fishing or ma∣king of Oil; or other Goods or Merchandizes left in New-found-Land or Green-Land by English; or burn, pull down or destroy any house built by English in New-found-Land, or Green-Land to them during the fishing season, or stage built in either of the said places for the ordering of Fish, or making of Oil, upon pain of loss of double the value what shall be by them stollen, burnt, or de∣stroyed; to be recovered in any of the said Courts as aforesaid. VI. That an Act passed the last Session of this present Parlia∣ment, Intituled, An Act for the importation of Madder pure and unmixed; and every clause and thing therein contained be from henceforth utterly void and repealed.
Hearth-money. Enacted 15. Car. 2. Cap. 11. That the Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties, Coporations, Places and Limits within their respective Jurisdictions, at the next Sessions to be held after the Feast of S. Michael next, or the major part of them present, shall issue out Warrants under their hands and seals to the respective High-Constables, or other the like Offi∣cers; who shall issue the Warrants to the Petty-Constables, Headboroughs, &c. requiring them on the next Sunday af∣ter morning service ended, to give publick notice in the Church or Chappel general to all the Inhabitants: and also give notice publickly in the Church, and particularly to every Inhabitant that shall then be Occupier of any House, Edifice, Lodging or Chamber, that within ten days after such notice, he give a just accompt in writing under his hand of all Hearths and Stoves in such respective House, Edifice, Lodging or Cham∣ber, unto such Constable, Headborough, &c. who upon receipt of such account, shall with two other substantial Inhabitants in the day time, enter into the respective House, Edifice, Lodging, &c. and upon his own view, compare such account, and see whether it be truly made or not, and endorse the said account accordingly; which so received and endorsed, shall be by him transmitted with∣in 20 days after, to the respective High-Constable or other like Officer, with a book fairly written, containing the names of the persons, and number of the Hearths and Stoves in their respective possessions, that are chargeable by the Act; and also the names of the persons and Hearths not chargeable by the Act: which being so received by the High-Constable, &c. shall within six days af∣ter be transmitted to the two next Justices of the Peace, who are to examine the High-Constable, Petty-Constable, Headborough, &c. upon their Oaths, such the truth and faithfulness of their acting in the premises; and the said Justices shall within ten days after sign and transmit the said book, together with the original accounts so endorsed, to the Clerks of the Peace, who shall within 20 days after, engross the book in parchment, to be kept in the re∣spective County: and shall also within two moneths engross a true duplicate of the said book, which being signed by two Justices of the Peace of the respective County, shall within one moneth after be transmitted to the Kings Court of Exchequer. Provided, 1. If any Occupier of any house, edifice, lodging, &c. shall not make, or cause to be made an account, or shall omit in
his accompt to be made, any Hearth or Stove, he shall for every such Hearth or Stove omitted forfeit 40 s. 2. If any Constable, Head-borough, &c. shall omit to trans∣mit such accompt together with the book, to the High-Constable, &c, or make default in giving notice as aforesaid, for every offence shall forfeit 5 l. 3. If the High-Constable, &c. shall neglect to compare the ori∣ginal accompt with the book, or to transmit the same in manner as aforesaid: for every offence to forfeit 10 l. II. That the exchanging of annual Officers, or leaving of their places, shall not excuse any person who shall be Constable, Head∣borough, High-Constable or Sheriff at the time any duty shall grow due or payable by this Act, from the collecting and receiving such duty so growing due, but every such person is enabled to do all things as to such duty so growing due, as if he had continued Con∣stable, Headborough, &c. III. If any person who by this Act ought to collect, distrain for, receive, or pay over the said Revenue, shall neglect, or refuse to do his duty therein, for every week he shall neglect or refuse, he shall forfeit 20 s. to be recovered as aforesaid. IV. In all cases where the Constable or Headborough by this or the other Act, may enter the house of any person, or distrain their Goods, he may call to his aid two sufficient Inhabitants of the re∣spective Township, who are to assist him therein. V. Where any Sheriff is by the aforesaid Act appointed to be Collector of any part of the Revenue, such Sheriff may execute the said place by such Deputy as to him shall seem meet, being thereto appointed under the Great-Seal of his Office, or under his own Hand and Seal. VI. The Treasurers and other Officers of the Inns-of-Court, Inns-of-Chancery, Colledges and other Societies chargeable for their Hearths and Stoves, shall do all things as the Constables by the Act are enjoyned to do, under the like penalties, without any Warrant from the Justices of the Peace; and the Occupier of any House, Lodging, or Chamber in any the said respective Inns-of-Court, Inns-of-Chancery, &c. shall do all things under the like penalties as are required of any Occupier of any House, Edifice, Lodging, or Chamber elswhere. VII. The High-Bailiff of Westminster for the time being, may within the Liberties thereof from and after 28. September next, collect and levy the said duty, and put in execution the powers in the former, and this Act, as ample as any Sheriff may do within their Limits and Jurisdictions; and the Bailiff for the time being
shall be subject to the same duties and penalties as the Sheriffs are, and shall receive the same reward. And the Sheriff of Middlesex is discharged from putting in execution the trust aforesaid in the City of Westminster and the Liberty, from the 28. of September, saving only from such arrears as shall then happen to be, and the Constables, &c. within the City of Westminster, and the Liberty, shall deliver to the Bailiff Duplicates of all Accompts of Hearths and Stoves, and do all other things as ought to have been done to the Sheriff. VIII. The Bailiff of the Borough of Southwark for the time be∣ing, or his Deputy, may within the Borough of Southwark and Li∣berties of Southwark, after 28. September next, collect, and levy the said duty, and put in execution all the powers in the former Act, as ample as any Sheriffs by the former Act made Collectors may do within their Limits and Jurisdictions: And the Bailiff for the time being shall be subject to the same duties and penalties, and receive the same reward: And the Sheriff of Surrey is discharged for putting in execution the trust in the Borough and Liberty of Southwark from the said 28. of September, and the Constables, &c. within the Borough of Southwark and Liberties, shall deli∣ver to the Bailiff Duplicates of all the Hearths and Stoves, and do such other things in such manner as they ought to have done to the said Sheriffs. IX. It shall be lawful for the Lord Treasurer of England, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or either of them, to make such further allowance unto the Clerks of the Peace of the respective Counties, for their labour and pains in and about the writing, en∣grossing and returning into the Exchequer the Duplicates of the several Constables (over and above what is allowed by the former Act) as the Lord Treasurer and Chancellor, or either of them shall think meet, the allowance not exceeding 1 d. in the pound, by the year. High-wayes. I. Enacted, 15 Car. 2. cap. Whereas the High-way and Post-road leading from London to York, and so into Scotland▪ and also from London into Lincolnshire: and also from the City of Nor∣wich, St. Edmonds-Bury and Cambridge to London, for many miles in the Counties of Hertford, Cambridge and Huntington is very ruinous and almost impassible; That for the surveying, re∣pairing, and keeping in repair the said High-wayes in the Coun∣ties aforesaid, four Justices of the Peace of the said several and respective Counties for the year 1663. till the Quarter-Sessions
then next ensuing; and from thenceforth after Easter every year shall appoint nine able persons inhabiting in the several Counties to be Surveyors of the several places in the said High-ways, who shall not act or do any thing but in their own and respective Coun∣ties; and shall cause notice to be given to the several Surveyors in writing of their several choice; which Surveyors within one week after notice of their election, shall assemble themselves toge∣ther in some convenient place within their several Counties ap∣pointed by the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter-Sessions, to view and survey the said High-way, and what reparations shall be needfull for the repairing the said places: and the Surveyors, three or more of them in their several Counties are to appoint a Recei∣ver or Collector of Toll, and such other Officers as shall be neces∣sary for the carrying on the said work, with moderate allowance, to be approved by two or more Justices of the Peace of each respe∣ctive County. II. That the Surveyors, three or more of them, in their several Counties, shall as they shall see cause, appoint all and every person inhabiting within three miles of the places, who by any Law or Statute is chargeable to find any Wain or Cart for the mending the High-ways, and every person chargeable to labour in the High-ways, to send their wain, &c. or come to labour in the said High-way, furnished as by the Statutes of the Realm is directed, so of∣ten as the Surveyors, three or more of them shall think needfull and appoint, for which they shall pay to such labourers, and to the owners of the Teams and Wayns, &c. according to the usual rate of the Country: And in case any person charged as aforesaid, shall refuse, or neglect so to do, such person shall forfeit 10. s. for every day he shall make default; and every labourer 18. d. for every day he shall neglect, or refuse to work. III. No person shall be compelled to labour, or send his Team or Wain, &c. For reparing the High-way, to any of the said places above three miles distant from his dwelling house; or to send his Team, Cart, &c. above three days in any one week, nor at any time in seed-time, Hay, or Corn-Harvest: And if any question shall a∣rise concerning the hire for Teams, &c. or what wages such labo∣rers shall be paid, or allowed; the Justices of the Peace where the difference ariseth, two or more of them shall determine the same. IV. Where there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, or Stone, within any Parish, Town, &c. within the High-ways, or places a∣foresaid; the Surveyors in their respective Counties, three or more of them, and such persons as they shall appoint, shall dig, take, and carry away Gravel, Chalk, Stones out of the Waste, or Common
of any neighbouring Parish, Town, or Hamlet (without paying any thing for the same) for the repairing of the said Highways, at the places aforesaid: Or where there is not sufficient materials in any Common, or Wast, near adjoyning, to dig in the several grounds of any person, not being a House, Garden, Orchard, Yard, or Park stored with Deer, within any Parish, chargeable towards the repairs of the said Highways; and to carry away so much thereof, as the Surveyors or three of them in their respe∣ctive Counties shal judge necessary for the said reparations, without paying any thing for such materials: saving only such reasonable satisfaction to the owners, or occupiers of the ground, for the da∣mage they shall sustain, as by the Justices of the Peace of the Coun∣ty, at their next Quarter-Sessions, shall be assessed and adjudged: And the pits where the materials shall be digged shall be with all convenient speed filled up and levelled with earth, so as the same may not be dangerous for man, or beast. V. That it shall and may be lawful for the Surveyors for the time being with the consent and approbation of the Justices of the Peace of their several Counties within their own Counties, and not elsewhere, to choose and appoint one or more fit person, or per∣sons, to receive, or take such sums of money in the name of Toll, to be paid for all such Horses, Carts, Coaches, Waggons, Droves and Gangs of Cattel, as in time to come shall pass, be led, or dri∣ven in or through the said way, or places: as after is appointed, viz. For every Horse 1. d. every Coach 6. d. every Waggon 12. d. every Cart 8. d. every score of Sheep or lambs ob, and so propor∣tionable for greater or lesser numbers: Every score of oxen, or neat cattel 5. d. every score of Hogs 2. d. and so for every greater or lesser number, not being under five. VI. All and every person who shall travel with Horse, Coach, Cart, or Waggon, or shall lead or drive any Sheep, Oxen, Hor∣ses, or other Cattel, in or through the High-ways and places aforesaid, shall pay to the respective Collectors of Toll, af∣ter the Rates aforesaid: the places for collecting of the Toll to be, for the County of Hertford at Wades-mill: for Cambridge at Caxton: for Huntington at Stilton, and at no other place, or places within the said Counties. And in case any person up∣on demand made of Toll as aforesaid, shall neglect or refuse to pay the same, it shall be lawful for the Collector or Receiver to di∣strain and detain such Horse, Cart, &c. until the said Toll be satisfied and paid, together with such damages as the Party so di∣straining shall sustain by keeping such distress: Of which mo∣neys so received, the Collectors shall from time to time render true
account, and shall pay the monies by them received to the Survey∣ors in the respective Counties, or to any three or more of them, or to such Treasurers as they shall appoint, when, and as often as they shall be required by the said Surveyors, or three of them, to be laid out, and expended for and towards the necessary repairs of the several places afore mentioned, and not elsewhere. VII. The Surveyors in their several Counties at their Quar∣ter Sessions next after Easter every year, shall yield to the Justices of the Peace there, a perfect Accompt of all money which they have received from the Collectors of Toll, in their Counties, and of all disbursments in and about the High-ways, or by reason of their Offices, and if any overplus remain in their hands shall pay the same to the Surveyors chosen for the next year, or to the Treasurers, to be disbursed in the places aforesaid within such County, wherein the overplus doth remain. Which Justices shall out of the benefit of the said Toll make such allowance to the Surveyors for their pains as to them shall seem good: And in case the Collectors shall not upon request pay the same to the Surveyors for the time being, or Treasurer, or shall not make such account and payment, the Justices at any Quarter Sessions of Peace for the County, in case of such default shall make En∣quiry thereof as well by Confession of the parties as by Exami∣nation of witnesses upon Oath: And in case such default be found, in the Collectors, Treasurers, or Surveyors, the Justices up∣on conviction shall commit the parties to the common Gaol, there to remain without bail, &c. Until they have made a true and perfect account and payment. VIII. The Surveyors are enabled with the consent of the Ju∣stices for their several Counties, to engage the profits arising of their Toll, in their several Counties for such sums of monies as shall be borrowed by them for that purpose, by Indenture under their hands and seals to transfer the profits of the said Toll, and to grant the same for any time, or term, not exceeding nine years, to any person that shall upon that security advance any present sum, or sums of money towards the present repairing of the said High-way, for the repayment of such sum so lent, with interest for the same; Or if such sum cannot be borrowed upon the security aforesaid; Then the Justices of the Peace in the several Coun∣ties at their Quarter Sessions, shall make a rate, not to extend to any other County but their own, whereby they shall have power to raise upon the Parishes that lie in, or near the said Road, such sums of money as they shall see convenient for the speedy effecting of the said repairs; Which sum so rated shall be paid to
the Surveyors for the County where such rate is made, or to their Collector to be imployed for the repayring of the said Ways; and not otherwise; and if any person shall refuse to pay such rate, the Surveyors to distrain for such sum, and to sell the distress rendring the overplus to the owners. IX. That the money advanced by the several Towns in the re∣spective Counties shall again be repaid with interest, by the Sur∣veyors for the several Counties as it doth arise out of the Toll, eve∣ry County paying what is borrowed within its own County. X. If any person (not having a lawful cause to be allowed) shall refuse to take upon him the office of Surveyor, being chosen ac∣cording to the Act, or to do his duty in the execution of the Act; The Justices of the Peace of the County where such Surveyors dwell, shall impose upon such persons so refusing such fine (not exceeding 10 l.) as to them shall seem meet, and cause the same to be levyed by distress and sale of his or their goods, rendring the party the overplus, if any shall be. XI. All fines or forfeitures imposed or incurred by the Act, shall be paid to the Surveyors for the time being, or three of them, or to the Treasurer of the respective Counties; and if any per∣son chosen to take the said office shall die, or be discharged from the said office: some other fit person within the County shall be appointed by two or more Justices of the Peace in the said County in the place of him, &c. that shall die or be dis∣charged; who are required upon notice thereof given, to take upon him, &c. the said office of Surveyor, and to execute the same in such manner and under such and the like penalties as if he, &c. had been chosen by the Justices at their Sessions. XII. If any suit shall be against any person for any thing done in pursuance of the Act, the Action shall be laid in the Coun∣ty where the cause doth rise, and not elsewhere; and the De∣fendant may plead the general issue, and give the Act and special matter in evidence; and if the action shall be brought in any other County, the Jury shall find for the Defendant, and upon such verdict, or if the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or discontinue his Action, after the Defendant hath appeared, or if upon demur judge∣ment shall be given against the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall have and recover double costs. Provided, 1. No person having occasion to pass any place where. Toll is taken, and return the same day with the same Horse, Coach, or other Carriage, or with Cattel, shall be com∣pelled the same day to pay the said Toll a second time. 2. All and every person by Law chargeable towards the re∣pairing
of the said High-ways: shall still remain chargeable. 3▪ Neither this Act nor any thing therein shall extend to any further time, or be in force longer than the term of eleven years from the passing of the Act. 4. Every person passing through the respective places ap∣pointed for the receiving of Toll (as aforesaid) shall have liberty to carry any quantity of Stones, Lime, Gravel, Dung, and Composs of any nature or kind, Brick, Chalk, Wood, and they and all Carts, with Hay, Corn in straw, at Hay-time or Harvest, Ploughs and other things employed in husbanding and manuring of their Lands, shall pass to and through the said respective places where such Toll is to be received, without paying any thing for their passing through the same. XIII. If it happen that after the expiration of eleven years, the Receivers or Collectors then in being, or any of them of the several Tolls or any part thereof, shall upon their or any of their accompts made, and to be made for the several receipts of the Tolls aforesaid, have any sums of monies in their or any of their hands, more than they have expended as aforesaid; such Re∣ceivers or Collectors, &c. shall bring all and every sum and sums of monies remaining in their hands, to the Justices of the Peace of the several Counties, where such Receiver or Collector shall live, at the next general Quarter Sessions which shall hap∣pen to be after their accompts so made, upon pain of forfeiting the double sum which shall be in their hands; which sum and penaties, shall be recovered by distress and sale of the parties goods by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of the Peace; and the Justices at their Quarter Sessions are to dispose of the said sums of monies, and all the said penalties, to and for a stock for the repairing the several High-wayes according to the Act, and not otherwise. XIV. If the Justices of the Peace of the County of Hunting∣ton, or four of them, dwelling next the said High road, shall ad∣judge some other place more convenient than Stilton for the re∣ceiving of the Toll for the said County: The said Justices to appoint some other place upon the Road within the said County to receive the Toll, instead of Stilton. XV. All and every Souldier upon their march, and all per∣sons riding Post, shall pass through any the places in the Act mentioned, without paying any Toll. XVI. If at any time after the expiration of the eleven years, the said High-wayes shall be well and sufficiently repaired, and so adjudged by the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter-Sessions;
After such adjudication made, and repayment of such moneys as shall have been borrowed, the Toll shall cease in the aforesaid County: any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. MANUFACTURES. I. Enacted, 15 Car. 2. Cap. 13. That from and after the first of October next it shall be lawful for any person whatsoever, native or foreigner, freely without paying any fee, or gratuity, in any place of England, or Wales, priviledged, or unpriviledged, corporate, or uncorporate, to set up, or exercise the trade, or mystery of break∣ing, hickling, or dressing of Hemp or Flax, as also for the making, and whitening of Thread, Spinning, Weaving, Making, Whit∣ning of any sort of Cloath whatsoever made of Hemp, or Flax only, as also the Trade, or Mystery of making Twine, or Nets for Fishery, or of stoving of Cordage; And the Trade or Myste∣ry of making any sort of Tapestery hangings. II. All Foreigners that shall really and bona fide use any of the Trades and Manufactures aforesaid by three years in this King∣dom of England, Wales, and Berwick, shall from henceforth, taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before two Justi∣ces of the Peace near their dwelling; enjoy all priviledges whatso∣ever, as the natural born Subjects of this Kingdom. III. Such Foreigners as shall exercise any of the Trades afore∣said by vertue of this Act, shall not at any time be liable to any other, or greater Taxes, Payments, or Impositions, then such as are and shall be paid by the Kings natural born Subjects, unless they use and exercise Merchandise into, and from foreign parts; in which case, they shall be liable to pay such customs as have usually been paid by aliens during the space of five years next en∣suing, and no longer. MILITIA. I. Enacted, 15 Car, 2. Cap. 2. That the several Lieutenants of the Counties, and Cities, and places nominated by the King, His Heirs, and Successours, and in their absence, by their di∣rections, their Deputy, or Deputies, two or more of them (ac∣cording to an Act made, Entituled, An Act for ordering of the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom) shall and may
Lead, Train, Exercise, and put in readiness by warrant under their hands and seals, all or any of the persons raised, arrayed, or weaponed according to the said Act, to the intents and purposes, and by the sons of the said Act, and of this Act. II. That an persons charged, or to be charged by either of the Acts, with Horse, Horse-man and Arms, or Foot Souldier and Arms; shall under penalty of 5 s. pay and allow 2 s. 6 d. per diem, to every Trooper that serves with such Horse and Arms for maintenance of the man and horse: and under the penalties of 2 s. pay and allow 12 d. per diem, to each Foot Souldier for so many days as they shall be absent from their dwellings by occasion of Muster or Exercise, which penalty is to be levied, as after is expressed, unless some agreement be made to the con∣trary; and the said penalty is to be paid to such Trooper, or Foot Souldier, to whom his said pay was denied; the said pe∣nalties to be paid within six weeks after default, or before the nex Muster or Training, and not afterwards: And if any person charged as aforesaid, shall refuse, or neglect by a reasonable time to provide and furnish such Foot Souldier and Arms; the Lieutenants and their Deputies, three or more of them, to inflict such penalty upon such person (not exceeding five pound) to be levied and imployed to the same uses in default whereof it was im∣posed. III. The Lieutenants and their Deputies, three or more of them, shall and may appoint the Constables of any Parish, or place within England, Wales, and Berwick, to provide (upon a pe∣nalty, not exceeding 40 s.) so many sufficient Foot Arms (with wages and other incident charges) as the Lieutenants, or their Deputies, three or more of them, shall assess or charge, according to the proportions of the said Acts, upon Revenues under 50. l. per annum, or upon personal Estates less then 600 l. lying, or be∣ing in such Parish or place. IV. If any person belonging to any Parish, or place, shall upon demand refuse to provide a Foot Souldier, or to pay any sum of money, whereat he shall be assessed by a pound rate, ac∣cording to a List signed by the Lieutenants, for and towards the defraying the necessary charge and expence in providing and furnishing such sufficient Arms; The Constable may by War∣rant for that purpose, levy such sum so rated by distress and sale of the goods of the person refusing, restoring the overplus, if any be, the charge of distraining deducted, and the Tenant of any House, Land, or Revenue rated as aforesaid, is required to make pay∣ment
of such sums so rated, and to deduct so much as shall be charged upon the Land-lords Rent, out of the next Rent payable to the Land-lord▪ and in default thereof, the goods of such Tenant shall be liable to be distrained and sold in manner as aforesaid. V. Once every year hereafter, each Souldier listed or raised, by either of the said Acts, shall pay to his respective Muster-Ma∣ster such sum (not exceeding twelve pence for a Horse-man; and six pence for a Foot-man) as the Lieutenants and their Deputies three or more of them, under their hands and seals shall di∣rect; who have power to levy the same by distress and sale upon default of payment upon the goods and Chattels of such persons as are charged with the finding of the respective Horse∣man, or Foot-Souldier so making default, unless the default be by the neglect of such Horse-man, or Foot Souldier; And every Muster-Master shall be an inhabitant of the respective County. VI. At every Muster, Training and Exercise, every Mus∣quetier shall bring with him half a pound of Powder, half a pound of Bullets; and every Musquetier who serves with a Match-lock three yards of Match; which are to be found at the charge of such person as provides the Foot Souldier and Arms. Every Horse∣man is to bring with him a quarter of a pound of Powder, a quar∣ter of a pound of Bullets at the charge of the person to provide the Horse-man and Arms, upon pain of forfeiting five shillings for every omission thereof. VII. It shall be lawful for the Lieutenants, or in their ab∣sence, and by their directions, for two or more of their Deputies in the respective Counties, at any time during the space of three years, from 24. July, 1663. to summon and continue together, so many of the said Trained Forces within their several Counties and Precincts, and so long as they shall judge conve∣nient, in lieu of certain days appointed for Exercise and Musters by the said Act, Entituled, An Act for the ordering of the Forces, &c. Provided, Any Troop, Company, or Souldiers may be so kept upon such duty, by vertue thereof fourteen days, and no longer in any one year. VIII. Every Commissionated Officer in the Trained Bands, or Militia of the Kingdom, shall be exempted and excused from finding and contributing towards the finding any Horse, Horse∣man, or Arms, or Foot Souldier or Arms, for his whole estate,
but with one Horse, or a less charge, or for such part of his estate as is, or shall be charged with one Horse, if his whole estate be charged with a greater charge then one Horse, in the County where he so serves as a Foot Officer, in respect of the expence, which the same employment doth engage him in. IX. That each Constable, Tythingman, or other Officer of any Parish or place, under penalty of forfeiting 40 s. shall and do, by vrrtue of a warrant from the respective Lieutenants and Depu∣ties, three or more of them, levy all arrears and proportions of money unpaid, which were set or charged for the Raising, Train∣ing, and Arraying the Trained Bands actually raised, and in be∣ing before the passing of the last mentioned Act, by distress and sale of the persons Goods refusing to pay the same. X. That every Trooper or Foot Souldier at any time raised by vertue, or according to the directions of this Act, shall be sub∣ject to such Exercise and Duty as other raised by the afore men∣tioned Act, and shall upon like pains and penalties observe all the orders of the said, and this present Act, and suffer such penalties for crimes and offences exprest in the said Act, which are likewise to be imposed and levied in the same manner and wayes as are set down in the said Act. XI. Thae the respective Lieutenants and Deputies, three or more of them, shall dispose of so much of the fourth part to the inferiour Officers imployed in and about the Forces for their pains, as to the said Lieutenant and Deputies, three or more of them, shall seem expedient. XII. It shall be lawful for every person that hath any action or suit brought against him for any thing done in execution of this present, or the said Act, to plead the general issue, and give the special matter in evidence, and if judgement be given for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff be Non-suit, or discontinue his suit, to recover double cost: And no action to be brought against any person for any thing done, in, or in pretence of execution of this Act, unless the action be laid in the pro∣per County, and brought within six moneths after the cause of action. XIII. That one clause in an Act, Entituled, An Act decla∣ring the sole right of the Militia to be in the King, &c, made for the Indemnifying of all persons acting in the Militia, from 24 June, 1660. to 20. July, 1661. as touching the As∣saulting, Detaining and Imprisoning any suspected person,
to be a Fanatick, Sectary, or Disturber of the Peace, or seizing of Arms, or searching of Houses for Arms, or suspected persons, shall be construed to commence and take effect, and shall be good in Law, for the indempnifying of all. persons acting in the Mili∣tia for any the matters aforesaid from 2. February, 1659. to the 24. of June 1660. inclusive, any thing in the said Act notwith∣standing. XIV. That the several Forfeitures, Penalties and Payments by this present Act imposed, set, or directed (not otherwise by this Act provided to be levied or recovered) shall in case of default be levied and recovered by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the Lieutenants and Deputies, three or more of them upon the Goods of the Offender by sale of the same: and if the Goods of the Offender cannot be found, whereof to levy the Forfeiture, Payment or Penalty, the Lieutenants, three or more of them, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals have power to commit such Offen∣der to Prison, till he make satisfaction of the Forfeiture or Penalty. XV. All and every person which since the 25. day of March, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, have done any thing in dismantling of any Cities or Towns, or demolishing of Walls and Fortifications, are hereby indempnified and saved harmless. XVI. That no person who hath any Estate of the yearly va∣lue of two hundred pounds, or personal Estate of two thou∣sand four hundred pounds chargeable by the said Act, shall be charged with, or towards the finding any Foot: and the Lieu∣tenants, or three or more of them, may charge any person who hath Estate of the yearly value of a hundred pounds, and under the value of two hundred pounds, or who hath a personal Estate of one thousand two hundred pounds, and under two thousand four hundred pounds, with, or towards the finding of Foot or Horse, as shall seem in their judgements most expedient for the Kings service; yet not to extend to make any alteration, concer∣ning the Forces to be raised in Cities, Corporations and Fort Towns. XVII. The Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and in his ab∣sence his Lieutenants, shall put in execution within the Ports, Towns and Members all the powers and authorities in this and the former Act, and execute all every Act and thing there∣in, as the respective Lieutenants of Counties may do, and
keep up the usual number of Souldiers in the Ports and Towns, un∣less they find cause to lessen the same, and the Inhabitants of the Ports and Members thereof, being in regard of their situation up∣on the Sea-coast, charged with greater proportions of Arms and armed men, than other parts of the Kingdom, shall not be charged with Arms or armed men in the Counties adjacent for their estates there, save only for such proportion as they are not charged with within the Ports. XVIII. The Inhabitants and Revenues of, or in the Parish of Saint Martin, called Stamford-Baron, in the Suburbs of the Town and Borough of Stamford on the South-side of the Wel∣land may be charged to find, and serve in the Trained Bands of the County of Lincoln, by the Lieutenants of the County of Lincoln, in such manner as Persons of Estates within the County of Lincoln may be assessed and charged to the purposes aforesaid. Distributing of Moneys. I. Enacted. 15. Car. 2. Cap. 1. Whereas an Act hath passed, Entituled, An Act for distribution of 60000 l. amongst indigent Commission-Officers, &c. It is declared, That the Commission∣ers appointed by the said Act, shall act according to these said Rules, viz. 1. The Officers allowed, Colonels, Adjutant-Generals, Quar∣ter-Master-Generals, Scout-Master-Generals, Commissary-Ge∣nerals, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains, Lieutenants, Coronets, Ensigns, Quarter-Masters. 2. Each Colonel of Horse, if he had a Regiment of 150: Captain of Horse if a Troop of 50: Colonel of Foot if a Regi∣ment of 300: Captain of Foot if a company of 40: Colonel of Dragoons if a Regiment of 200: Captain of Dragoons if a com∣pany of 30. 3. Loyal Officers, who faithfully served the late King, and continued loyal to the King, and did not withdraw themselves from the service without sufficient cause to be allowed by the Com∣missioners. 4. No person indigent, who hath of his own, or of the Kings gift, such estate as the Commissioners shall judge a sufficient liveli∣hood.
5. If upon examination it be found any Certificate hath been lost or invalid, because not signed at a publick meeting: the Com∣missioners, or nine of them, to give relief to the party. 6. If the Commissioners in the Star-chamber, or of the respective Counties, three or more of them shall suspect any Certificate to be unduly procured, or insufficient, they shall examine Witnesses upon Oath; the Commissioners in Star-chamber shall transmit to them the exceptions against such Certificates, with the names of the persons excepting, to be by them reviewed and examined, by exa∣mination of Witnesses or otherwise, and then opinions to be con∣clusive. II. No exception to any Certificate shall be admitted after 1. October next; and all reviews and returns thereupon shall be in writing under the Hands and Seals of the respective Commissioners before 1. November next. III. All moneys to be paid or distributed, shall be paid to the respective Persons qualified to receive the same, before the 24. De∣cember next: And nothing in that, or this Act shall extend to pre∣judice the Persons hereafter particularly named, viz. Edward Ros∣carrock, Guy Molesworth, John Low, John Foryth, Matthew Ca∣rew, Walter Braoms, Thomas Gleadstone, to deprive them, by rea∣son their Certificates were not entred within the appointed time by the Act, but all the said Persons who shall before 16. August next, deliver in their Certificates asserted under the Hands and Seals of five Commissioners to the Register appointed by the Commissioners in the Star-chamber, shall be taken to have good right to the bene∣fit of the Act. Post-Office, and Wine-License. Anno 15. Car. 2. cap. 12. An Act of Parliament 12. Car. 2. En∣tituled, An Act for the better ordering and selling of Wines by re∣tale. And another Act, Entituled, An Act for the erecting and establishing a Post-Office are mentioned; And it is also mentioned, that the King is pleased, for and towards the maintenance and sup∣port of his beloved Brother James Duke of York his estate and dig∣nity, to grant the said Offices to his said Brother James Duke of York, and the Heirs Males of his body, begotten or to be begotten; it is therefore,
I. Enacted and declared, That the said James Duke of York, and the Heirs Males of his body begotten, and to be begotten, shall have all and every the powers and authorities to give and grant Licenses to such persons as he shall think fit, to sell and ut∣ter by retale all and every, or any kind of Wines whatsoever to be drunk or spent within the house, houses, or other places in the Tenure or Occupation of the party so licenced, within any City, Town, or other place within the Kingdom of England, Wales, and Town of Berwick, with all the benefit and profits thereof; and that the said Duke and the Heirs Males of his body begot∣ten, or to be begotten, shall have that moyety of the forfeitures which by the said recited Act is given to the King, his Heirs and Successors. II. That all and every persons which at any times hereafter, shall be by the said Duke and the Heirs Males of his body, be∣gotten or to be begotten, appointed Agents or Commissioners, to treat and contract for the giving of Licences to any persons for selling and uttering of Wines by retale in any City, Town, or place, shall have the full and sole power and authority to treat and contract for the giving of such Licenses, as the Kings Commissi∣oners might do by vertue of the recited Act. III. That such persons as shall be appointed by the Duke, his Heirs Males of his body, begotten or to be begotten, under his or their hand and seal for the granting of Licenses for selling and uttering Wines by retale, or enabled under such seal as he or they shall appoint, to grant Licenses for selling and uttering of Wines by retale to any persons for any times not exceeding twenty one years, and under such condition as they shall think fit; so as no Fine be taken but the Rents and sums of moneys reserved be duely paid at the times and places agreed for payment thereof, for which Rents, the Duke and his Heirs Males, &c. shall have power to sue for, by Bill, Plaint, or Action of Debt, in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster, or elsewhere, in his own name, or to sue for in the Kings Name in the Court of Exche∣quer, at the Election of the Duke, and the Heirs Males of his bo∣dy; and the discharge of the Duke, and the Heirs Males of his bo∣dy, &c. or his or their Receiver-General, shall be an effectual discharge for so much as shall be received by vertue of the said Act for Wine-Licenses.
1. Provided, The King, his Heirs and Successors, shall not during the continuance of the estate tail, by himself, or Agents, grant any Commissions or Licenses for selling or uttering any Wines by retale. 2. That nothing in the Act shall make void any Contracts, Leases, or Agreements that have been made by the Kings Agents for granting Licenses for selling of Wines by retale, but that such Contracts, Leases, &c. shall remain in force; and all Rents reserved thereupon shall be paid to the Duke, and the heirs males of his body begotten, &c. IV. That the yearly Rents, sums of Moneys, Revenues, and Profits whatsoever shall grow due, or be payable to the King, his heirs or successors, for or by reason of the general Letter-offce, or Post-Office, or Office of Post-Master-General, or annexed, in∣cident, or belonging to the Post-Office, or general Letter-Office, or issuing out of the same, or growing due by reason of the same, shall be vested in the said Duke, and the heirs males of his body begotten, or to be begotten, with full and sole power for the said Duke and the heirs males of his body begotten, &c, his and their Receivers-General, to receive all and every the Rents and Profits accruing for, or issuing out of the said Office, and to give dive discharges for the money received. V. None of the yearly Rents, Issues and Profits arising or issuing out of the said general Letter-Office, &c. shall for, or during the said Estate tail be paid into the Exchequer, but only to the Duke and the heirs males of his body begotten, &c. his, or their Receiver-General for the time being: And the Duke, and the heirs males of his body begotten, &c. shall and may in the name of the King, his heirs, &c. or in his own name sue for the same, by Bill, Plaint, Information; or otherwise, in any Courts of Law, or Equity, whereing no protection, wager of Law, &c. shall lie. Provided, Nothing in this Act, shall make void the grant made by the King to Daniel Oneal Esquire of the Office of Post-Master-General, or General Letter-Office, or Post-Office for four years, and a quarter of a year, from the 25 of March, 1663. under the yearly Rent of 21500 l. for all the said Term (except the last quarter which is paid aforehand) so as the said Rents be paid to the Duke, and the heirs males of his body be∣gotten and to be begotten. VI. That it shall and may be lawful for the King, his heirs and Successors at any time or times during the said Estate tail,
by Warrant under his Privy Seal to charge any sum, or several sums, not exceeding in the whole the sum 5382 l. 10 s. to be paid out of the Office of Post-Master-General, to which said sum of 5382 l. 10 s. the several sums and payments now charged there∣upon do amount (the grant of which sums are not to be avoided by this Act) which said sums of money not exceeding 5382 l. 10 s. to be granted by the King, are by the Act confirmed and made of full force. VII. That the King, his Heirs and Successors, shall have the nomination of the Post-Master-General of the said Post-Office, and shall from time to time nominate and appoint such person, &c. as he or they shall please, to be Post-Master-General of the said Office, and may grant the same with the power thereun∣to belonging, and the Rates of Portage in the said Act mention∣ed, either for lease or years, not exceeding 21 years, to any per∣son, &c. as he or they shall think fit, under the most improved yearly Rent can be gotten for the same by the Duke, or the Heirs Males of his body, &c. without Fines, the said Rent to be paid to the Duke and the Heirs Males of his body, &c. under such Covenants and Agreements as the Duke and the Heirs Males of his body shall think fit∣ting. VIII. It is declared, That the Duke, and the Heirs Males of his body begotten, and to be begotten, may settle any part of the premises, not exceeding a third part of the clear yearly value over and above all charges or reprises, for a Joyn∣ture for his or their Wife or Wives, and to lease any other part of the premises for any number of years not exceeding twenty one years, and not exceeding one third part of the clear yearly value of the premises, in order to raise portions for his or their younger children. 1. Provided. This Act, nor any thing therein not in any wise to be prejudicial to the priviledge of the two Universities of this Land, or to the Chancellor or Scholars of the same, or their Successors, but they may use and enjoy such priviledges as they have heretofore lawfully used and enjoyed. 2. Nor shall extend to be prejudicial to the Masters, War∣dens, and free-men and commonalty of the Vintners of London, or to any other City or Town-Corporate; but that they may enjoy such priviledges and liberties as heretofore they have law∣fully used and enjoyed.
3. Nor shall in any wise extend to debar or hinder the Mayor and Burgesses of the Burrough of Saint Albans to the County of Hertford, or their Successors, from enjoying and exercising such Liberties heretofore granted to them by several Letters Patents by Queen Elizabeth, or King James, for the erecting and licensing three several Wine-Taverns within the said Burrough, for the maintenance of the Free-School there; but the same Liberties, Powers and Authorities are hereby established, and shall remain and continue to the said Mayor and Burgesses, &c. for the cha∣ritable use aforesaid, according to the tenors of the said Letters Patents. 4. That all Letters, and other things may be sent or convey∣ed, to or from the two Universities in manner as before hath been used. SUBSIDIES. 1. Enacted, 15 Car. 2. Cap. 7. Every person born within the Realm of England and Dominions thereof, worth 3 l. in money, stock, merchandize, and other goods whatsoever, which he hath to his own use, or any other hath to his use (except his wearing apparel belonging to their bodies) and every body corporate, Guild or Fraternity, which hath any stock, or place, &c. to his or their own use, or others have in trust for their use: shall pay for every of the four Subsidies 2 s. 8 d. of every pound: Every Alien, Stranger born out of the Kingdom, Denizens, or others; and Every Recusant convict, or shall be Indicted for Recusancy, and shall not discharge their Indict∣ments at the next Assises, or within two general Sessions of the Peace where they shall be Indicted, which shall have Coyn, Plate, or other Goods and Chattels whatsoever, or sums of mo∣neys owing them within the Realm or without (Except as before excepted) shall pay 5 s. 4 d. for every pound for every Subsidy: Every Alien born out of the Kings Dominions, Denizen or not Denizen, not being of the age of seven years, or above, and every Popish Recusant convict, &c. being of the age of 17 years, or which being of the age of 21 years, hath not received the Communion, shall pay to every of the said four Subsidies 8 d. for every Poll; and the Master, or he or she with whom the Alien is, shall be charged with the same for lack of payment thereof.
II. The first two of the four Subsidies shall be rated in eve∣ry County, Borough, City, Town, &c. before 1. October next; and the two last before 1. March, 1663. And the particular sums of every County, City, &c. for the two first Subsidies, cer∣tified into the Exchequer, before 14. October next; and the two last before 14. April next: And the payment of the two first Sub∣sidies shall be into the Receipt of the Exchequer to the use of the King, &c. before 1. November next: and the two last before May then next following. III. Every person, aswel such as are born within the Kings obeysance, as other person, stranger, Denizen or not Denizen, inhabiting within the Realm and the Kings other Dominions, which at the time of the Assessing shall be out of the Realm, and have Lands, Goods, &c. shall be charged for the same where such Lands or Goods shall then be, or in such place where his or their Factor or Attorney shall have their resort within the Realm, as if the Person at the time of the assessing had been within the Realm; and every person within or without the Realm shall be charged after the rate of such yearly substance, or value of Lands or Goods, as every other person shall be charged. IV. For the Assessing and ordering of the Subsidies to be had, the Lord Chancellor of England, and divers other Lords, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, in the Act are particularly named, who by the Act are appointed to be Commissioners of any of the several Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Places, which said Commissioners, or any three of them are to execute the powers within the Act, within their respective Divisions; and every the said Commissioners shall hereby effectually and dili∣gently execute their respective Authorities, without omission, fa∣vour, dread, or malice. V. The Commissioners for Taxation of the said Subsidies, at the days aforesaid, shall direct their several or joynt Pre∣cepts to 8, 7, 6, 5, 4. 3, or 2. of the most substantial and discreet Inhabitants within the Hundreds, Lathes, Parishes, Towns and Places, aswel within the Liberties as without (ancient Demesn places excepted) and to the Constables, Sub-constables, Bailiffs and Officers of the same Lathes, &c. commanding the said In∣habitants, Constables, and Officers, &c. to appear in their proper persons before them, within the Cities, Towns, Places limited, to do and accomplish all that to them on the part of the King shall be enjoyned touching the Act; and that to
whom the said Precept, &c. shall come, to deliver the same to the other Inhabitants or Officers named in the Precept; and none of them to fail to accomplish the same, under pain of 40. s. to be forfeited to the King. VI. That at the day prefixed by the Precept, every of the Com∣missioners not having a reasonable excuse for his absence, shall appear; and as many of them as are appointed by the Act, shall call before them the Inhabitants and Officers; and if any person make default, unless letted by sickness or lawful ex∣cuse, examined by the Oaths of two credible Witnesses, every person so making default or refusing to serve, shall forfeit to the King 40. s. And upon appearance had, they shall be charged by all convenient ways and means to enquire of the va∣lue of the Substance of every person dwelling, &c. within the limits and places they shall be charged with, and of all other things requisite touching the Act, as near as may be, or shall come to their knowledge, and certifie before the Com∣missioners the Names, Sur-names, Substances and values of every of them, as well of Lands, &c. as of Goods, Chattels, Debts and other things chargeable by the Act, without concealment, love, favour, dread, or malice, upon pain of forfeitute of any sum, not exceeding 5. l. to be levyed as by the Act is appointed; And the Commissioners thereupon shall openly read the Rates mentioned in the Act, and declare to them in what manner and form they ought to make their Certificates: and of all manner of persons within the Act and of their Possessions, Goods and Chattels, by which information they may have such plain knowledge of the Act that they shall have no cause to excuse themselves of ignorance; and after such charge, and the manner of the Certificate to be made, and to them declared, the Commissioners shall appoint to the said parties, ano∣ther day and place to appear before them, charging them to make diligent enquiry of the premisses, and then every of them, upon pain of forfeit of 40. s. shall appear, and certifie to the Commissioners, as to them in manner hath been directed; and if any of them do make default, or refuse to make such Certificate, they shall forfeit to the King 40. s. and of such as do appear the Commissioners shall receive the certificate, and if they see cause examine the Presentors thereof; and there∣upon the Commissioners shall prefix a day and place for their further proceeding in the Assessing of the Subsidies, and shall make their Precepts to the Constables, &c. of such Hundreds,
Towns and Places, with the names of the Persons presented in the Certificate, of which if they shall vehemently suspect to be of greater substance in Lands or Goods than is so certified, they shall make their warrants to the Constable, &c. to warn such persons before the Commissioners at a prefixed day and place, to be examined of their substance and value, and other matter concerning the Premises; And if the Persons warned to be exa∣mined, shall not appear (without some reasonable excuse) eve∣ry of them making default, to be charged to the King with the double sum of the rate, he should or ought to have been set at of his Lands, or Substance, and the Commissioners af∣ter the better knowledge of their values either in Lands or Goods, shall have power to encrease the Taxation of such Persons: and every spiritual Person of the Taxations of the Subsidies, for every pound he, or other Person hath to his use, by descent Bargain, in Fee, Tayl, for Life, Years, Copy-hold, &c. of Ma∣nors, Lands, or Tenements, shall be taxed after the just and true value thereof. VII. If the Assessors shall affectionately, corruptly, or par∣tially in their enquiry, taxation, &c. demean themselves in such wise as the Commissioners shall deem them Offenders, four of the Commissioners of that County for the said Subsidy, have Power either to charge the said Assessors upon their better Ser∣vice, to charge them upon their Oaths, or to set upon them for their misdemeanour, such Fine as they shall see good, so it exceed not 10. l. and to estreat the same into the Exchequer, which shall be Levyed and answered to the King as other sums shall be taxed and become due, and not otherwise; And if any Person Certified or Rated be a Commissioner, or other, find him∣self grieved with the Sessing or Rating, and do complain to the Commissioners before the same taxation be certified into the Ex∣chequer, The Commissioners, or two of them, shall particularly examine the person so complaining, upon his Oath, and his Neighbours at their discretions, of his Lands, Goods and Chat∣tels, and upon due examination and knowledge thereof, abate, defalk, increase or enlarge the said Assessment, and the same so abated, encreased, or enlarged, shall be estreated by them in∣to the Exchequer; and if it be proved within a year after the Person sworn was of better value in Lands, Goods, &c. at the time of such Oath made, than the person upon Oath doth de∣clare, the person offending shall forfeit to the King so much mo∣ney as the same Person so sworn was set at or taxed to pay.
VIII. Every Person to be rated, shall be rated, and the sum on him set, levyed at such place where he and his Family were resident the most part of the year before the Taxation made, and no where else; and no Commissioner shall be rated but in the Shire where he is Commissioner: and if any Person at the time of the Assessing shall be out of the Realm, to be set where he was last abiding within the Realm: and the Com∣missioners after the Rates aforesaid; shall cause every Person Ra∣ted and Taxed, to be Rated and Taxed according to the Rate of the substance and value of his Lands, Goods, &c. whereby the greatest and best Sum may be Set and Taxed; and every per∣son Taxed in any other County or place, than where his Fa∣mily were resident as aforesaid, upon Certificate made to the Court of Exchequer, under the Hands and Seals of two Com∣missioners testifying his non-resiance, shall be a sufficient dis∣charge for the Taxation of that person in any other place for all other sums of money set upon such Person, save only the Taxations made in that County, or place, from which such Certificate shall be made as aforesaid; and the same Certifi∣cate shall be a sufficient Warrant to the Barons and Auditors of the Court of Exchequer, as to all other Officers, paying for the al∣lowance and discharge 6. d. and no more. IX. Provided, That every person Rated according to the mean∣ing of the Act, to and for the Subsidies, after the yearly value of his Lands or other real Possessions at any of the Taxations, shall not after be Rated for his Goods, &c. at the same Taxa∣tion; and so è converso, who is taxed for his Goods, shall not be Taxed for his Land at the same Taxation; nor any person shall be doubly charged, but if any person happen to be double Rated or charged, he to be discharged of the one, and charged with the other. X. No Person having two Mansions to resort unto, or cal∣ling himself Houshold-Servant, &c. to the King or other Lord, Lady, Mr. or Mistress, shall be excused upon his saying, from the Taxing of the Subsidies in neither of the places where he may be Taxed, unless he bring a certificate from the Commis∣sioners where he is so Taxed indeed in one place. And if any person, that ought to be Taxed, by reason of his resorting to two places, or of his saying he was elsewhere Taxed, or otherwise by his covin or craft, or by any words, sayings, or otherwise: Or if any Commissioner, or Assessor shall escape from the Taxations, and not be taxed according to the Act,
and the same proved before the Commissioners, or two of them, or the Barons of the Exchequer, or two Justices of the Peace of the County where such person dwelleth; every person that by such means, or willingly by covin, shall escape from the said taxations and payments, shall be charged upon proof thereof, at the double value of so much as he should, or ought to have been taxed by the Act, the said double value to be levyed of his Goods, Lands, and Tenements, towards the Subsidies, and to be punished according to the discretions of the Barons, Justices, or Commissioners be∣fore whom he shall be convicted for his Offence. XI. The Commissioners which shall be within any County or place, within their respective Limits, or the major part of them, shall tax and assess every other Commissioner joyned with them, and the Commissioners within their Division shall assess every Assessor within their Division, and as well all sums upon every the said Commissioners and Assessors, as the sums made and pre∣sented by the Presenters, as aforesaid, shall be written, estreated, levyed, and gathered as it should and ought to have been, as if the said Commissioners had not been named Commissioners, and the estate of all Barons or Baronesses, & every estate above shall be charged with their Freehold and value, by Ed. Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellour of England, and other Earls and Barons parti∣cularly named in the Act, seven or more of them for the several payments of the said Subsidies, and the sums by them to be taxed, with the names of the Collectors (which Collectors shall be ap∣pointed by the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being) to be estreated, delivered, and certified at the days and places above specified, by the said Earl of Clarendon, and the said other Earls, Lords and Barons in the Act particularly named, or by seven or more of them. XII. That after the Taxes and Assesses of the said sums made, the said respective Commissioners, shall without delay by their writing estreat the Taxes under the Seals and Signs manual of the Commissioners, and the same shall deliver to sufficient Inha∣bitants, Constables & other Officers jointly of Hundreds, Towns, Parishes within their Limits, and to other sufficient persons with the assent of the High Collectors, aswel the particular names and Surnames, as the remembrance of all sums of monies taxed upon every person chargeable by the Act by the authority of which writing and estreat so delivered, the Officers shall have power to demand, levy, and gather of every person therein specified the sums of money therein estreated, and for non-payment thereof,
to distrain the person being behind of their Goods and Chattels, and to keep the distress eight days, & if the Owner do not pay the money within eight days, the distress to be apprised by two of the Inhabitants where it was taken & then to be sold by the Consta∣bles or other Officers, the overplus to be restored to the Owner; which said Officers deputed to take and levy the said sums, shall be charged for the portion onely to them limited to be gathered and comprised in the said estreat to the use of the King, &c. and the sum therein comprised to pay to the High-collector; and the Inhabitants and Officers for the gathering the said particular sums, shall retain for every 20 s. by them received and paid 2. d. at the payment by them made to the High-collector. XIII. The Commissioners for every the payments of the Sub∣sidies shall name able persons who have Lands of the value of 40. l. per annum, or Goods to the value of 400 l. taxed in the Subsidie-Book, to be High-collectors within the Counties, Towns and Places, as well priviledged, as others, and to have the collection and receipt of the moneys levyable within their Limits and Precincts; and to every of the said Collectors, the Commis∣sioners after the whole sum of any payment of the Subsidies be set, shall under their Hands and Seals deliver one Estreat indented containing the sums of such persons as were assigned to levy the particular sums, with the names of the persons so chargeable ac∣cording to the Estreat thereof so first made: and the Collectors to be charged to answer the whole sum comprised in the Estreats limited to his Collection. XIV. The Commissioners who nominate the High-Collectors, immediately after their election shall take sufficient Recogni∣zances or Obligations of the said High-Collectors, of the penal sum of double their Collection, with this condition indorsed, viz. That if the said Collector, his Heirs, Executors, &c. do truly pay to the use of the King, his Heirs, &c. in the receipt of the Exchequer, at, or before the first of November next coming, so much of the Money appointed to his collection as he shall collect or gather, and pay the residue of his collection and charge within one moneth after such time as he hath collected the said residue, then the said Recognizance or Obligation to be void; The like Recognizance or Obligation for the payment of the two last of the said four Subsidies upon the first of May then next fol∣lowing: or within one moneth after he hath gathered the re∣sidue of the same; which Recognizances, &c. the Commissio∣ners shall certifie and deliver into the Exchequer, with the se∣veral
Certificates of the Taxations and Rates, upon pain of forfeit of 10 l. for every Recognizance, &c. not so certified; and every Collector upon request to him made, shall make the said Recognizance or Obligation upon pain of 20 l. to the King for refusal thereof; And the Barons of the Exchequer upon payment of the said several collections, shall cancel, and deliver the said Recognizance, &c. to the said Collectors, and every Collector so deputed, having the said Estreat, shall appoint days and places within his collection for the payment of the Subsi∣dies to him, and all the Constables and others having the charge of the particular collection within the Hundreds, Parishes and Towns, to make payment of the said particular collection at a day and place appointed by the High-Collector; and if the said Constables and others do sail thereof, at the day and place pre∣fixed by the High-Collector: The said High-Collectors shall di∣strein them, and every of them for their several particular Collections by their Goods and Chattels for such sums as shall be levyed by them and unpaid, and the distress taken, to be kept and sold, and thereof to take the sums so then behind and unpaid, restoring to the Owner the overplus. XV. No person shall be appointed High-Collector for the two last Subsidies, who hath been a Collector for the two first Subsi∣dies, unless he first shew forth to them by whom he shall be ap∣pointed his Quietus est, for his discharge of his collection before appointed upon pain of 100 l. to be paid by him or them who shall appoint any such Collector; And no person inhabiting in any City, Borough, Town, &c. shall be compelled to be an Assessor or Collector, for any part of the Subsidies, out of the City, Bo∣rough or Town where he dwelleth. XVI. If any Officers, or persons, charged to and for the collection of any part of the Subsidies, or any persons for them∣selves or as Keeper, Guardian, Factor, or Attorney for any other person of any Goods, or Chattels at the time of assessing being out of the Realm; Or of, and for the goods of any other person of other commonalty Corporate or not Corporate shall be taxed, valued and rated, & after such taxation shall happen to die, or de∣part from the place where he was taxed; Or his his goods be so eloined, or kept in such convert manner as the persons charged with the same by the Estreats, cannot levy the same by distress within the limits of their collection, or cannot sell such distress for any the said payments before the time limited, to the High-Col∣lector for payment thereof to the Kings receipt, upon relation
thereof, by due examination upon Oath, and examination of such persons as shall be charged for the Collection and Receipt of the same; upon plain Certificate thereof made into the Ex∣chequer by the Commissioners, aswell of the dwelling place, as of the names and sums of the persons of whom the said sums cannot be levyed. Then aswell the Constable, &c. for the perticular Collection, as the High Collector upon his Oath in the Exchequer, to be discharged thereof, and process to be made for the King against such person, his Heirs or Executors so be∣hind with his payment: And the Commissioners to whom such Declaration shall be made, shall direct their Precept to any Sheriff, Steward, or Officer of any place, which such person shall have any Lands, &c. Goods or Chattels, within the Kings Dominions to levy such monies, and to Distrein every such person indebted, or the Executors, Administrators of his Goods and Chattels, his Factors, Lessees, Farmers, or Assigns, and the distress so taken to cause to be apprized and sold: And if any such distress shall be taken out of the limits of the per∣sons charged for the levying of the same, shall take the same distress for the labour of every person going in execution there∣of 2 d. And every Farmer, Guardian, Factor, &c. shall be of such sums of money of him levyed and taken, discharged and acquited at his next day of payment for the same, or at the day of the delivery of such Goods, as he Distrained, had in his custody or governance, against him or them shall be so Set and Taxed. XVI. If such person as should be Distrained, have no Lands; or hath alliened, hid, or concealed his Goods, &c, in such manner as they cannot be found or known, so as the sum by him to be paid, cannot conveniently be levyed; the Commissioners may make precept (as before is directed) to take and arrest his body, and the same to keep in Prison within the Shire, where such person shall be taken: And every Officer to whom such precept shall be directed, shall execute the same upon the person so indebted upon pain of forfeiture for every default 20 s. And no keeper of the Goal shall suffer such person to go at large before he have paid his said debt upon pain of forfeit of 40 s. to the Kings: And the Goaler to pay to the King the double value▪ the rate the person was so rated at: And if the sums behind unpaid be levyed by force of the said prncess; Or the person so owing the same, be Committed to Prison as aforesaid, the Commissioners
shall make Certificate thereof into the Exchequer in the Term next following: And if it happen the Collectors assigned, or any of the Majors, Sheriffs, Stewards, &c. disobey the Com∣missioners, in the request to them made for the executing the same Commission, or if any of the Officers refuse to do that which to them doth belong, by reason of any precept to him di∣rected; Or if any person being suspected not to be indifferent∣ly taxed, do refuse to be examined; Or will not appear before the Commissioners upon warning to him made; or make resi∣stance, or rescues upon any distress taken for any part of the Subsidies, or commit any misdemeanor, or any wilful omission, misdemeaning contrary to the Act; the Commissioners upon In∣formation and Examination thereof may set upon every offender for every offence 40 s. XVIII. That the Commissioners or two of them, shall have power to punish every offender by Imprisonment, there to re∣main and to be delivered, as to them shall seem convenient: And to assess Fines, which Fines, if any be, to be certified in∣to the Exchequer, there to be levyed and paid by the Colle∣ctors of that part, in such manner as if the said Fines had been Set and Taxed upon the said offenders for the said Sub∣sidies. XIX. Every High Collector who shall accompt in the Ex∣chequer: for money within his Collection, upon payment thereof shall there out of every pound be allowed 6. d. viz. 2. d. for himself; to every Collector or their accomptants 2. d. and 2. d. to such Collector as shall take upon them the business and labour in the Premises, in ordering the Writings, &c. in and for the Subsidies: And no person of the Company of this Parlia∣ment, nor any Commissioner shall be a Collector, or Sub-colle∣ctor, or be compelled to make any Presentment, or Certificate other then into the Court of Exchequer of, for or concerning the Subsidies, or any part thereof. And no Commissioner shall be a Head-Collector of any of the payments of the Subsidies, nor any part thereof. And he who is Head-Collector for the two first Subsidies, shall not be compelled to be Collector for the two last Subsidies: And every Collector shall be acquitted and dis∣charged of all manner of Fees in the Exchequer concerning the same to be asked: And if any person take any Fees of such Ac∣comptants, or use unnecessary delay in their Accompt, he shall for∣feit for every peny 5. s. to the King, and 5. l. to the party; and suffer Imprisonment.
XX. After the assessing the several Subsidies, and the Estreats delivered to the Collectors, every Commissioner shall by him∣self, or his Deputy, certifie and bring forth to the Commissioners the presentment made before him, within one limit, so as the same may be accounted and cast with the other Certificates within their limits; and then the said Commissioner, (if any of them be in life, or their Executors or Administrators, if dead) shall jointly and severally, as they were divided within their limits, under their seals make Writings, indented; containing as well the names of the Collectors, as the sums written to every Collector, to receive the said Subsidies; and all fines and for∣feitures within their limits, to be certified into the Exche∣quer; so as none of the Collectors certified into the Exchequer, shall be compelled there to accompt, but for the sums in his Collection. XXI. If the respective Commissioners cannot agree, or if any of them be not ready, or refuse to make Certificate with the other Commissioners: Then they to make several Indentures of Collectors within their limits, upon and in the several Hun∣dreds, Wards, and other like Divisions within their Limits; for the several charges of the same Collectors; so as one Collector shall be charged and accompt for his part only by himself: And every Collector to be severally by himself acquitted and dis∣charged in the Exchequer, without paying any Fees, &c. to any person upon the pain aforesaid: And if any Commissioner, or any Collector, or other person charged with any receipt of any part of the Subsidies, or with any sum, Fine, Amerciament, or penalty, shall happen to die before such person shall have exe∣cuted, satisfied, or discharged that which to such person doth belong or appertain; the Executors and Heirs of every such person and all other persons seised of any Lands, to his use, at the time such person was named Commissioner, Collector, or otherwise charged with; and all those who have any Goods, Chattels, &c. that were to such person, &c. at the time of his death, shall be compelled to do, and accomplish in every case; as the person might have been compelled to do if he had been in full life. XXII. If the Commissioners shall think it fit, not to joyn in one Certificate; then the person that shall first certifie the said Writing indented, shall certifie all the names of that respective Division; whereupon shall be there then to be certified with the Division of the Hundreds, &c.
with the names of the Commissioners, with the gross sums of mo∣neys for the Subsidies Taxed and set within the Hundreds, &c. as of the Fines, Forfeitures, Penalties, if any happen within the Limits: And after such writings indented, shall be certified, and not contain in it the whole sum set within the respe∣ctive Limits; the other Commissioners before the day of pay∣ment of the said Subsidies, shall certifie by their writing into the Exchequer, the gross and several sums within the places, to them limited in the said Subsidies, and other Fines, Amerce∣ments, &c, with the names of the Hundreds, &c. or else certifie at the same place before the day of paiment such reasonable cau∣ses, for their excuses, for their not certifying as aforesaid, or in default thereof, process to be made out of the Exche∣quer against the said Commissioners, not making Certificate as aforesaid. XXVII. That the Inhabitants of the Parish of St. Martin called Stamford-Baron in the Town of Stamford inn the South part of the Waters, there called Wellands; shall be taxed by such Commissioners, as shall be appointed for the assessing of the Subsidies for the Counties of Lincoln; and shall pay the Subsidies to the Collector appointed for the gathering of the same with the Aldermen and Burgesses of Stam∣ford. XXIV. Every person having Manors, Lands, &c. charge∣able to the paiment of the Subsidies, and also having Spiri∣tuals Possessions charged to the King by any grant made by the Clergy in their Convocation, and having Substance in Goods and Chattels; if such person shall be taxed for the said Manors, Lands, Goods and Chattels; he shall be by this Act charged, only for the said Manors, Lands, and Spiritual Possessions, or for his Goods and Chattels, the best for the King, and not charged for both, or double charged for any of them. 1. Provided, This grant of Subsidies shall not extend to the Inhabitants of Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey, for or concerning any Manors, Lands, &c. Goods or Chattels, which they or others have to their use, within the places afore∣said. 2. All Letters Patents, by the King or his Progenitors to any Cities, Boroughs or Towns within the Realm, of any Li∣berties, or Exemptions from such Grants of Subsidies which be now in force, shall remain good to the said Cities, Boroughs, &c.
although the Inhabitants of the same, and the said Corporations upon weighty considerations for this Grant charged and con∣tributary in like manner as the other Cities, Burroughs, which be not in any wise priviledged. 3. No Orphan or Infant within 21 years, born within the Kings Dominions shall be charged to the payment of any of these Subsidies for his Goods and Chattels, to him left, or be∣queathed. 4. The Act not to extend to the Lands or Goods to any Col∣ledge, Hall, or Hostal within the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or of the Colledges of Eaton, Winchester, or to the Lands, Goods or Revenues assigned for the sustentation and living of the poor Knights, founded in the Castle of Windsor, or to the Goods of the same Knights, or any of them; or to the Lands and Goods of any common Grammar-Shool within Eng∣land or Wales; Or to the Goods of any Reader, School-Master, Scholar or Graduate remaining for study without fraud, within any the said Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or to any of their servants tending daily upon them; Or to the Lands or Goods of any Hospital, Meason-dieu, or Spittle-house used for the sustentation or relief of poor peeple. XXV. If any Alien, or Stranger born, Denizen or not De∣nizen dwelling in England, shall assign or convey over to his or their child or children born within the Realm of England, any of their Lands, Goods or Chattels, to defraud the King of the said Subsidies; Every such child or children so seized of such Lands, &c. or possessed of such Goods, &c. shall be charged with the payment of the double of the said Subsidies, at the rates and values as Aliens, Strangers, Denszins or not Denizens are limited. XXVI. That the grant of Subsidies do not extend, or be prejudicial to any the Inhabitants having dwelt for the most part of the year before the taxing within the Cinqueports-Cor∣porate, or any of their Members Incorporated or united to the Cinqueports; but such the said Inhabitants from and after the said grant and payment thereof, only during their resiance as aforesaid and no longer, be acquitted and discharged. 1. Provided, The grant of Subsidies not to extend to be preju∣dicial to English Inhabitants or Resiants at this present within the Liberties of Rumney Marsh, of, or for any part of the said sums to be taxed or paid; but they shall, from the grant of Subsidies during their resiance there, and no longer, be discharged.
XXVII. That for the direction of the Commissioners in the execution of this Act, it is declared, there shall be a restriction as to the real value of Lands and Goods by having regard to debts, and other necessary expences, and to relation of former Presidents of Subsidies in the reigns of King James, and King Charles the first in the manner of taxing thereof. Subsidies granted by the Clergy. Anno 15. Car. 2. cap. The Prelates and Clergy of the Pro∣vince of Canterbury, in their Convocation assembled, have grant∣ed to the King four Subsidies, under the Clauses and Provisoes therein after mentioned, which Grant of theirs, with the clauses therein, they humbly desire may be confirmed by Act of Parlia∣ment, viz. I. They grant to the King four entire Subsidies of 4 s. in the pound in manner following, viz. Every Arch-Bishop, Bishop, Dean, Arch-Deacon, Provost, Master of Colledge, Prebendary, Parson or Vicar, of what name or degree soever they be, within the said Province, having any Spiritual promotion, or Temporal Possessions to the same annexed, and not divided and separated from the Possession of the Clergy, shall pay to the King, his Heirs, &c. for every pound he may yearly receive by reason of the said Spiritual Promotion, 4 s for every of the said four Subsidies; The Valuation, Rate, Taxation and Estimation to be, the Rate and Valuation remaining of Record for the paiment of Disme or Tenth granted to King Henry the 8th in the 26. year of his Reign. II. For as much as the 10. part of the said valuation is paid yearly to the King for a perpetual Tenth, so as there remains but nine parts to the Incumbent clear, the four Subsidies shall be understood only of every full pound of the said nine parts, 4 s. per pound; The said four Subsidies to be paid as followeth, viz. The whole paiment of the first of the said four Subsidies, 4 s. per pound to be paid 1. October next; the first paiment, and moiety of the second, viz. 2 s. of every pound, upon 26. March, 1664. the second paiment of the second Subsidy upon the 5. of October following; The first paiment and moiety of the third Subsidy the 26. March, 1665. and the second paiment up∣on 5. October next following; The first paiment and moiety of the fourth Subsidie upon 26. March, 1666. and the second paiment of
the moiety of the last four Subsidies, upon 5th of October, then next following; to be paid by such persons as shall be appointed by the Grant to have collection thereof to the Lord Treasurer, under▪Trea∣surer of England, or such as the King shall please to appoint it to be paid. No Person that is, or shall be promoted to any Benefice, or Spiritual Promotion, and hath Compounded, or shall Com∣pound, for the First-fruits of the same, from 1. October last past 1662, and on this side 5. October, now next, which shall be in 1663. shall be charged for the said Benefice, or Promotion with any part of the first of the four Subsidies due 5. October, now next ensuing. And no Person which shall be after promoted to any Benefice, or Spiritual Promotion, and shall compound for the First-fruits of the same, from and after 26. March. 1664. and on this side 5. October, 1666. shall be contributary or char∣ged for the same Benefice, with any part of the other three Subsi∣dies during the first year after any such compounding for his First-fruits. IV. Every Archbishop, Bishop (and the See being void) every Dean and Chapter of that See void, shall be Collector of the four Subsidies within their proper Diocess, for the paiment of the said Subsidies: And they pray it may be Enacted, that when and as often as any Collector chargeable with the Collection, or any of their under Collectors or Deputies, shall offer the paiment of the said four Subsidies, or any part of them, to any Person appointed to receive the same; that the Person so appointed within four days next after such appointment, receive the money so to be paid with∣out delay, and deliver a Bill testifying the receipt thereof, unto eve∣ry Collector, &c. upon every such particular paiment thereof; and that every Auditor appointed to take the accompt of such Colle∣ctor, &c. within six days after request, take the said accompt, and make allowance, as by the Grant is appointed, under pain every such Person appointed to receive such money, and every such Auditor lose for every default Ten pound, one moiety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to the Collector or his Deputy, the party so grieved, to be paid upon complaint made to the Lord Treasurer or Chief Baron of the Exchequer, who finding the fault, shall commit the offender to Ward, till he have paid the sums for∣feited. V. That every Collector of the four Subsidies their under-Collectors or Deputies may have power to use all such ways and Process as be prescribed in the Act of perpetual Tenths, for the
levying thereof; and may accompt for the same before the Lord Treasurer, or other Officer appointed by the Court of Exchequer, and in such wise, and such form only as the Archbishops and Bi∣shops be now charged to make accompt for the Tenths, whereby is meant that the lack of payment of and for any Spiritual Promo∣tions, shall charge the Incumbents, and such others as be bound to pay the same; and that the Archbishop, Bishop, &c. gathering that which they can receive, and making payment thereof for the rest, not received, shall be discharged by their Certificate to be made for every of the said payments, which shall be due upon the fifth of October, in any of the aforesaid years: or before the last return of Hillary Term next following the said dayes: And for the payments which shall be upon 26. March in any of the said years before the last return of Trinity Term then next following the said days: and that six pence in the pound be allowed to eve∣ry Collector, upon his accompts, for the charges of the Collecti∣on and paying of the said Subsidies. VI. After payment of any of the Subsidies shall be once due; If any Incumbent of any Benefice, or Promotion Spiritual, shall be lawfully monished either personally at his Dignity, Church, or Mansion-house, by the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, or his or their Collector or Deputies; or by the Dean and Chapter (the See being void) or their Collectors or Deputies by himself, or hie Deputie at a certain day and convenient place, appear; and then and there to pay such part of the said Subsidies for his Bene∣fice, or Promotion; and do not at the same day and place, pay the same to the Archbishop, Bishop, &c. his or their Collector, or Deputies, shewing forth sufficient Deputation from the said Arch∣bishop, Bishop, &c. under their hands and seals, being ready at the day and place to receive the same; or else pay every of the said payments within fifty days next after such warning given; then every Incumbent, &c. so making default of payment; and after such default certified, under the seal and hand writing of any such Archbishop, Bishop, &c. certified according to the form parti∣cularly set down in the said Grant (and in the Act mentioned) shall forfeit and lose to the King, His Heirs, &c. all the profits of that only Dignity, Benefice, or Promotion, for which he maketh such default: and the profits which shall grow and rise to him over and above the charges of serving the Cure; And the Tenths to be paid into the Exchequer. See the Certificate in the Act.
Provided, If any Person or Incumbent shall proffer or tender the payment of any sum due, to the Archbishop, Bishop, or to any their Under-Collectors or Deputies; Then notwithstand∣ing their Certificate made, the said Person or Incumbent may aver the offer, or tender of his payment, and the same shall be tryed by Witnesses before the Lords and Barons of the Exche∣quer, or by a Jury of twelve men upon issue thereupon joined, which being found for the Incumbent, he shall enjoy his pro∣motion still without forfeiture or losing any profits thereof, and as if no such Certificate had been made. VII. That every Archbishop, Bishop, &c. chargeable with the collection of the four Subsidies within the Province aforesaid, shall and may upon every payment thereof made to the Lord Treasurer, Under-Treasurer, or such other person as the King shall appoint for the receipt thereof, at every times of pay∣ment thereof, have a sufficient Acquittance, Discharge or Qui∣etus est in writing as the Lord Treasurer, &c. or Court of Ex∣chequer, shall assign for the receipt thereof; and every such Ac∣quittance, discharge, or Quietus est, subscribed with the names of the Lord Treasurer, or Under-Treasurer for the time being, or such Auditor as it shall please the King, or Court of Exche∣quer to appoint, shall be good and effectual in Law to all and eve∣ry the said Collectors, to all intents and purposes, as if the same were made by Act of Parliament; and every Collector shall pay only 3 s. 4 d. for every general or final Acquittance, Discharge, or Quietus est, for any payment of the said Subsidies; Or if any other Officer of the Exchequer shall require, or take of any Col∣lector or their Deputies, &c. either for expedition or other pre∣tence whatsoever; other Fees or Sums then are in this present Grant expresly allowed them, that he may forfeit ten pound, to be paid in like manner to the same uses as is before in this Grant ex∣pressed, touching the forfeitures of Receivers and Auditors: And every Acquittance to be made by any Collector, &c. to any In∣cumbent of any Benefice or promotion, or to any persons contri∣butary to the payment of the Subsidies, or any part thereof, shall be good and effectual in Law, and a sufficient discharge to every such Incumbent or person; and no Acquittance of any other per∣son made before such Certificate shall in any wise discharge any person, or promotion of any part of the Subsidies, or of any pain or forfeiture specified in the Act. 1 Provided, That no Collector shall use any Process or compul∣sory means, or exact any Fees of any person for not paying for the
Subsidies at such a day certain or place; which shall be by the Collector perfixed, in case the person shall tender the same to the Collector, or his Deputy within twenty days after such day prefixed: Nor shall the Collector take for the receipt of any the Subsidies, or his acquittance more then 4 d. 2. No Spiritual Promotions, nor Lands thereunto annexed. or any Goods, or Chattels, growing, or being upon the same, shall be charged, or made contributary to any Fifteenth, or Tenth, granted to the King by the Laity, or after to be granted during the time appointed by this grant for the four Subsidies; All Deans, Arch-Deacons, Masters, Wardens, Prebendaries of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches or Colledges, shall be charged with the four Subsidies; for those Possessions and Pro∣motions only, which to their several Dignities are clearly and distinctly limited, for every of the Subsidies four shillings in every pound; and all those Possessions, Rents and Profits, and every of them given or granted by any the Kings or Queens of the Realm, or Given, Granted, Devised, Impropriated unto the Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches, which be Imployed or Used, towards the maintenance of the Readers of Divinity, Poor-men, School-Masters, Scholars, &c. Petty Canons, Cho∣risters, &c. or toward the edifying or repairing the Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, shall not be charged with any part of the said four Subsidies. 3. Every Person, Vicar, or Spiritual person paying any Pension, whereof no allowance is made in the valuation of his Benefice, may retain to his own Use, so much of every pound of such Pension as he standeth charged by this Grant to pay for every payment of the four Subsidies, out of every pound for the whole Valuation of his Promotion. VIII. That the Cathedral Churches and the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, and Prebendaries of the same, and all other places and persons to whom any of the Lands, Tenements, Rents, Spiritual Promotions, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, and other He∣reditaments, given bestowed and spent in the finding and main∣taining of Chantres, Obits, Lights, Lamps, which came to the hands and possessions of King Edward by the Statute of Chante∣ries, made in the first year of Edward the 6. may not be charged with any payment of Subsidies, of or for any part or portion of the said Lands, &c. nor of any yearly Rents or Payments go∣ing out of the said Cathedral Churches and other places; and that deduction and allowance thereof be made to every of them
according upon every payment of the said four Subsidies out of the whole Taxation, above for the payment of Tenths, whereunto the King was entituled or possessed, or which since the making of the said Statute, have been found as Lands concealed from King Edward the sixth, King Henry the eighth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, or King Charles the first, or otherwise severed ftom the possessions of the said Cathedral Churches, and other places and persons aforesaid, by force of the said Statute, or otherwise. 1. Provided, That these four Subsidies shall not be demanded or levied out of any Benefice, House of Students, or Colledge with∣in either of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or out of any Benefice, Lands, or Revenues of the Colledge of Westminster, Eaton, or Winchester, or any Hospitals, &c. 2. That all persons whose Benefices are not above 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. after the Taxation aforesaid, shall not be charged with the four Subsidies. 3. That every Vicar whose Benefice is 8 l. or above, and not above 10 l. per annum after the Taxation aforesaid, shall pay at every of the said payments, 13 s. 4 d. for the first payment of the first Subsidie, and every other payment 6 s. 4 d. And if a Vica∣ridge be under 8 l. in the Tax, the Incumbent shall not be charged with any payment of the Subsidies. Enacted therefore, That every person that shall be elected to the collecting of the said subsidies, shall have power and authori∣ty; as by suspension, excommunications, and also by sequestra∣tion of the profits of their Benefice in whose hands soever they be, and to make sale of the same Fruits without danger of the Laws, or by distress upon the possessions of the Farmers of the Land, chargeable by the said Instrument for the payment of any sums of money by force thereof; and no Replevin, Prohibition, or Supersedeas, shall be obeyed for any default of payment of the said Subsidies contrary to the tenour of the Grant: And every Farmer, &c. their Executors and Assigns shall be charged with the said Subsidies, shall retain in his hands so much of his yearly Rent, as he shall pay for his Lord, or Lessor as the sum he shall pay shall extend unto, except the Farmer, &c. be bound to pay the same. II. It shall be lawful for the Collectors of the Subsidies, or their Deputies, to levy the Subsidies upon the Farmers or Occu∣piers of all Impropriations or spiritual Promotions by all the Censures of the Church, or by way of distress upon the Tythes of the said Impropriations, &c. or upon the Goods, &c. of
the said Farmers, in which case no Inhibition, Prohibition, or Supersedeas shall be obeyed; and the Collectors and other Offi∣cers of the Arch-bishops, Bishops, &c. for not payment of the Subsidies after the same shall be due, to prize and value the Di∣stress, and to sell the same, and thereof to detain so much as shall amount to the sum payable to the King, with the charges of the Collectors sustained in that behalf. III. Every Lay-person having Spiritual promotion charge∣able by the Act, and having Temporal possessions, Goods, Debts, charged to the Subsidies granted by the Temporalty, shall be charged for his Spiritual Promotions with the Clergy, and for his Temporal Possessions, and Chattels real with the Temporalty. IV. All and every grant, of all and every sum of money, which hereafter shall be granted to the King by the Clergy of the Province of York, shall be of the same strength and force as the Grant made by the Province of Canterbury, and shall be taxed, gathered, and paid according to the tenour and form of this Act, in such manner and form as though it were particularly expressed in this Act by express words. V. All the Provisions contained, or to be contained in the said grant of the Prelates and Clergy of the Province of Canter∣bury; and the like of the same Provisoes contained in the grant of the Prelates and Clergy of the Province of York, shall be good and effectual and kept in every point and article, accord∣ing to the true meaning of the same. Trade. I. Enacted, 15. Car. 2. cap. 5. From and after 1. September 1663. When the prices of Corn and Grain, Winchester mea∣sure exceed not the Rates, viz. a quarter of Wheat 48. s. Of Barley or Malt 28. s. Of Buck-Wheat 28. s. Of Oats 13. s. 4. d. Of Rye 32. s. Of Pease and Beans 32. s. Every person may ship, lade, carry, and transport any of the said Corns or Grains from the Havens, or places where they shall be of such prices, unto any the Parts beyond the Seas, as Merchandize, paying such Rates for the same are to be paid when they might have been transported, by an Act, Entituled, A Subsidie granted of Ton∣nage and Poundage.
II. When the prices of the Corn and Grain aforesaid, Win∣chester measure do not exceed the Rates beforementioned, and shall be imported from any part beyond the Seas, there shall be paid for the Custom and Poundage, viz. Of every quarter of Wheat 5. s. 4. d. Of Rye 4. s. Of Barley and Malt 2. s. 8. d. Of Buck-Wheat 2. s. of Oats 1. s. 4. d. Of Pease and Beans 4. s. III. When the Corn and Grains aforesaid, Winchester mea∣sure, at the Markets where they are bought, Havens or Places, do not exceed the prices in the first clause particularly mentioned, every person (not forestalling or selling the same in the same Market within three moneths after the buying) may buy in open Mar∣ket, lay up, and keep in his Granaries or Houses to sell again, such Corn and Grain, at or under the prices before expressed, without incurring any Penalty. IV. From and after 25. March, 1664. No Commodity of the growth, production, or Manufacture of Europe, shall be im∣ported into any Land, Island, Plantation, Territory to the King belonging, or shall hereafter belong unto, or be in the possessi∣on of the King, his Heirs, &c. in Asia, Africa, or America (Tangier excepted) but what be bona fide, laden and shipped in England, Wales, or Berwick, in English-built shipping; Or which were bona fide bought before 1. October 1662. and had Certificate thereof; and whereof the Master and three fourths of the Mariners at the least are English; and which shall be di∣rectly thence carried to the said Islands, Plantations, Territories and Places, and from no other place, under the penalty of loss of all such Commodities of the growth or manufacture aforesaid, as shall be imported into any of them, from any other place by land or water; if by water, of the Ship in which they were imported, with the Guns, Ammunition, and Apparel, one third part to the King, his Heirs, &c. one other third part to the Go∣vernour of such Land, Island, Plantation, &c. where the goods were imported, the other third part to him who shall seize or sue for the same, in any of the Kings Courts in such of the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, where the offence was committed, or in any Court of Record in England, by Bill, Plaint, In∣formation, &c. V. It shall be lawful to ship and lade in such Ships, Naviga∣ted as in the foregoing clause is expressed, in any part of Eu∣rope, Salt for the Fisheries of New-England, and New-found-Land, in the Medera's Wines of the growth thereof; in the west∣ern Islands, or Azores, Wines of the growth of the said Islands; in
Scotland all sort of Victual of the growth and production of Scot∣land; In Ireland all sorts of Victual of the growth and producti∣on of Ireland, and the same to transport into any of the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, &c. VI. From and after 25 March 1664. Every person import∣ing by Land any Goods or Commodities whatsoever, into the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, &c. shall deliver to the Gover∣nour of such Land, Island, Plantation, &c. or to such Officer as shall be by him appointed, within 24 hours after such Impor∣tation; their names and surnames, and a true Inventory of all such Goods, &c. and no Ship, &c. coming to any such Land, Island, Plantation, &c. shall lade or unlade any Goods, &c. until the Master or Commander of the ship, &c. shall first have made known to the Governour, or such person as shall be appointed by him, the arrival of the Ship, with her name, and the name of the Master or Commander, and have shewed him she is an English built Ship, &c. or made good by Certificate that she is a Ship, &c. belonging to England, Wales, or Ber∣wick, and navigated as aforesaid, and have delivered to the Go∣vernour, &c. a perfect Inventory of her lading, with the place where they were taken in; upon pain of loss of the Ship, her Guns, Tackle, Furniture, and Goods, &c. VII. All such as are Governours or Commanders of any the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, &c. (Tangier excepted) before 25 March 1664. and such as hereafter shall be made Governours, &c. of any of them, before their entrance upon execution of such Trust or Charge, shall take Oath before such person as the King, his Heirs, &c. shall authorize to ad∣minister the same, to do their utmost within their respective Governments, &c. to be truly observed, what in this Act is Enacted in relation to the Trade of such Lands, Islands, Plan∣tations, &c. under penalty of being removed out of their Go∣vernments, &c. And if any person after the taking of the Oath shall be found to have wittingly offended, they shall be turned out of their said Governments, &c. and be incapable of the Govern∣ment of any other Land, Island, Plantation, &c. and also for∣feit the sum of 1000 l. one moyety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other moyety to him who shall inform and sue for the same, in any of the Kings Courts in the said Plantations, or in any Court of Record in England. VIII. If any Officer of the Customs of England, Wales, Ber∣wick, shall give Warrant for, or suffer any Sugar, Tobacco,
Ginger, Cotton-wooll, Indico, Speckle-wood, or Jamaica-wood, Fustick or other dying-wood of the growth of the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, &c. to be carried into any other Countrey or place whatsoever, unless they have been first unladen bona fide, in some Port or Haven in England, Wales, &c. Every such Of∣ficer shall forfeit his place, and the value of the said Goods so suf∣fered to pass into other Countries, &c. the one moyety to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other to him who shall sue for the same in any Court of Record in England, &c. IX. From and after 25 March 1664. It shall be lawful out of any Port of England, Wales, &c. to ship and lade Sea-coals, for any of the said Plantations, paying for the Chalder-measure at New Castle 1 s. 8 d. and for the Chalder-measure London 1 s. in full of all Custom and Poundage for the same. Provided, such Sea-coals be shipped in such shipping navigated as aforesaid, and security given to the Officers of the Customs of the Port where they are shipped, for the landing them in the said Plantations, and not elsewhere. X. From and after 1 August 1663. It may be lawful for any person whatsoever, to Export out of any the Ports of Eng∣land, Wales, &c. in which there is a Customer or Collector, all sorts of Foreign Coin, or Bullion of Gold or Silver, first ma∣king entry thereof in such Custom-house, without paying any Duty, Custom, Poundage, or Fee for the same. XI. That for every head of great Cattel (except such as are of the Breed of Scotland) that shall be Imported into England, Wales, &c. after 1 July in any year: And for every head of great Cattel of the breed of Scotland, that shall be brought into England, Wales, &c. after the 24 August, and before the 20 of December in any year, there shall be paid to the King, his Heirs, &c. 20 s. and 10 s. to him that shall inform or seize the same, and 10 s. to the poor of the Parish where such seizure or infor∣mation shall be made; and that there shall be paid to the King, his Heirs, &c. for every sheep which shall be Imported into England, Wales, &c. after the first of August, and before the twentieth of December in any year, ten shillings, to be recovered and levied in manner as aforesaid. Provided, The Act, so far as it relates to great Cattel, or Sheep, shall not take place till 1 July, 1664. nor continue longer than to the end of the first Session of the next Par∣liament.
XII. From and after 1 August 1664. No Fresh Herring, Fresh Cod, or Haddock, Coalfish or Gulfish shall be Imported into England, Wales, &c. but in English built Ships, &c. or Ships, &c. bona fide, belonging to England, Wales, &c. and having the Certificate thereof as abovesaid, and whereof the Masters, and 3 fourths of the Mariners are English, and which hath been fished, caught and taken in Ships, &c. so navigated, and not being bought or had of any strangers born, or out of strangers bottoms, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Herring, &c. Imported, and of the Ship, &c. in which it was Import∣ed; One moyety of the forfeitures to the King, his Heirs, &c. the other moyety to him who will Inform, Seize, and Sue for the same, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, Information, &c. XIII. For the following kinds or sorts of salted or dryed Fish, which from and after 1 August shall be Imported into Eng∣land, Wales, &c. in any other Ship or Vessel, than what is of English built, or belonging to England, Wales, &c. and having such Certificate as abovesaid, and whereof the Master and 3 fourths of the Mariners are English, and not having been fished or caught in Ships, &c. and so navigated; there shall be by way of Custom and Impost, as followeth, viz. For Codfish the Barrel 5 s. For Codfish the Last containing 12 Barrels 3 l. For Codfish the 100, containing 120, 10 s. For Coalfish the hundred, 5 s. For Lings the hundred, 20 s. For White-herrings the last 12 Barrels, 1 l. 16 s. For Haddocks the Barrel 2 s. For Gul∣fish the Barrel 2 s. XIV. That all and every person whatsoever that do, or shall at any time hereafter set, plant, or sow any Tobacco in seed, Plant, or otherwise, in, or upon any ground, field, earth, or place within England, Wales, the Islands of Guern∣sey, Jersey or Berwiek, shall (over and above the penalty contained in an Act of Parliament made in the twelfth year of the Kings Reign that now is, Entituled, An Act for the prohibiting the planting, setting or sowing of Tobacco in Eng∣land or Ireland) for every such offence forfeit and pay the sum of ten pounds for every Rood or Pole of ground that he or they shall so plant, set, or sow with Tobacco, and so proporti∣onably for a greater or lesser quantity of ground; one third part to the King, one other third part thereof to the use of the poor of the Parish where such Tobacco shall be planted; and one other third part to him who will sue for the same by Bill,
Plaint, Information, &c. in any of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster. XV. That if any person or persons shall resist, or make for∣cible opposition against any person in the due execution of the said Act of the twelfth of this Kings Reign, he or she so resisting, &c. shall over and above the penalties therein mentioned, be committed to the common Goal of the County where the offence shall be committed, till they have entred Recognizance to the King with sufficient Securities of 10 l. not to commit the like offence again. 1. Provided, This Act shall not extend to the hindring of plant∣ing Tobacco in any Physick Garden of any of the Universities, or any private Garden for Surgery, so as the quantity planted, ex∣ceed not the half of one pole. XVI. It shall be lawful to Import Cattel of the breed of the Ifle of Man, not exceeding six hundred in one year; and Corn of the growth of that Island, out of that Island into England; so as the Cattel be landed at Chester, Liverpool or Wirewater. Vestries. I. Enacted, 15 Car. 2. Cap. 3. That all and every person who now is a Vestryman, or member of any Vestry within any Parish in the Cities of London, Westminster, Burrough of South∣wark and weekly Bills of Mortality: and in all other Cities, Burroughs, and Towns-Corporate, where select Vestries are used in England, on or before twenty September next, and every person who hereafter shall be elected to be a Vestryman, or member of any Vestry within any Parish, shall within one moneth after his election, before the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary, Vicar-General, or Chancellor of the Diocese, make and subscribe the Declaration following. Viz. I A. B. Do declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretence whatsoever, to take Arms against the King: And I do abhor that Traiterous position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person; or against those that are Commissionated by him: And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by Law established: And I do declare, that I do hold there lies no obligation upon me, or upon any other person from the Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavour any change or alteration of Government, either in Church, or State: And that the same was and is an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. II. That all and every such person who shall neglect, or refuse to do the same within the respective time, shall ipso facto be de∣prived of his place of Vestry-man, and of being a member of such Vestry, and such place, shall be actually void, as if such person were naturally dead. III. From and after such neglect and refusal, it shall be lawful for all persons who have right of Election, or nomination of such Vestry-man or member of such Vestry, to elect, or nominate some other discreet Person of the Parish in the Room of that person so neglecting, or refusing: And if the Person so to be elected in the room of such person refusing, shall also neg∣lect or refuse to make and subscribe the said Declaration, where∣by the place shall become again void: Or if the persons who have right of Election, shall not proceed to a new Election after such Vacancy, the Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese shall Elect and Nominate a discreet Person of the Parish in such vacant room, which Person, after his making and subscription, in manner and time aforesaid, shall be taken to be a Vestry-man, or member of such Vestry, as if he had been Chosen by the re∣spective Electors. IV. That the Bishop, Ordinary, Vicar-General, or Chancellor of the Diocese, upon request to him made by any Vestry-man, so making and subscribing the said Declaration, deliver a Certificate of his so doing, for which no Fee shall be paid. 1. Provided, Nothing in the Act shall be construed to give any new power to any select Vestry-man; or to confirm any usur∣ped Power heretofore exercised by any Select Vestry-man, which before the making of the Act is not warranted by Law. 2. This Act to continue in force till the end of the first Ses∣sion of the next Parliament, and no longer. Uniformity. I. Enacted, 15. Car. 2. cap. 4. That all Deans, Canons, Pre∣bendaries, Masters, & Fellows of Colledges, Halls, Parsons, Vicars, and other Spiritual Persons, who at the time of the passing of an Act made this present Parliament, Intituled, An Act for Unifor∣mity
of Publick Prayer, and Administration of the Sacrament, &c.) being in Ireland, or any the parts beyond the Seas, and not return into this Kingdom, before the Feast of Saint Bartholo∣mew, 1662. Or who being in England by Imprisonment, Sickness disability of body or otherwise, did not resort to the Archbishop, Bishop, Ordinary, or Vice-Chancellor of the Universities, to Subscribe the Declaration, and Acknowledgement, (in the said Act expressed) before the said Feast in the year aforesaid, are hereby declared to be restored unto and preserved in their re∣spective Deanries, Prebends, Masterships, Fellowships, Personages, Vicarages and other Spiritual Benefices or Promotions, whereun∣to no other person before the 1 August, 1663, were or shall be lawfully Instituted, Inducted, Collected or placed; and it shall be lawful to hold and enjoy the same according to his or their for∣mer right. II. Every Dean, Canon, Prebendary, Master and Fellow of a∣ny Colledge, Hall, &c. who are, and shall be by vertue of this Act restored to, or reserved in their several and respective pro∣motions, shall before the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, if he be in England, or if beyond the Seas within forty days after his return into England, Subscribe the Declaration or acknow∣ledgement (in the said recited Act mentioned) before the Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, or Vice-Chancel∣lor respectively; And every such Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lectu∣rer, shall procure a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, who are upon de∣mand to make and deliver such Certificate. And shall Publick∣ly and openly read the same, together with the said Decla∣ration, or acknowledgement upon some Lords day within three months then next following such Subscription in the Parish where he is to Officiate, in the presence of the Congregation then Assembled in the time of Divine Service. III. Every Subscription already made, or after to be made before any Vicar-General, to any Archbishop, or Bishop; or Commissary to the Archbishop of Canterbury, or other Bishop, is and shall be as Effectual in Law to all intents and purposes to every such person as shall make such Subscription, as if the same had been made before the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Pro∣vsnce, or Diocese respectively. Provided, Every person, who shall have benefit by this Act, shall make such allowance for serving the Cure since 24 Au∣gust, 1662. as shall be adjudged fit by the Ordinary of the place;
and shall pay all Tenths, Pensions and other charges to which the Benefice to which he is restored, hath or ought to have been legally charged since the day aforesaid. IV. That the penalties by the said mentioned Act to be in∣flicted upon any person disabled by the said Act to preach for any offence against the said Act, shall in like manner be inflicted upon every Person so offending as is prohibited by the said Act to preach; any thing, doubt, or ambiguity in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Woods and Timber. I. Enacted, 15. Car. 2. cap. That from and after the 24. of June next, Every Constable Headborough, or other person in every County, City, Town-corporate or other place where they shall be Officers, or Inhabitants shall & may apprehend or cause to be ap∣prehended, all and every person they shall suspect having or carrying, or any waies conveying any burthen, or bundles of a∣ny kind of Wood, Under-Wood, or Poles, or young Trees, or Bark, or bast of any Trees; Or any Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails or Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze: And by warrant un∣der the Hand and Seal of any one Justice of Peace directed to any Officer, such Officer shall have power to enter into, and search the Houses, Out-houses, Yards, Gardens & other places of all and every person they shall suspect to have any kind of Wood, Un∣der-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark, or bast of Trees, Gates, Posts, Rails, Pales, &c. and where they find any such to ap∣prehend all and every person suspected for the cutting and taking of the same; and them, and every of them as well those apprehend∣ed carrying any kind of Wood, &c. as also those in whose hou∣ses any such Wood, Under-wood, Poles, young Trees, &c. shall be found; to carry before one Justice of the Peace of the County, City, &c. and if the said person so suspected, or apprehended, do not then and there give good account, how he or they came to such Wood, Under-wood, Poles, or young Trees, &c. by consent of the owner, such as shall satisfie the Justice; or within conve∣nient time set by the Justice, produce the party or parties of whom they bought the same Wood, Under-wood, Poles, young Trees, &c. or some witness to depose upon Oath the sale of the said Wood, &c. the said person suspected not giving such good ac∣count not producing witness to testifie the sale, shall be adjudged as convicted of cutting and spoyling of Woods, and Under-woods
within the meaning of the Statute made in the 43. year of the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth. II. All and every person and persons convicted of the offence in manner as is mentioned in this Act, shall for the first offence give the Owner such satisfaction for his, or their damage, within such time as the Justice of the Peace shall appoint, and over and above pay down presently to the Overseers, to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the Offence is committed, such sum of money (not exceeding 10. s.) as the Justice shall think fit; and if the Offenders do not give such satisfaction to the Owners, and pay the sums to the Poor; then the Justice shall commit the Offender to the House of Correction for one moneth, or to be whipped by the Constable, or other Officer, as in his judgement the Justice shall seem expedient: And if such person shall again commit the said Offence, and thereof be convicted, every person so offending the second shall be sent to the House of Correction for a moneth, to be there kept to hard labour; and if he shall so offend a third time, and be thereof convicted, he shall be adjudged an incorrigible Rogue. III. That whosoever shall buy any burthens of Wood, or any Poles, or Sticks of Wood, or any other of the premises in the Act particularly named, which may justly be suspected to be stollen, or unlawfully come by, the Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and Head-Officers, or one of them within their Jurisdictions, upon complaint to them thereof made, are to examine the matter upon Oath, which they have power to administer; and if they find the same was bought of a person might be justly suspected to have stollen, or unlawfully come by the same; They, or one of them, may award the person who bought the same, to pay the treble value of the same to the person from whom the same was stollen, or unlawfully taken; and in default of present payment, to levy the same by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendring the overplus to the party, and in default of distress to commit the party to the Goal, at his own charge, there to remain one moneth with∣out bail. Provided, no person shall be questioned upon this Act for any Offence, who hath been punished for the same offence by any former law, nor punished by this Act, unless he be punished within six weeks after the offence committed. FINIS.
The Table.   Pag. C CAttel. 249. E Excise. 250. F Fenns. 257. Fishing. 271. H Hearth-money. 273. High-ways. 275. M Manufactures. 281. Militia. ibid. Moneys. 286. P Post-Office and Wine-Licenses. 287. S Subsidies. 291. Subsidies of the Clergy. 304. T Trade. 310. V Vestries. 315. Uniformity. 316. W Woods and Timber, 318. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1663.
