F230 E408_11 99864145 160544
A REPRESENTATION From his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, And the generall Councel of the ARMY. EXPRESSING The Desires of the ARMY in relation to themselves as Souldiers; in which they desire satisfaction before Disbanding. Tendred to the Right Honourable the Com∣missioners of Parliament residing with the ARMY, Sept. 21. to be by them represented to the PARLIAMENT. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THO∣MAS FAIRFAX and the generall councell of the Army. JOHN RƲSHWORTH Secret. 7ber 24 LONDON: Printed for John Partridge, in Black-fryers at the Gate going into Carter-lane 1647.
Crown surmounting French fleur-de-lis flanked by a Tudor rose and Scottish thistle on either side, each surmounted by a crown Right Honourable: IN our Representation or Declaration sent from St. Albans; We did expresse in generall termes, what we desired for the setling and securing of the Rights, Liberties, Peace and Safety of the Kingdome; and since then, as the Distractions and interruptions we have met withall would admit; We have proceeded to prepare, and have lately delivered to your Lordships in particu∣lar Proposals. In pursuance of these Generall desires, and in order to the same Ends, having in these set forth what our Desires are, in the things which concerne us as Members of the Common-wealth, and in common with all others, we shall now desire your Lordships to reminde the Parliament of our humble Desires in these things which concerne us as souldiers; and of our dis∣satisfactions in relation thereunto: which remained up∣on us, when some Regiments of the Armie, are voted to be disbanded. For which purpose, we have now prepared, and do herewith tender to your Lordships our particular de∣sires, in pursuance of our former papers, published be∣fore our coming to St. Albanes; in order to the satis∣faction and security of the Army, and other the Parli∣aments
forces, in point of Arreares, and other things that concerne us as souldiers. Which we desire may be humbly represented to the Parliament, to be taken into a speedy consideration; as may be the matter of the first Article, concerning the present stating of Accounts, and giving Debentures for Arreares, to be speedily put in execution, or set in a way of dispatch; and the rest of them to be agreed up∣on, and provided for, and included in any setling of a Peace, which we shall heartily pray for. Putney 21. of September 1647. By the appointment of his Excellencie Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. and the generall Councel of the Armie.Signed John Rushworth. For the Right Honourable, the Lords and Commons, Commissioners of Par∣liament, residing with the Army.
Putney, September 21. 1647. FIrst, That a Committee or Commissioners be appointed by the Parliament to come downe, and abide at the Head∣quarters of the Army, with full power and authority to Audite and State the Accounts thereof, and to give De∣bentures, as well for the pay respited upon the Publique Faith, as otherwise for their service under the command of his Ex∣cellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or any other respective Command wherein they or any of them have formerly served the Parlia∣ment; that so what shall appeare justly due upon the said De∣bentures, may be made an unquestionable Debt unto them: And for the more effectuall accomplishment thereof, we desire, that the respective Treasurers and Commissaries of Musters of the severall Armies may be commanded to attend the said Committee or Commissioners; That thereby the Arreares of any person of this Army incurred in other Armies or Garri∣sons, who by his or their continuall attendance upon the Ser∣vice, have not had their Accounts audited and stated, may now be fully accounted for, without further trouble. And for as much as the Accounts of many who are now Members of this Army, and have formerly served the Parliament under o∣ther Commands, through the neglect or want of Musters, losse of Papers, death of Officers, taking of Garrisons, &c. and will be very difficult to be cleered, to what they will be for the ser∣vice under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, where Musters have been certaine and Accounts better kept,
and such contingencies as aforesaid have not happened. We humbly offer that the said Committee or Commissioners may have such full Instructions that where Certificates from supe∣rior Officers cannot possibly be obtained, or other sufficient te∣stimony had, the Oath of such persons may be taken, and va∣lid as to the stating of their Accounts. And in regard there re∣maines a dissatisfaction upon the Army, grounded upon the Instructions made for the Auditing of our Accounts, and pub∣lished at the Randezvouz of the Army, at Triploe-Heath in order to our satisfaction, wherein care is taken for the abatement for free Quarter, when Monies have been received, and Quarters not accordingly satisfied; but no notice taken of payment of Quarters at any time beyond our proportions of pay received, or any regard had of the severall hardships, wants and extre∣mities we have been put upon in times of eminent Services, viz. difficult Marches, continuall Motions, and tedious Leaguers, &c. whereby the greatnesse of our Body, or closenesse of Po∣sture in quartering, there hath been such scarcity in Provision, that both Officers and Souldiers have been put to extreame ex∣pences in procuring necessaries to live upon; and all this at such time when no Monies have been sent us, and hereupon proceede made to the severall large deductions thereafter spe∣cified, which we neither then, nor yet can see good grounds for. We humbly offer, That the two Houles will be pleased to reassume the Consideration of the said Instructions, and thinke upon some expedient whereby our Deductions for free Quarter may be moderated, as to the Instructions aforesaid; and that no person who hath constantly paid Quarters may be put upon any Deduction, or any Officer be accountable for any thing, save that which particularly concernes him∣selfe. And fursher, we desire there may be effectuall course and provision made for the stating the Accompts, and securing the Arrears of those the Souldiers of the Kingdom, who have faithfully served the Kingdom and concurred with this Army in their late Engagement. That whereas divers of the Horsemen of this Army, upon
the losse of their Horses in the Parliaments Service, have at their own charge furnished themselves with others for the said Service, and happily have again lost certain of the said Horses so bought, whereby the State hath been served, and the Soul∣diers much damnified, We humbly desire the two Houses will be pleased to take it into their consideration, that some con∣venient satisfaction may be thought upon for such as by suffi∣cient testimoniall shall make it appear they have been damni∣fied as aforesaid. Secondly, That provision may be forthwith made, and a visible security given to satisfie the Arrears of the Army, in such way and manner as may be least burthensom to the Com∣mon-Wealth; in order to which we offer, That Bishops lands, Deanes and Chapters lands, and Forrest-lands, may be speedi∣ly set to Sale, or otherwise made over for the use aforesaid, or any other way the Parliament in their wisedomes shall think meet appearing satisfaction for the security of the said Army. Thirdly, That there may be an Ordinance for securing all and every person in this Army, who have willingly served the Parliament, from being imprested out of this Kingdom to any forreign Service, and that no Horseman shall be forced to serve on Foot in any future Case; and for the more reall ef∣fecting hereof, we desire, every such person as aforesaid as shall have a Certificate under the Generalls, or his respective Field-Officers or Captains hand, that he hath served in this Army, which he may carry about him or keep by him, or producing such a Ticket he may be discharged, and that if any Officer shall detain any such person after the sight of such testimoni∣all, there may be a certain penaltie inflicted upon him. Fourthly, That the Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedom that have served the Parliament, may be made an Act before or at the setling of a Peace. Fifthly, That the Ordinance concerning provision for maimed Souldiers and the Widdows and Orphans of men slain in the Parliaments Service, may likewise be made an Act. Sixthly, That to the Ordinance lately passed for Indemp∣nity, there may be an additionall provision for saving harm∣lesse
and indempnified the Army and all the Members of it, as also all that have acted in concurrence with it, and for secu∣ring of them from all trouble, question, or prejudice for or concerning any thing done, in, upon, or in pursuance of the Petition of the Army, agreed upon at Walden in March last, or upon the Papers since then presented and published from the Army, or any the things therein contained, or for or concern∣ing any thing spoken or done in relation to or in vindication of the Army from the injuries or extremities put upon it about the said Petition, or since; Which additionall provisions we desire may (together with the said Ordinances for Indempni∣ty) be past into Acts at the setling of a Peace, so as we nor others, may not (for what we have done or insisted on in ne∣cessary defence or vindication of our selves, as Souldiers, from ruine or insufferable injuries and oppressions, or in behalf of the Common-Wealth, for the setling and securing of the Rights, Liberties, and Peace and Safety thereof,) remain subject to the malice or pressures of ours and the Kingdomes Enemies (whom we have opposed) upon any future ad∣vantage. Putney, Sept. 21. 1647. By the Appointment of his Excel∣lency Sir THOMAS FAIR∣FAX, and the Generall Coun∣sel of the Army. JO. RUSHWORTH, Secret. FINIS.
