F597A R231239 99899780 136940
A Divine Antidote against the Plague: OR Mourning Teares, IN Solioquies and Prayers. AS, 1. For this general Visitation. 2. For those whose Houses are Shut up of the Plague. 3. For those who have Risings or Swellings. 4. For those Marked with the Tokens. Necessary for all Families as well in the Country as in the City, in this Time of Pestilence. By John Featley, Chaplain to His late Majesty. London, Printed by Thomas Mabb and are to be sold by Margaret Shears at the Blew-Bible in Bedford-street, 1665.
The Table. Teares of mourning, fitted for this General Pestilence. The Soliloquie, consisting of fix se∣veral parts, and treating of, 1 Mourning by Example, in a publi∣que Calamity. Page 1. 2 Several causes of God's Visitati∣ons. p. 18. 3 Sin especially the cause of the Pe∣stilence. p. 33. 4 Several Examples of dreadful Pe∣stilences. p. 42. 5 God's threatning before his Visi∣tation. p. 51. 6 The duty of a Christian, decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in the time of Pe∣lence. p. 60. The Prayer. p. 72. Teares of those whose Hoses are shut up of the Plague. p. 81. The Prayer p. 94. Tears for them who are visited with the Pestilence, being 1. either woun∣ded with a Swelling or Sore. 101. Or, 2. Marked with Tokens. p. 111 The Prayer. p. 123.
Teares of mourning, fitted for this General Pestilence. The Soliloquie, consisting of six se∣veral parts, and treating of, 1 Mourning by Example, in a publi∣que Calamity. 2 Several causes of God's Visitati∣ons. 3 Sin especially the cause of the Pe∣stilence. 4 Several Examples of dreadful Pe∣stilences. 5 God's threatning before his Visi∣tation. 6 The duty of a Christian, decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in the time of Pe∣lence. The Ejaculation. Psal. 5. v. 1, 2. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for un∣to thee will I Pray. THe heart of the Wise is in the house of mourning: Ecles. .. (saith So∣lomon) but the heart of fooles is in the
house of mirth. Is the heart then, sometimes in a Pilgrimage from the body? Or is the body required to visit the sick, yea, though the Dis∣ease be Infectious? Or are we al∣wayes, by command, to intimate the Prophet, Psal. 42.3. whose Teares were his Meat day and night? The heart in∣deed is often from home; and is least where it liveth, most where it loveth. The Sick must be visited, or else my Saviour will complaine as he doth in the Gospel, saying, I was sick, Mat. 25.43. Job 2.11. and ye visited me not. When Job's three friends heard of the evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place; for they had made an appointment to∣gether to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him. Vers. 13. So they sate down with him upon the ground, and mourned seven dayes and seven nights. When Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness wherewith he dyed, 2 Kin 13.14. Joash the King of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said, O my Father, my Father, the Charet of Is∣ra, and the Horse-men thereof. When wicked King Joam went to be Irealed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Rmah, ch. 8.. Ahaziah the Son of Heho∣ram
King of Judah went down to see him in Jezreel, because he was sick. Thus do I read of a Holy Patient visited by friendly Mourners: a Ho∣ly Prophet visited by a weeping King: a Wicked King visited by an∣other as wicked as himself. All these were visiters, or visited: But I do not find that the Diseases were In∣fectious. No: I must therefore imitate the best of them in my cha∣rity to others: but I may not forget charity to my self. Wilfully to run into apparent danger, is desperately to tempt the Keeper of Israel. What shall I then do? The passing-bells inform mine eares of the mortality of my Neighbours; and yet I can∣not, I must not visit them. What (I say) shall I do? What course shall I take? Charity commandeth me, compassion hastenth me to the dying Christians, that by my ad∣vice, or at least by my prayers I might expresse my commiseration. And yet, when I am just at my door provided, resolved, intended to go, even then mine own health, the health of my Family, and (which is greater then all these) the fear of displeasing my Gracious Protectour brings me back again, and keeps me
at home. I would not be uncha∣ritable; but I must not be desperate. Well then: I am resolved what I will do. I will (with Solomon) go to the houses of mourning, the houses of the Visited; yet not in body, but in mind, and in purse; I will pitty them, and I will send relief unto them. I dare not go in Person, but I will go in Affection; and for my Neighbours groaning under the evil of punishment, and for my self bur∣thened with the evil of sinne; I will feed upon my teares day and night. I must grieve for my self in parti∣cular; and yet I must not be so un∣kindly Covetous, as to keep my teares onely for my self. In pub∣lick Calamities those who shed no teares may be justly suspected to have no bowell. I find my self not un-apt to weep; for I am prompted to that by the weakness of my dispo∣sition. And yet I suspect my self; I am jealous of my self, that my teares do rather flow from my fear of Infection, then from a fellow-feel∣ing of the miseries which the infect∣ed suffer. To heighten therefore my mourning, and to justifie it by my compassion, I will propose to my self the Examples of others such
as I finde Recorded in the word of my God. When the Destruction of the Jewes was near at hand,  the Lord called upon them by the mouth of his Prophet, saying, Consider ye, Jer. 9.17. and call for the mourning women that they may come; and send for cunning wo∣men that they may come:  And let them make hast, and take up a wayling for us, that our eyes may run down with teares, and our eye-lids gush out with waters:  for a voice of wayling is heard out of Zion, How are we spoy∣led, &c.  The Women were com∣manded to hear the Word of the Lord; and their eares to receive the word of his mouth: they were to teach their daughters wailing; and every one her Neighbour Lamentation:  For death was come up into their windows, and entered into their Palaces; to cut off the Children from without, and the young men from their streets.  Even the carcassesof men did fall as dung upon the field, and as the handfull after the harvest-man; and none did gather them. The case is now with us, as it was then with the Jews. Alass, how are we spoyled too! How is death come up into our windows by the Infectious Aire! How do our
Children dye, and our Young Men fall! Our Children which know not the cause; and our Young Men that trusted in the strength of their Youth! O how do the Carcasses of men fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handfull after the Harvest man; and yet there are none to ga∣ther them up! They perish without, because either there is not room enough left within doors for them; or not people alive to attend them in their sickness; or not people of strength enough to unlock the doors or not means for their sustenance if they enter in. Thus necessity dri∣veth them into the fields; and there mortality seizeth upon them, where no person is found to bury their bo∣dies; no bearers to carry them to the surfeited Earth; no friends to be∣wail the loss of their lives; and no Christians to cover them from their gazing spectators; the very Fowles of the Air, and the Beasts of the field. What heart would not break; what eye would not weep; what soul would not lament for this sad Visita∣tion? Lam. 1.16. For these things (with Jere∣miah) will I weep: mine eye, mine eye shall run down with water; because the comforter which should relieve our souls, is far from us.
The Lord hath thrown down Jeru∣salem (saith the Prophet) and hath not pittied; Lam. 2.17. and he hath caused their Enemy to rejoyce over them; he hath set up the born of their Adversary.  Their heart cryed unto the Lord, O wall of the Daughter of Zion, let teares run down like a River day and night: give thy self no rest;  let not the apples of thine eyes cease. Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the Watches powre out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thy hands towards him, for the life of thy young Children that faint in the top of every street.  Even thus hath the Lord covered us also with a cloud in his anger, as then he did the Daughter of Zion; and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the beauty of our Israel; and remembered not his foot-stool in the day of his anger. An Enemy destroyeth, and rejoyceth over us: but such an Enemy it is, as nei∣ther can hear, nor will spare. The very Aire which was created to coole the flames of our scorching hearts, is so poysoned with the Infection, that the more we make of it, the less we our selves are made by it: the closer we seat it even to and in our hearts, the nearer doth the Infection
approach our spirits. The corrupt∣ed Aire shall be therefore cleansed by the thick groanes that shall fly from my heavy heart; and be purified with the thunder of my loudest cryes. With Moab in the Prophesie, Isa. 15.2. I will howle over Nbo,  and over Medeba, in the streets let every one gird himself with sack-cloath: on all their heads let there be baldness: on the tops of our houses, and in our streets let eve∣ry one howle, Jer. 48.4. weeping abundantly; for we are destroyed; for our little ones have caused a cry to be heared. Oh our sucklings that cry for milk from the breast, suck in destruction when they expect their nourishment. For these things (with Jerusalem) I will weep sore in the night (in this night of a General Affliction: Lam. 1.2.) my teares shall be on my cheeks, because among all our Lovers there is none to comfort us. At the final desolation of the house of Israel, Eze. 7.16. the Prophet told them that, They that fled away of them should escape, and should be on the Mountains like Doves of the Val∣leys, all of them mourning, every one for his Iniquity:  All hands should be feeble,  and all knees should be weak as water: They should also gird them∣selves
with sack-cloath, and horrour should cover them; and shame should be upon all their faces, and baldness upon their heads. Lord what a time of mourning should here be! What a time of horrour! Destruction is threatned; and whom Destruction missed, mourning should over-take; feebleness should follow, weakness should pursue, and horrour should cover. Oh, that very time is come now upon us: that Prophesie is ful∣filled in our Israel. Here is no sword to slay us; no Fiery Engines of a hel∣lish invention to murder us; no men to take us Captives: but here is worse, far worse; Psal. 91.6. here is the Pesti∣lence that walketh in darkness, and the destruction that wasteth at noon∣day. Here are houses not inhabited; Streets not trampled; Churches not frequented, Sick not visited, Hungry not fed, Doors not opened, Bells not ceased, and Graves not satisfied. Isa. 24.10 Pro. 30.15 E∣very house is shut up, that no man may come in. The Horse-leech hath here her two Daughters crying give, give. Here are three things not satisfied; yea, four things that say not, It is enough. The Hungry cry give, and the Thirsty cry give, and the Sick cry give, and the Grave cryeth give. The
Hungry pine, and therefore cry; the Thirsty scorch, and therefore cry; the Sick want help, and therefore cry; but, O, the Grave is daily fed, and yet it is daily hungry. The mouth thereof is opened, and it devoureth men; and yet for all that, it still cry∣eth for our return to the dust as we were. Eccl. 12.7 The Mountaines the great persons escape not: the habitations of men are like the Wildernesses for Beasts, because the Inhabitants are burnt up with the fiery Pestilence. Therefore (with the Prophet) For the Mountaines will I take up a weep∣ing, Jer 9.10. and wayling; and for the Habi∣tations of the Wilderness a Lamenta∣tion; because they are burnt up that none can pass thorow them; neither can men hear the voice of the Cattel. The House of Israel was com∣manded to seek the Lord; Amos 5.4. but they on the contrary are said to have sought Bethel,  and to have entered into Gilgal, and to have passed to Beersheba:  Therefore the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the Lord said thus: Wailing shall be in all streets, and they shall say in all high wayes, Alas, Alas: and they shall call the husband∣man to mourning, and such as are skilfull of Lamentation to wayling;
and in all Vine-yards shall be wayl∣ing, for I will pass thorow thee, saith the Lord. Here is again a cloud of sorrows; a thick mist of groans,  for the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. This cloud overcasteth us too; this mist choaketh us; this darkness blindeth us. Here is way∣ling in our streets, to dim our eyes; here is the Husband-man mourning to stifle us with sorrow; and here is the mourning of the Vine-yards, to cloud our souls. Our hearts, Psal. 104.15. which should have been gladded with the fruit of the Vine, are squeezed and pressed like the bunches of Grapes. Our Bellies, which should have been filled with the Fruits of the Earth, do cry in their emptiness, and wayle with the Husband-man. One woe courteth another: one curse saluteth another. Our Sickness is great, and yet our Famine too is great; not that the Earth hath forgotten to be fer∣tile, but by reason that men are afraid to furnish us. Pestilence con∣sumeth, and Hunger cryeth: thus the Visited dye they know not of what; for Sickness calleth, and Hun∣ger calleth, and Want calleth, and Sorrow calleth: all of them joyn in their hideous concord, in their hor∣rid
discord, and call for our Ruine, and yell for our Destruction. That heart which bleedeth not for such un∣utterable sorrow, must needs be stone, or steel: nay worse; for stones will weep, to complain with the clouds: and steel will droop in a time of stormes. Heart, if thou are a wo∣mans, break; if thou art a Christi∣ans, lament; if thou art mine, be∣moan the afflictions which dwell a∣mong my friends, Joel 2.6. and the blackness which the faces of my Neighbours have gathered. Ps. 35.13. I will (with David) put on sack-cloath now, though for my very Enemies which are Sick; and humble my soul with Fasting: and I will go heavily,  as one that mourn∣eth for his Mother. With the Pro∣phet Isaiah, Isa. 16.9. I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the Vine of Shib∣mah: I will water thee with my toares, O Heshbon, and Elealeh. Or with Jeremiah, Jer. 14.17 Let mine eyes run down with teares night and day, and let them not cease; for the Virgin-Daughter of this People is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow. The Prophet Ezekiel telleth the Israelites, Eze. 7.12. that The time is come; the dy draweth near: let not the buyer
rejoyce, nor the seller mourn; for wrath is come upon all the Multitude there∣of. The King shall mourn,  and the Prince shall be cloathed with desola∣tion; and the hands of the people of the Land shall be troubled. O Israel, how great were thy pangs, when thus thou wert Visited! O how deep are our groans too in this day of our Vi∣sitation! The Israelites are dead; their Torments are forgotten: but we live; we live dying; we live to suffer; we live to dye. To dye, said I? O that Death were sweet indeed, if it would come with a wish; if it would hasten it's approach: it were sweeter then the honey, Psa. 19.10 and the honey comb. What was formerly our dread, is now our desire. What we posted from, we would now hasten unto, could but Death yet grow so pittifull, so mercifull as to hear our desires. But we cannot either dye when we would, or how we would. We may not chuse either the time, on the manner of our death. See, See, how it stare's us in the face; and look's upon us in every Passenger that crawleth by our doors; in every Cossin that is carried by our win∣dows. Dye we must; but of what Diseas? By what means? If of Ago,
'tis welcome: if of a Consumption, 'tis kind. But what if of the Plague? What if of the Pestilence? Wo un∣us, there is our fear; thence is our trembling. If that arrow be short at us, we shall have no Preacher to pray by us, or to administer ghostly consolation unto us: no Friend to Visit us; yea, and it may be, nei∣ther Physick to help us, nor Meat to strengthen us, no nor Servant to at∣tend us. We may call, but none will dare approach to answer us: we may weep, but none will dare come to comfort us. This, this day is come upon us. The Buyer rejoyceth not, fearing least with his bargain he purchase a Disease. The Seller mourneth not, hoping that though he loose by his bargain, yet his money will furnish him with things for necessity. Thus the wrath of God is come upon us: we are cloathed with desolation. This I feele; and and yet I feele it not: I hear of it; but it cometh not yet upon me: it walketh by my doors; it beckneth to me in the streets; it knocketh at my habitation; and yet, for all this, (blessed be my God) it is not yet entered. But who knoweth how soon that affrighting Disease may
force open my door; or creep in at my window; or peepe in at a key∣hole; or slink in at a crevise? The Disease is general; but my sorrows shall be therefore as generall. All others shall not weep, and my self alone rejoyce. The meat offering, Joel 1.9. and the drink offering (the participation of the Holy Communion) through fear is cut off from the House of the Lord: the Priests, Hos. 4.3. the Lord's Mini∣ster. do mourn. The Land mourneth, and every one that dwelleth therein languisheth; with the Beasts of the Field, and with the Fowles of the Heavens. Ezr. 10.6. Therefore (with Ezra) I will go into the Chamber; and when I am come thither, I will eat no bread, nor drink water; for I will mourn, because of the transgressions of us all. Or (with Nehemiah) I will sit down and weep, Neh. 1.4. and mourne certaine dayes; and fast, and pray before the God of Heaven. The Lord God of hosts did threaten to touch the Land of israel, Amos 9.5. and it should melt, and all that dwelled therein should mourn; and it should rise up wholly like a flood, and be drowned as by the flood of Aegypt. Thus hath he threatned us also; and hath he not brought it to pass? See,
See how the Land melteth; Psal. 97.5 yea melt∣eth like wax at the presence of th Lord; at the presence of the God o the whole Earth. Needs must the Land, (the hearts of the inhabitants of the Land) melt at his presence seeing, the Apostle styleth him a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29. Oh how all do mourn that dwell in the Land! The Parents lament the sickness of the Child; the the Wife of the Hus∣band; the Servant of the Mistress all mourn, all lament. It may now be truly said that the whole Land is drowned: for, what eye is not dim∣med with teares? What house is not filled with teares? What street is not washed with teares? if the saltnesse of water will cause a barrennesse of the Earth, what fruit can possible our Land produce, which is thus moystened, thus watered with the brine of our teares? And yet, me thinks, the Earth appeareth as gree∣dy as ever; for it speedily devour∣eth whatsoever is sprinkled on it by the sorrows of the inhabitants. The insected cry, and the languishing cry: and shall not my teares much rather trickle down my cheeks, although my door is nor yet converted into pasture; nor my walks over-gron
with the springing grass? O yes, much, much rather: yea, and with he more courage will I weep, by how much the more I retaine my rength to weep. I hear, Jer. 4.31. me thinks be Voices of the Visited, as of a wo∣an in travel; and their anguish as  her that bringeth forth her first hild, bewayling themselves, and breading their hands, and each of hem saying, Woe is me now, for my ul is wearied because of this mur∣ering Sickness. Isa. 22.5. Therefore will. I ake up the resolution of the Prophet saiah; and whosoever shall come to ivert my teares; to them I will say, Look away from me; I will weep bit∣erly; labour not to comfort me. Or (with Jeremiah) my soul shall weep n secret places, for their pains; Jer. 13.17 and ine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears; because the Lord's flock is thus destroyed.
The second part of the S∣liloquie, treating of several cause of God's Visitations. I Mourn, and I mourn and all o of a sense of the general suff∣ance; I mourn and I mourn by pre∣dent: But do I find the cause of o Distresses? The ground of our Sic∣nesses? Pestilence is not the on arrow that is shot from the Almig∣ty, when his revenge is stirred u and yet every punishment is term a Stroak, a Stripe, a Plague. Wh the Lord intended the spoyle of t Aegyptians by the Children of Isra that which in others would ha been deemed theft, or at the least cozenage, was in the Israelites b Justice, and done in Obedience him who is Lord of all, Ex. 12.36. when th spoyled the Aegyptians of their Jew∣ells,  which yet they but borrowe▪ And yet this to the lenders is term∣ed a Plague; for the Lord said un Moses, Ch. 11.1. Yet will I bring one Plagu more upon Pharaoh, and upon Aegyp afterwards he will let you go hence▪ When the first-born of Aegypt wer decreed to be slain for the stubborn∣ness of the King, the Execution o
at decree was styled a Plague: for od told the Israelites by his Servant oses, saying; Ch. 12.13 The blood shall be to  for a token upon the houses where are; and when I see the blood, I ll passe over you; and the Plague all not be upon you to destroy you, en I smite the Land of Aegypt. hen the Children of Israel had ged after the flesh-pots of Aegypt, d cryed, and murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ch. 16.3. Would to od we had dyed by the hand of the ord in the Land of Aegypt, when we te by the flesh-pots, and when we did t bread to the full; for ye have rought us forth into this Wilderness to ill this whole assembly with hunger: hen (I find) the Lord was intreat∣d for flesh; but that flesh proved he Destruction of the People, and hat Destruction is called a Plague. For, Num. 11.33. while the Quailes were yet be∣tween their teeth (saith the Text) re the flesh was chewed, the wrath f the Lord was kindled against the people; and the Lord smote the people with a very great Plague. Consum∣ption is also said to be a Plague; for so saith the Prophet. Zech. 14.12. This shall be the Plague where-with the Lord will smite all the People that have fought
against Jerusalem: Their flesh  consume away while they stand  their feet; and their eyes shall  sume away in their holes; and  tongue shall consume away in  mouth. Thus every Judgement truly a Plague; and from Go cometh; and upon men, weak  mortal men and women it come but it is for their sins; it is for t Transgressions. Every one gro under the Affliction, but few for Cause. We are angry with the R and we are angry with the Correct and yet we quarrel not with  selves for meriting such, yea mo yea greater, yea more tormenti more continuing Punishments.  will therefore look into the sacr page yet once again: I will look i to the roll of that Book, and (wi Ezekiel) I will spread it before no and find written therein the Lame∣tations, Ezek 2.9.  and Mournings and Woes.  will find the Punishments, and I w find out the Offences too. I wi mourn with them, with us, with ev∣ry one that is visited: and with the and for our selves I will pry into th causes of our maladies, seeing I kno that God will not be angry withou a cause. Psal. 89.30. We do first forsake his Laws
and walk not in His Judgements;  we st prophane His Statutes, and break s Commandments;  before He Visi∣h our Transgression with the Rod, d our Iniquity with Stripes. Wherefore did the Prophet Jere∣ah cry out, and say, Jer. 23.9. Mine heart ithin me is broken; all my bones ake: I am like a drunken man, and ke a man whom Wine hath overcome, cause of the Lord, because of the ord of his Holiness? Here I finde e Prophet in a strange and fervent assion, in a trembling Extasie: yet ot too great if I consider the cause, I weigh the verse that imediately sueth:  For the Land (saith he) is ll of Adulterers: for because of wearing (or cursing) the Land ourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dryed up; and their nourse is evil, and their force is not ght. VVas Jerusalem thus Visited or Swearing and Cursing? Was Sa∣aria thus burnt up with drought or Adultery? Lord what then hath ot This Land deserved? An Oath in very tongue causeth a Cross upon e∣very Door. Unclennesse in every Person causeth the sowlest sores in e∣very Patient. The Sins are Univer∣sall, the Panishment must needs there∣fore
be as Universal. The Pu∣ment is become generall; O our sorrow would grow as gen This disease may be cured by  For my part therefore I will b first that shall step into Bethesd I have layne the longest in my Jo. 5.2. long have I also waited for th vation of my God. I will im the Prophet Jeremiah, and cr with him, and as truly as he,  heart is broken. Why did the Prophet Mic solve to wayle, Mich 1.8. and to howle; stript, and naked; to make a w like the Dragons, and mourning  Owles?  Was it not because the was coming forth out of his place∣ing down to tread upon the high p of the Earth?  Was it not becau Mountains should be molten  him, and the Vallies be cleft, as before the fire, and as the waters are powred down a steep place?  was Destruction for Samaria, Ruine for Jerusalem;  but all was for the Transgression of Ja and for the sins of the House of Isr The Graven Images were the si the People: Idolatry incensed Wrath of the Almighty.  might he punish, when the wor
ens hands robbed him of his ho∣our, whose work-man-ship we are. ell might he resolve to be known e Mighty God in his Revenge, hom they would not acknowledge  be God when he forbore them. ut is it not just so with us as it was ith them;  Is not Samaria the sin of ur Jacob? Are not the high places  Judah our Jerusalem? Here is rath, and Wrath, and Plague, and Plague; but is not Idolatry still in ur Gates? The God of the Patri∣rch saith unto us, as Jacob did un∣ his House-hold, Gen. 35.2 and to all that were with him, Put away the strange Gods hat are among you. If therefore we ave still a noise of the Beades; of he Chapters pretended to be conse∣trated at Rome: if we have Pictures Worshipped; Crucifixes Adored; Prayers not understood; and other foot-steps of the Heathen remain∣ing amongst us; I cannot choose but remember what our incensed Crea∣tor saith by his Prophet concerning the sins of the Jews; Jer. 9.9. Shall I not Visit them for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged o such a Nation as this? Lord where thou art not truly Worshipped, thou wilt be dreadfully Feared. Though
this sin be not General, thought Universal amongst us; is it no be found in Private? Doth it  lurk in private Closets? Is it  harboured in some secret hearts? hateth the light because it is not truth: but yet our sins may multi in the dark, until they have brou us to the Land of Darkness. O  (with Jacob) we would all arise, Gen. 35.3 go up to Bethel, and make there Altar unto our God; then we kn he would answer us in our distr This is our Plague, this is our Puni∣ment which now doth rage amon us: and is not that our sin? Is  that our iniquity? What remain but that (so far as lyeth in me) should strive to appease the wrath my God? I will therefore endeavo to blunt his arrow, that it may sti no more when he shooteth it at  I will pray unto him to remove once both the Sin, and the Punish∣ment. I will do as did Micah: will wayle, and howle: I will way like the Dragons, and mourne like  Owles. When Ezra had Confessed the sin the People, Ezr. 10.1 weeping, and casling him self down before the House of Go there assembled unto him out of Isra
a very great Congregation of Men, and Women, and Children; and the Peo∣ple wept very sore. What ayled the Priest to cast himself down; and the People so sorely to weep? Were they not come out of Captivity? Were they not busied in re-edify∣ing the House of the Lord? Were not their burnt Offerings, and their Sacrifices made unto the God of Israel? What now should deject them? What should dismay them? The Lord questioneth Cain the Murderer, the Fratricide, saying, Gen. 4.6 Why is thy countenance sallen? If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou doest not well,  sin lyeth at the door. Thus might Judah and Benjamin be likewise examined. They had a sin that lay at the door: yea nearer, closer to them if possible might be; even in their beds, in their bosomes. Ezra 9.1. They had not seperated themselves from the People of the Lands, and from doing according to their abominations: but they had ta∣ken of their Daughters for themselves,  and for their Sons: yea the hand of the Princes, and Rulers had been Chief in this Trespass. Yet for all this, their Punishment was not hi∣ther to come upon them to the full.
They had yet but a sprinkling of it only some drops: or at most but a gust, a small storm, a shower or tw of rain. When the Lord was angry the clouds frowned; they knit thei brows; and it were in the abun∣dance of their compassion, cha. 10.9. they dis∣solved into teares for the sins of th People. But more vengeance w expected; therefore the Childre of the Captivity turned away the Wives,  That the fierce wrath of G for this matter might be turned fre them. If such a sin as this he th cause of this our dreadful Visitati we ought also (with them) to fit the street of the house of God,  tre∣bling, because of this matter. Wh∣ther this, or whatsoever else is th cause of this Contagion, the sin this Land; Cha. 9.4. for my part I will  solve (with the same Ezra) to  astonished at the sins of the Lan and (with the people) I will tre∣ble at the words of the God of Israe because of the Transgressions of  People of this Land. I will not rise from my heaviness;  But I w rent my Garment, Joel 2.13 or rather my Hea and not my Garment, and turn un the Lord my God: for he is Gracio and Mercifull; slow to Anger, and
great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil. I will fall uponmy knees, Ezra 9.5. and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God. Zion was threatned that her Gates should lament, and mourn; Isa. 3.26. and that she being desolate, should sit on the ground. Here was the Punishment; a grievous Punishment: Desolation by War; Destruction by the Sword. Her Men should fall by the sword,  and her Mighty Men in the War. But what was the cause? What stirred up the Almighty to shower down his ven∣geance? Alas, it is too easily found. The Pride of the Woman was the De∣struction of the Men.  It was because the Daughters of Zion were haughty, and walked with stretched-out necks, and wanton eyes; walking, and min∣cing as they went, and making a tink∣ling with their feet. We are punish∣ed; we are afflicted; not by the Sword, but (which is more dread∣full) by the Pestilence. Our suffer∣ances are not in the same manner indeed as were theirs; and yet we deserve both the manner, and the measure. Our Sins are alike; our Punishments must therefore be ex∣pected alike; alike in the greatness, though they are not in the kind.
They seem (me thinks) already t agree in part; for, besides our sick∣nesses, Mat. 24.6. we hear of Wars, and rumou of Wars. Yea, they come yet near∣er alike; for they were threatner that the Lord should smite them wi a scab on the crown of the head of th Daughters of Zion: Isa. 3.17 and this ver Judgement appeareth among us i every blane, in every botch, in ever carbuncle. Surely our sins are great, or greater then theirs. T pride of our Sex in their Dresses,  their Laces, in their Jewells,  their Fashions, in their Gaites,  their Behaviours, in their Attendant in every thing is greater then Zion The Effects of Pride, their Lasci∣vious Embracings, their Amoro Conrtings are commoner, are fre quenter then Zion's. Lord is it n just with thee then,  to take aw from us (as thou didest from Zion the bravery of our tinkling Ornaments and our Tyres,  and our Chains, an our Bracelets,  and our Rings, and o changeable Suites of Apparel,  and o Mantles, and our Glasses, and o fine Linnen,  and our Hoods, and o Vailes?  We may most justly in deed expect a stink, insteed of a swee smell; and instead of a girdle a re
and instead of a well-set hair, blad∣ness; and instead of a stomacher, a girdle of sack-cloath; and burning, instead of beauty. For us the Land mourneth; for our Pride the People are humbled; for our Sins the Pe∣stilence Reigneth. Lord make us all with Zion, Lament and Mourn: make us sit on the ground, acknowledging Thy Justice, and Our Sinfulnesse. Eze. 35.15. God hath come down to the Grave a∣mong us, as he did at the Destru∣ction of Assyria for the Pride there∣of; and caused Lybanon to mourn for us; and the Trees of the field to faint for us: therefore with Zion, I will lament, I will mourn, I will sit on the ground. A Voice was once heard from the high places of Israel, Jer. 3.21 weeping and supplications of the People; because they had perverted their way, they had forgotten the Lord their God. Here was sorrow at the heart for the sin of the soul; and yet no Destruction of the body threatned for Disobedi∣ence. Had they continued in this their repentance, they might have prevented the ensuing Judgements: but intermission of sorrow proved to be the ground of their sorrow. Hence came their Land to be cur∣sed
with Barrenness, and the Proph to cry out, Cha. 12 4 How long shall the L mourn, and the Herbs of every  wither, for the wickedness of them th dwell therein? Here Wickedness w the Cause, and Barrennss the Effect. But why should the Herbs and Flow∣ers of the field suffer for the sins the People? Alas, they grew up t wards Heaven in their gratefull a knowledgement, that from the they received their nourishment  the Earth. Yea so innocent th were, that when they looked abo them, and saw (as it were) the wi kedness of them for whose servi they were made, every morni hung pearly-tears upon their droo∣ing eyes: and when they saw th men had not half so much remo as they themselves, they sad shrunk to bed again in the Earth. It was a curse to them to be ens ved in the service of cursed sins:  poysonous is transgression; so m chievous is iniquity. Thus th Herbs were cursed for the sins of th Jews: but what had the Jews do amiss, which we have not exceeded What wickedness had they commit∣ted which we have not surpassed Therefore our Herbs and our Flow∣ers,
the beauty of our Gardens, and the pride of our Knots is nipped, is withered with the poysonous breath that ariseth from our infected bo∣dies: and yet we fear that what we dispatched the air to kill in our Gar∣dens, will bring poyson to us, and slay us in our Houses. Thus we suf∣fer; for thus have we sinned: I will therefore resolve with the Pro∣phet David, Psal. 119.136. That Rivers of Waters shall run down mine eyes, because we have not kept the Law of our God. Shall not the Land tremble for this,  and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? Amos 8.8 Saith the Prophet Amos. Tremble! for what? Israel knew well enough; the poor were sen∣sible enough;  even the Poor that were bought for silver, and the needy that were sold for a pair of shooes. Here was Oppression in the streets,  and Crying in the gates; for the Ephah was made small, and the Shekel great; and the ballances were falsified by deceit. No marvel that the Psal∣mist concludeth, Psa. 61.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high de∣gree are a lye: to be laid in the bal∣lance they are altogether lighter then vanity. It was thus among the Is∣raelites;
and thus it is among  also. Men of low degree are vanity, vanity in the account, and contemp of Superiours? Vanity in the cru∣elty of Superiours. Men of high de∣gree, the Richest Traders, the Mer∣chants of Corn, and the other fruit of the Earth, are a lye: their mea∣sures are false, their weights are false: yea they buy by one, an they sell by another. They devou their brethren, and yet they do it by a shew of Justice; for the ballance they have corrupted, and the weight they have pared; insomuch as men erre most, they are most deceived when they think themselves most righted, best dealt with. This I∣justice commandeth us justly to mourn: so the belly cryeth, and the back cryeth. The hungry cry when they buy of the rich, and are cozen∣ed by the rich: when they suffer in the cozenage, and suffer likewise in the publick, in the general punish∣ment for the cozenage. For this our Land Mourneth, for this our People are Visited, our Houses are shut up, our Streets are not frequented, our Markets are not filled; and yet the hungry lament, and the thirsty do mourn. The poor can neither buy
for their money; nor be imployed in their willing labours to earn them money; nor live without money. We roar all like Beares, Isa. 59.11 and mourn sore like Doves. We look for judge∣ment, but there is none: for salvation, but it is far from us. Therefore with the Oppressed I will cry, and with the Visited also I will cry. I will cry with the Oppressed for Right; and I will cry with the Visited for health. How long, Lord, how long wilt thou punish us? Ch. 44 22. O remove our sins like a cloud: blot out, as a thick cloud, our transgressions, and as a cloud our sins: return unto us, for thou hast redeemed us. The third part of the Soli∣loquie; shewing that Sin especially is the cause of the Pestilence. THe Diseased (ignorant of the kind of their Maladies) cause the Physitian to consult with their Paulses; to examine their Urine; and by sympromes to find out the Cause of their disturbance. So should the sick Soul also; or else the ignorance of the sin may hinder the cure. Ge∣neral
complaints have been mad by men groaning under the burden of several Visitations: but doth the Pestilence come by the same Rule and arise from the same causes Surfeits, and Consumptions, an Feavers, and Palsies, and Plurisie and other such sicknesses may ha their Causes in Nature, and the Remedies oft-times by Physick: bu neither is the cause of the Pestilen so clear in nature; nor is the cu thereof so easie by Physick. Or if  be; yet is this Disease more Infec∣ous, more Mortal, and therefore mo Dreadfull then any of the rest. I shall therefore be my first care  find out the cause in my Soul, bfo I look upon the effects thereof  the bodie of sinfull mortals. I wi examine our times by those of o Ancestours; and see whether this ge∣neral Contagiou doth not rather pro ceed from the malice of the soul then from the Air-dyet, or whats∣ever else the Physitians conjectu at. The men which Moses had sent  spic out the Land of Canaan returi∣ed, Num. 14.36. and made all the Congregation  murmur against Moses, by bringing up a slander upon that Land of Pro∣mise:
and those very men that did bring up that evil report upon the Land,  dyed of the Plague before the Lord. What? Of the Plague? Of the Pestilence? There were but Ten of those spies, and those Ten onely dyed. We have the Pestilence too; but it contenteth not it self with Ten, and Ten, and Ten, and Ten, but Hundreds dye; Hundreds are Visited; Thousands complain; every one feareth. But was their Disease the same as Ours? Was not theirs an inflamation of their tongues, and wormes issuing out of them, as a just recompence, because with their tongues they had lyed? Or was it not some other extraordinary Plague from the hand of God? Or was it not that Pestilence which was threat∣ned when the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this People provoke me;  and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all signs which I have shewed among them?  I will smite them with the Pestilence, and dis-in∣herit them; and will make of thee a greater Nation, and mightier then they? Whatsoever their Disease was, though I cannot determine it; yet will I consider the cause thereof. The cause was a sin, a grieveas sin;
a lye: and the effect of this was  sin, a grievous sin; it was murmu∣ring. O thus have we also added sins unto sins. We also lye; we lye grievously, desperately, impudently. Like unto Job's Friends, Job. 13.4. Psal. 40.4. Psal. 58.3. Psal. 62.4 Ez. 24.12 Hos. 10.13. we are for∣gers of lyes; we turn aside to lyes; we go astray so soon as we be born, and speak lyes: we delight in lyes; and we have wearied our selves with lyes: justly therefore now do we eat the fruit of lyes. And yet, not content∣ed with this, we murmur too. A∣gainst our Superiours we murmur, for not governing us according to our Licentious, and sinfull desires: a∣gainst the Rich we murmur, because we float not in their plenty: yea even against God himself we mur∣mur, because he granteth not our sinful desires. Thus in every thought, and in every word we ei∣ther find a sin, or make a sin. For this our lying, for this our murmu∣ring we are now Visited; we are now Stricken; 1 Cor. 10 10. we are (as those spies were) destroyed of the Destroyer. The Rebellious Israelites were threatned by Moses, Deut. 28.61. that Every Sickness, every Plague which was not written in the Book of the Law, them should the Lord bring upon them, un∣till
they were destroyed:  And they should be left few in number, whereas they were as the stars of Heaven for Multitude. These were the mena∣ces, these were the threats to the Children of Israel: but among all these Sicknesses, where is that which reigneth among us? Hath God prepared a new punishment for us, such as the Israelites never suffered, nor the Law ever mentioned, nor skill ever cured? Doubtlesse thus God could afflict us; but he chu∣seth rather to punish us as he did o∣thers, that so we might find out the cause as others have done. He was pleased to tell the Israelites the cause of their Plague which he would send upon them;  even Because they would not obey the Voice of the Lord their God. Just thus he punisheth us as he punished them; even untill we are almost quite destroyed: and he telleth us our sin, our offence too, by his Word, by his Ministers, by our own Consciences, even, that we refuse to obey the Voice of the Lord. Just therefore, most just it is, that seeing we have, we do, we will thus sin; even thus, yea thus severely likewise we should be punished. Yea, we deserve it in a far greater
manner; in a far greater measu He who threatened those that would walk contrary unto him, Levit. 26.21. and wo not hearken unto him, that he wo bring seven times more Plagues up them, according to their sins:  who by Moses threatned them, th If they would not observe to de all  words of that Law which are writ in that Book, Deut. 28.58. that they might fear t Glorious Name,  The Lord thy Go Then the Lord should make the Plagues wonderfull, and the Plagu of their Seed; even great Plague and of long continuance: and s Sicknesses, and of long continua The self-same God hath found walking contrary unto him; a therefore hath brought on us sev times more Plagues then former He seeth that we fear not this G∣rious Name, The Lord our God therefore hath he sent us gr Plagues, and of long continuance. Thus I sit, and muse, and cons∣der of the Sickness: I hear the Be Tolling; even those Bells which we wont to invite us to the Temple that we might know our sins at th mouth of the Preacher, and pra for remission of our sins by the hel of the Preacher; the very self-sam
Bells serve now to tell me that one man lyeth languishing, and desireth my Prayers; another man is depart∣ed, and wanteth nothing but a Fu∣nerall; a third man is to be buried, but a Neighbourly, and Friendly Company is wanting. Every stroak of a Bell (me thinks) hitteth me at the heart, and biddeth me to pre∣pare for my last farewell Every toll awakeneth my conscience; and bid∣deth me remember what my sins have merited. Thus mine eares re∣ceive a sound; and thus my trem∣bling heart feeleh a throb, a beating, a panting for my particular sins which have been some cause of this general Sickness. Moses went unto the Lord,  and said, Ex. 32.31. Oh this People have sianed a great sin, and have mad them Gods of Gold! But what followed? The Lord Plagued the People,  because they worshipped the Calf which Aaron had made. There was the Sin, and there was the Punishment. But was that Plague the same as this which now doth rave, and rage amongst us? Surely our sins are the same as were theirs; for we dig the entrels of our mother Earth, and (like the Au∣gures, the South-sayers, though they
said no sooth, no truth at all) conjecture, we divine by those  trailes; yea, and we decree h who is rich, to be a good man, a  ficient man, an honest man, and wh not? We value the man for  Gold; we worship him for it; honour him for it. And is not to sin with the Israelites? We very little differ from those Id∣ters, even nothing at all. Th made them Gods of Gold, and make Gold our God. Justly the fore are we thus punished by  True God, because we honour  which is no God. The Israelites  this very kind, and sort of Plage such a very Pestilence as ou and for just such a sin as this of ou Though Moses prayed for them, y though he desired to be blotted ou the Book of God,  rather then th should not be forgiven; yet G decreed saying,  Whosoever hath si∣ned again  me, him will I blot out my Book. hosoever hath sinned a gainst him? If he should deal  with us who should people the lan Who should nhabit our dwellings Who should enjoy our Treasures He hath begu blotting indeed al∣ready: His Ink is found in the
blackness of every blane; in the blew∣ of every Token; in the redness of ery Crossed Door. But will this sotting alwayes continue? Will he t stay his hand? Will his wrath rn like fire for ever? Our bones  scattered at the graves mouth, as hen one cutteth, and cleaveth wood on the Earth. But mine eyes are to thee, O God, the Lord; in thee is  Trust. Either blot not at all, Psa. 141.7 or ly blot out our Offences.  Hide thy  from our sins, and blot out all our quities. Say unto every one of  as thou diddest unto Jacob by the outh of thy Prophet; I, even I am  that blotteth out thy Transgressions, Is. 43.25. r mine own Names sake, and will t remember thy sins.
The Fourth Part of the  liloquie, consisting, of se∣veral Examples of Dread∣full Pestilences. LOrd what a hideous din  in mine eares! There ∣groan able to have shaken eve Earth it self, had it been impr∣ed in the deepest bowells the What another? Heark! Th weeping too. Oh this is the sad∣wearisome life of us poor si who are caged, and miewed up  Infected Cities, and Towns, and lages. The Diseased groan th the extremity of their pains; an want of comforts both of body, soul. The sound are weeping so miseries of the sick; and long the deliverance even of their w Families from the burden of flesh. Some Habitations are m both Hospitall, and Charnel-ho where many a one lyeth sick;  for want of help, they sicken w out Hope, they dye without Com and they consume without Interm Sometimes again the Mother,
dandled her Infant in her clasping mes, is enforced in those armes to ry it to the Grave. Sometimes e Husband, who dearly affected be Wise of his bosome, is enforced to ake her the burden of his shoul∣ers; and to bear her dead Corps  the devouring Earth, for want of riends, and Neighbours to ease im of the burden. Yea, sometimes he Children are enforced to assist heir Father, in the carriage of their Mother to her longest home. O hor∣our, horrour, horrour! Can pitty nd no entrance at the hearts of strangers? Can compassion find no arbour in the bowells of Neigh∣bours? Will none perform this act f piety to key-cold woman to the carcass of a woman, but onely her Husband, the Husband of her Af∣fection; and her Children, the la∣bour and the fruit of her Womb? O how divers in the world would stand amazed at the sight, and hardly de∣termine whether the drops which fall from the faces of the bearers be the sweat of their brows, or the tears of their eyes. Oh what a dreadfull time is this! Did ever age produce a paralell to this severe Contagion? Was it ever known that a Pestilence
was so generall, and so malign Did ever any people drink so of the Cup of Sorrow, Astonish and Desolation as we do? Ez. 23.33 Was Samaria,  or Aholah, or Aholib Babylon, Jer. 25.20 or Jerusalem; was ev King of the Land of the Philistin Askelon,   or Uzzah, or Ekro Ashdod;  was ever Edom, or  or Ammon, Hos. 4.18. or Tyrus, or Zidon; ever Dedan, or Tema, or any place so drunk with the Cup  from the Lords hands, as we Our drink was formerly sowre our Whoredoms, with our Abo∣tions: Jer. 8.14. Ch. 23.15 Ch. 25.15 Ez. 39.17 Vers. 18. Vers. 19. Lam. 1.12 Now therefore we have ters of Gall to drink; we are with Worm-wood; and our Cu Cup of fury, of trembling, and of nishment. O the Plague, the P it is that eateth our flesh, and d∣eth our blood: It eateth the fle the Mighty, and drinketh the blo Princes; it drinketh even untill drunken with our blood. Was t ever any sorrow like unto our sor wherewith the Lord doth afflict  this day of his fierce wrath? But why do I thus cry out? W complain I so mournfully, as if Afflictions exceeded all that e were sent upon the Children.
Mn? If I consider our estate by it f, I cannot choose indeed but clude it miserable: but if I weigh  with the Pestilences of former es, it will not perhaps appear a rden so un-supportable. Com∣risons may peradventure ease my rief, and lessen my Torments: erefore (with David) I will re∣mber the dayes of Old; Ps. 143.5. I will me∣ate on all the works of God. It y be that Solomon may advise e, and comfort me too, where he us counselleth; Eccl 7.10 Say not in thine art, What is the cause that the for∣r dayes were better then these? For ou doest not enquire wisely concern∣g this. Ps. 77.5. I will therefore consider the yes of Old, and the years of ancient nes. The Children of Israel murmured ainst Moses and Aaron about the estruction of Korah, Dathan, Num. 16.41. Abi∣m, and their Accomplices, saying, e have Killed the People of the Lord: d presently there was wrath gone  from the Lord,  the Plague was be∣n.  So thy that dyed of the Plague ere Fourt en Thousand and Seaven undred, and all in a day; beside m that dyed about the matter of orah.
When Israel abode at Shi the People committed  horedome the Daughters of Moah: Num. 25.1. and not tented with this high offence,  also joyned themselves unto  Peor, Psal. 106.28. and did eat the Sacri the dead.  Thus they provo Lord to anger with their inven and the Plague brake in upon  and those that dyed in the Plagu Twenty and Four Thousand. Num. 25.9.  sin was doble; it was Whore boh Carnal and Spiritual: the nishmnt was therefore almost  to that which was sent for mu ring. When David sent for the ∣tain of the Host to number the ∣ple;  Joab answered hm fairly, ∣ing, 2 Sam. 24 3. Now the Lord thy God add∣th People (how many soever th an hundred fold; and that the ey my Lord the King may see it: but doth my Lord the King delight in thing?  Notwithstanding the Ki Word provailed against oab, an gainst the Captains of the Host: Joab, and the Captains of the went out from the presence of the  to Number the People of Israel.  what was the event thereof? Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel
morning even to the time appointed:  there dyed of the People from Dan  to Beersheba Seventy Thousand en; and all of them in the space but three dayes.  Here was yet a ater number then before; and  all of them fell for the sin of one ly man: but this one man was a g; and for his Eminent offence  times as many were slain, as en the multitude of people joyned a murmuring. He who by the peo∣ple was acknowledged worth ten thou∣d of them, Ch. 18.3. now for his sin became e destroyer of seven times as many them as he was vallued at by em: so great was the anger of the ord, for a sin so great, and commit∣d by a person so great, so eminent. The Almighty threatned Jeru∣slem by the mouth of his Prophet,  at he would make that City desolate, d an hissing: Jer. 19.8. every one that passed ere by should be astonished, and hiss, ecause of the Plagues thereof. The me God threatned Edom also by e same Prophet, saying, Ch. 49.17 Edom hall be a delolation: every one that th by shall be astonished, and shall ss at the Plagues thereof. The same God again threatned Babylon by the same Frophet, saying, Ch. 50 13 Because of the
Word of the Lord, it shall not be ∣ted, but it shall be wholly deso Every one that goeth by Babylon be astonished, and hiss at her Pla Thus I remember thy Judge of Old, Psal. 119.52. O Lord, and receive c Confesse I must indeed that W sinned with our Fathers, 2 Chro. 6.37. we have amiss, and dealt wickedly: b our Punishments as great as ou thers were? Fourteen Thousand Seven Hundred of them fell a time: Twenty and Four Tho at another time: Threescore Ten Thousand at a third  Lord, what mighty Numbers, here! and yet we fear when O∣eth; we tremble when Ten; w when Twenty; we are dism when an Hundred; we are hop heartless, even almost quite dea ready when a Thousand depart.  why should not we expect as  Plagues as were sent upon a our Ancestours, seeing, that our are not less either in Namber Weight? Wherein are we be then Jerusalem, or Edom, or B∣lon, that we are not yet as deso as were they? That every one  passeth by is not astonished, nor his at us, as they did at them? He
Visited them doth Visit us: Ps. 89.32. he Visi∣th our Offences with his Rod, and r Sins with his Scourges. Yet he Visiteth us not so sorely as he did he Israelites, when Fourteen Thou∣and and Seven Hundred of them lyed; or not so severely as when wenty and Four Thousand of them vere swept away: or not so grie∣ously as when Threescore and Ten housand of them were destroyed;  not so terribly as Jerusalem, Edom, d Babylon; for we are not quite esolate: or not so furiously as Nini∣th, to whom God spake by his Pro∣het saying, Nah. 3, 19 There is no healing of thy ruise; thy wound is grievous: all hat hear the bruit of thee shall clap he hands over thee: Or howsoever ot so remedilesly as the Army of haraoh at Euphrates, whom the ord mocketh by the mouth of his rophet, saying, Go up unto Gilead, Je. 46.1 nd take Balm, O Virgin, the Daugh∣r of Aegypt: In vain shalt thou use y Medicines, for thou shalt not be ured. This, Ez. 12.18 O this maketh me to t my bread with quaking, and to ink my water with trembling and arefulness, for fear least our sin-re∣enging God should punish us as he ath done them. O what mecies
doth he not yet offer unto us; W kindness doth he not yet afford  To our Physitians he giveth kno ledge: to our Medicines he give virtue. The Herbs of the fields,  and the Fruits of the trees, and  flesh of the beasts do yet offer the selves for our cure, and our su∣nance. O that we had but so m happiness, as to know the mi which is due to our Offences  that we had but so much mercy s God, as to know his mercy in gentle visitation! For this our m will I groan; for these our sins ∣lament; for the mercy of my  I will Pray, and I will Cry; He Lord, Psa. 20 0  and have mercy upon us: I be thou our helper. O he thou our in trouble, for vain is the help of
The Fifth part of the Soli∣loquie, shewing how God threatneth before his Visitation. IT is a weakness, it is a sondness, it it a madness in people not to be∣lieve the sure effects of certain cau∣ses, before they become obvious to their senses. In the course of Nature we are apt to believe what we dare not try. Who will put his finger into the fire to try if it will burn? Who will cast himself into the wa∣ter to try whether it will drown him? Yet in things divine we are too in∣credulous, too full of unbelief. I find that my God hath stricken di∣vers with Plagues for the sins which they have committed: But I like∣wise find that he hath threatned di∣vers before the Visited them, that so by their amendment they might pre∣vent those Judgments which other∣wise would ensue. It is my best way to finde out the crying sins of the Land, by observing the punishments which are sent us for them: but I must not forget either the patience
of our God, or the obstinacy men? the long suffering of  Creatour, or the impenitency of  Creatures. Sure I am that the L did alwayes call to Repentance be∣fore he punished Offenders: he ha ever woed Transgressours both  Promises, and by Threatnings be∣fore he ever made them sick in smi them for their Transgressions. Mic. 6.13 1. When the Israelites were to  freed from the Aegyptian bondag O how often was Pharaoh admonis∣ed to let them go! Moses and Aa said unto him, The God of the H brews hath met with us: Exo. 5.3. let us go,  pray thee, three dayes journey into  Desert, and Sacrifice to the Lord  God, least be fall upon us with the P∣stilence, or with the Sword. Lord how meek Moses begged for the peo∣ple! yea, and in the Name of God too; and for an act of Religion too; and for fear of Judgements too: yea and those Judgements not small or trivial; for they should be either the Pestilence, or the Sword; yea, and he pretendeth that those Judge∣ments should sall upon the Israeli∣tes, the People of God, if they neg∣lect their Sacrifices; he saith not, upon the Agyptias; he saith not,
upon the King: And yet for all this, the King yielded not; the Israelites sacrificed not; and therefore the Plagues, the Vengeance came upon the heads of their Oppressors. Gogg was threatned for a thing which yet he was suffered to do.  The Israelites were to be his purchase; the un-walled Villages his prey; Ez. 38.11 all that dwelled without Walls, and had neither Barrs, nor Gates should be made desolate by him. Thus the People of God were to suffer for the sins committed against their God. But was the Enemy to escape, by whom the People should be cor∣rected? Was Gogg to be enriched, and to enjoy the spoyle? Nothing less. The very instument of revenge was not to be freed from the wrath of the Revenger, nor the Execu∣tioner to be accounted innocent, though he punished the guilty. I will plead against him with Pestilence saith the Lord) and with blood.  I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an over-slowig rain, and great hail-stones, fire and brim∣stone. Thus the Israelites offended, and were threatned with the Armies of Gogg. Gogg offended, in that he
knew not his Maker; in that looked onely to his advantage spoyles, whilst yet he executed vengeance of God: he's there threatned; he shall therefore be sumed. When he should have venged God upon the Rebel People, then God himself wou revenged upon him with Judgm from Heaven. The Prophet Ezekiel was ser threaten the Israelites for their  Rebellions,  and thus said the  God unto him, Smite with thine and stamp with thy foot, Eze. 6.11. and say,  for all the evil abominations of House of Israel; for they shall so the Sword, by the Famine, and  Pestilence. He that is far off sha of the Pestilence,  and he that is shall fall by the Sword; and he that maineth, and is besieged shall dye the Famine: thus will I accomplish fury upon them. Here is warn given before the blow be stricke there is the Sword already halfo here is the Famine already in a  preparation; here is an Angel re to disperse the Pestilence: but be execution here is a threatning f Even thus also hath our good G dealt with us: thus hath he war
s. He who delighteth not in the eath of a sinner, Ez. 33.11 doth never strike before notice given; for he had ra∣ther that our repentance should quiver his arrows, then that by our sins he should be enforced to hit us at the heart. I will smite the Inhabitants of this City (saith God by Jeremiah con∣cerning Jerusalem) both Man and Beast: Jer. 21.. they shall dye of a great Pesti∣tence. Loe here is still the future tense, I will; not I do. God de∣lighteth not in the execution of his wrath; but yet his I will is as sure as his I do. Thus he hath formerly threatned us with his I will; I con∣fesse indeed he hath: and yet we would not believe what was to come, and only because we found it not in∣stantly present. Hence it is, that now our people cry; now our beasts do roar: and it is but just that men and women should be ranked in the order with beasts, seeing that our sins have discovered us to be more stupid then them. Yet the beasts perish, though they could not sin; and we perish because we can do no∣thing but sin. So the Servant suf∣fereth for the offences of the Master: so the Beasts are punished for the
sins of the owners. The Pesti putteth no distinction between t both, although the one could  the other would not avoid the nishment. In the Book of Exodus the L saith concerning Pharaoh,  and Egyptians, Exo. 9.15. Now I will stretch mine hand, that I may smite thee thy people with Pestilence, and  shalt be cut off from the Earth. T heed Pharaoh, he is true who thro neth; and although he saith, I w yet he saith also now I will. H ready for thee, although thy he be not ready for him: he is  now prepared to punish, if thou not just now prepared to obey. I w bring a Sword upon you, Lev 26.25 that sh avenge the quarrel of my Covenan and when ye are gathered together  your Cities, I will send the Pestilen among you; and ye shall be deliver into the hand of your Enemies, saith the Lord to the Israelites. And again: The Lord shall make the Pestilence  cleave to thee, Deut. 28.21. untill he have consumes thee from off the Land whither tho goest to possess it. Yea, and yet once, again; Num. 14.11. The Lord said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me? And how long will it be e're they be∣lieve
me, for all the signs that I have ewed among them?  I will smite em with the Pestilence, and dis∣herit them, and will make of thee a nightier Nation then they. O the fa∣thoruless treasure of the bounty of my God! O the riches of his goodness, Rom 2. and patience, and long-suffering, lead∣ing us to repentance! What were the Israelites, that he should not Plague hem? Why not presently? The wages is due so soon as the service is done; and the punishment is as due, so soon as the offence is committed: and yet, although God be forward in the former, he is slow to the lat∣ter: although he delight in the for∣mer, yet is he hardly drawn to the latter. Me thinks when I consider the Israelites, I wonder at their Re∣bellions: and yet, me thinks, when I consider our selves, I wonder much more. Isa: 5.1. What could have been done more to this Vine-yard of God, that he hath not done unto us? He hath fenced us,  and gathered out the stones from us and planted us with the choy∣cest Vinc, and built a Tower in the midst of us, and also made a Wine-press in this his Vine-yard, and yet for all this, when he looked that we should bring forth grapes behold wild grapes.
Oh how my heart panteth w me, and my whole self is in a t bling fear, when I consider his  ees, and our rebellions! O thinks I see a hand-writing ag us almost upon every door, Dan. 5.5. ever habitant, written as it were, wit fingers of a man's hand (as Belshazar saw upon the plaister  Wall;)  which maketh my ∣nance change, and my thoughts be bled, so that the joynts of my loy loosed, and my knees finite one a another; and I cry for mercy have offended; and I knod compassion, for I have transgn God did threaten Israel with: stilence that should dis-inherit t and all this to avenge the quar his Covenant, because they still voked him; because they woul believe him, for all the signes he had shewed among them.  wherein had Israel offended? what manner? In what meas which this Land hath not excee And yet, o how unwillingly do Almighty punish us! O how slo O how gently! Mat. 11.1. The Kingdom Heaven suffireth Violence, saith Jesus. Violence indeed, by our  the Reven
Sword for him: we bend his bow for him, and make it ready: Psal. 7.12. Verse 13. Psal. 64.3 we also repare for hun the insteuments of death, because we whet our tongues like swords, and bend our bows to shoot or arrows, even bitter words, that we may shoot in secret at the perfect:  sud∣denly do we shoot at him, and fear not. And what now can we expect but judgments, seeing that we will not offer the just, and rightfull violence to the Kingdome of heaven, even the violence of our prayers; the violence of our tears; the violence of sobs and sighs, and groans in our spiritual com∣bats, and conflicts? What can we expect but vengeance? And what do we meet with, but destruction? He hath threatned, and threatned, again and again; and yet we have resist∣ed, and resisted, again, and again too. Isa. 5.7. When he looked for Righteous∣nesse, behold Oppression: justly there∣fore, now we look for mercy, behold a cry. A cry in the Beds of the lan∣guishing; a cry in the Chambers of the Infected, and pined Prisoners; a cry of the healthfull, for fear of in∣fection; a cry of Parents for their tender children; a cry of Children for their dying Parents. Brother cry for brother; sister  sister:
All cry for help; All cry for mer O Lord hear our Prayers, Psa. 102.1 and let  Cryes come unto thee. The Sixth part of the Sol loquie, treating of the du of a Christian; decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in time of Pestilence. I Weep and weep, and sigh a sigh, and pray, and pray:  why do I thus weep, and sigh a pray? If for my self, it is a de which is challenged even by natu it self, so that I may have any her by these means either to prevent,  to cure the sicknesse. If for others, is charity; it is a religious due Thus we are commanded by the  postle; Oal. 6.2. Beare ye one anothers burde and so fulfill the law of Christ. An again, by the same Apostle, I an commanded to weep with them th weep. Ro. 12.15 But must my tears be gene∣ral? Must my prayers be universal For all? For the wicked as well as the godly? There was a time whee the Prophet Jeremiah might no
pray for Judah. Jer. 14.11 The Lord said un∣to him,  Pray not for this people for their good: When they fast, I will not bear their cry; and when they offer burnt-offerings, and oblations, I will not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the Pestilence. cap. 16.3 There was a time too when the Lord said concern∣ing the sons, and concerning the daugh∣ters that were born among the Jews, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them:  They shall dye of grie∣vous deaths; they shall not be lamen∣ted; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth; and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by the famine; and their carkeises shall be meat for the fowle of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. For thus saith the Lord, En∣ter not into the house of mourning;  neither go to lament, nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the Lord;  even lo∣ving kindnesse, and mercies. Both the great and the small shall dye in this land: they shall not be buried,  shall men lament for them,  themselves, nor make them  for them, And there was
when the eys of Jehojakim the so of Josiah King of Judah, Ca. 22.17 and  heart were nought but for coveteous and for to shed innocent blood, and oppression, and for violence to do Therefore thus said the Lord conc ing him,  They shall not lament  him, saying, Ah my brother, or Ah ster: they shall not lament for h saying,  Ah Lord, or Ah his glory.  shall be buried with the buriall of Asse, drawn, and cast out beyond gates of Jerusalem. Thus it  with them; but must it there be thus with those which dye of  sicknes; of the Pestilence? With This were a dreadfull sentence  deed, To dye, and not to be pitti to dye of the Plague, and be denth not to be prayed for. W knoweth indeed, but that some su as those men of Judah, may be mongst us? Who knoweth but th some Jehojakims may be among t Visited? What then? Shall I ther fore pray for none? Yea, shall nor pray for them? God forbid. Th lesse they pray for themselves, th more will I pray for them. The les they know God, the more will I pra that they may know him. The sick∣er they are in body, the more nec
they have of comfort in minde. What though they in part may be a cause of this mortality? What though their wickednesses have help∣ed to bring this Contagion? If they are enemies to my particular, I will forgive them: though they are God's, I will pray for them; even that he in his good time would be pleased to call them home both to the knowledge, and the practise of his Truth. David I am sure did pray for, and pitty his enemies; Ps. 35.13. for so he professeth, saying, As for me, when they were sick, my cloathing was sack-cloath: I humbled my soule with fasting. And thus did my Redeemer too for Jerusalem: for, Lu. 19.41 When he was come neer to the City, he beheld it: yea, be wept over it, saying, If thou hadst known, even thou,  at least in this thy day, the things which be∣long unto thy peace! But now are they hid from thine eyes. Shall David weep then for his enemies? Shall my Jesus weep for his enemies, for the enemies of his father, Joh 20.17 and my fa∣ther; of his God, and my God; and shall not I weep for those who are in misery, and distresse? My Saviour knew who were elected, and who were reprobates; and yet he wept
over the whole City. I dare not p into those secret counsels of my Go nor can I know all those wh he hath ordained for heaven or he Shall not I then weep for them  in general in this general Calami Yes, I will keep my turn: I  sing my part in this dolefull conso Surely if my God should forbid  praying for them, even the very pr hibition might peradventure enco rage me to perform it: he know that we are apt to doe whatso he forbiddeth. O my God, eit take away my readinesse, and apt to contradict thee; or else for me nothing but what thou would  have me to perform. But w should. I pray for those, who (tho they are visited) refuse to repent Shall I hope to alter the eternal d cree of him with whom is no va ableness, Jam. 1.17 neither shaddow of change What if he hath reserved them so vengeance? Can I, by my praye snatch them out of the fire? If the are sick, peradventure I cannot cur them. If they are not yet sick,  cannot preserve them. O thes churlish, inhumane, un-christian, uncharitable thoughts! God there∣fore sendeth them this affliction,
that they may repent: and that y may rather prevent, then he ex∣rcise his revenge. Seeing therefore hat I know not the hearts of any, I vill pitty all: and since by my rayers I cannot prevaile for them o whom is reserved the blacknesse of arknesse for ever; Jud. 13. I will grieve, hat Man is become so wicked, as to reasure up unto himself such wrath a∣ainst the day of wrath. Rom. 2.5. Fain would ny God have conquered the stub∣ornnesse of stiff-necked Israel with he pleasant allurements of his hea∣enly blessings: yet they would not eeld, they would not relent. Then e threatned them: yet they would ot yeeld. Then he punished them; nd yet they would not turn: which ade him cry out by his Prophet. I ave sent among you the Pestilence af∣er the manner of Egypt; Amo. 4.10 yet have yee ot returnd unto me, saith the Lord. Surely the Lord is very angry with uch as will not tremble at his judge∣ments; which made him threaten so by Ezekiel, saying, Ez. 14.19 If I send a Pestilence into that land, and powre out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: Though Noah,  Daniel and Job were in it, as I live saith the Lord God, they shall deliver
neither sonne nor daughter: they deliver but their own soules by righteousness. What comfort then I receive or give, when I mou the comfortlesse? What hope ha to speed, when these worthies sh be denyed; If they were here to tercede for them by their ea supplications? Sure I am that I not so good as any of those th Not as the worst. Gen. 9.21 Not as  though he had been drunk. N Job, though Eliphaz taxed him impatience, when as he just himself, and seemed to tax  God himself with in justice, Job 16.15 say I have sewed sack cloath upon my  and defiled my borne in the dust. face is foul with weeping;  and  eye-lids is the shadow of death.  for any injustice in my hands: als prayer is pure. No, no; far sh come I of either, of any of the Poore I; a poor, weak sinfull  even as sinfull as the worst; as  ked as the worst. And (now I  gin better to bethink my self by th king worse of my self) what are th which I question, whether I mi pray for them, or not? Are they si∣ners? So am I. Are they grieve sinners? So am I. Surely I doe
know enough of my solf, If I doe ot know my self the worst, the vilest e chiefest of sinners. It is then but ustice that I should pray for the orst, since I my self either am, or ight have been worse then them. My prayers shall be general, for all; oping that God may be pleased to ave mercy on all. But it a∣y among them be certainly Re∣robates, though I know it not; yet,  will pray that they may be taken om the number of the faithfull, hat so they may neither seduce by heir temptations, nor offend by their examples, nor dishonour my good God any longer by their crying, and multiplying abhominations. Yet must I howsoever be charitable in my devotions; and pray for others, as well as for my self. But all this while (since my thoughts have been sixed upon those that are visited, and I am certainly resolved for whom I will pray) let me be sure that I direct my prayers aright, or else my devotion may be but blindnesse, and my Religion, Su∣perstition. To him without doubt, & to him alone must I tender my Peti∣tions, from whom, yea from whom alone this sicknesse is sent upon this
sinfull Land. And who is he  visiteth the earth, but onely the  Creatour of heaven and earth?  very Philistines could acknowledg this, 1 Sam. 4.5 when the Arke of the Co of the Lord came into the Campe,  all Israel showted with a great sh so that the earth rang again.  then began to be afraid, for said,  God is come into the Campe.  they said, Woe unto us, for there  not been such a thing heretofore:   unto us.; who shall deliver us  the hands of their mighty Gods? T are the Gods that smote the Aegypt with all the plagues in the Wildern Thus even by the testimony of uncircumcised, my God is detem∣ned to be the sin-revenging G who punisheth offenders with the Plagues and Pestilences. But shall onely depend upon their testimon who knew not God, for my assuran that this vengeance cometh fro God? No: I will look a little sa ther, and finde David the good P∣phet acknowledging it in his Psalm and saying, Ps. 78.50 He made a way to his a∣ger; he spared not their soule  death; but gave their life over to the Pestilence. This the patient Job con∣fessed, Job. 5.17. saying, Behold happy is
man whom God correcteth: therefore spise not thou the chastening of the mighty: For he maketh sore,  and deth up; he woundeth, and his ds make whole. This the holy ophet Hosea proclaimed and said, Hos. 6.1. me and let us return unto the Lord;  he hath torn, and he will heale us:  hath smitten, and he will hinde us  This was the song of devout nnah: The Lord killeth, 1 Sam. 2.6 and ma∣h a live; he bringeth down to the eve, and bringeth up. Yea and s God himself doth publish to the ole world, and saith, Deut. 32.39. See now t I even I am he, and there is no d with me. I kill, and I make a e: I wound, and I heale: neither  there any that can deliver out of ne hand. It is cleer then, it is most parent, that in this general sick∣sse, I must of necessity acknowledg  Finger of God. There was once ime when he himself proclaimed, ying, Isa. 65.1 I am sought of them that ask∣ not for me: I am found of them at sought me not. I said, Behold e,  behold me unto a Nation that was t called by my Name. I have spread t my hands all the day unto a Robel∣us People. And surely, that time is ow come again: for we sought him
not, and yet we have sound hi this day of our Visitation, eve this dreadfull sickness.  He  spread out his hands all the day unto us a Rebellious people; we would not harken unto him: ∣ly therefore doe we remain an the graves; and hence it is tha hands are held up unto him.  alas, so weak are our devotions feeble are we in our Petitions unconstant, so wavering are our Faith, that our Hands, are vier then our Hearts. We  fain to have an Aaron, Ex. 17.12 and a H∣stay them up, or else we are rea let them down; and if they fa great Amalekites, (both our sin Gods revenge) will prevaile aga us. He cryeth out unto us,  me, behold me; and (wois unto we do behold him in his severe, consuming wrath: But O tha might behold him in the clear most lovely glory of his mercy that he might now be sought o though formerly we have not a for him! He once did promise a time should be when the childre Israel should come, they and the  dren of Judah together, er. 50.4. going,  weeping: they should go and seek
d their God. Surely that time is  come to us his Israel: for now we  and weep as we go (as did David  Absolom) We weep as we go up to  Chambers. With Joseph, 2 Sam. 18.33. Ge. 34.30 we seek ere to weep; and we enter into our ambers, and we weep there. With e Church in the Psalms, Ps. 126.6. we goe th and weep. With the Israelites,  weep before the doore of the Taber∣cle of the Congregation. Num 25.6 With Da∣d, 2 Sam. 15.30. and the people that were with m, we weep as we go up to the Ci∣. Yea, with Ishmael, we weep all  as we go. And as we weep, Jer. 41.6. so hope we shall seek too; even seek e Lord, and his strength; Psa. 105.4 yea seek s face evermore. This is the way for ardon; and this is the means for alth: for so God promised King oomon, saying: If I shut up heaven at there is no rain: or if I command e Locusts to devour the Land: 2 Chro 7.13. or if  send a Pestilence among my people: if y people which are called by my Name hall humble themselves, and pray,  nd seek my face, and turn from their wicked wayes; then will I hear from , and will forgive their sinne, and will heale their land. Lord, this Pilence thou hast sent among us: among us Christians that are called
by thy Name. Let others do  they will: Jos. 24.15 As for me, and my h we will serve thee, O my Lord.  thou make me to turn from my  ked wayes, that thou mayest  from heaven, and forgive my s and heale this land: for I will  thy face; I will humble my sel will pray unto thee, and say. The Prayer. OMnipotent Lord, thou sin venging God, who for  obedience diddest threaten th own people of Israel to smite them the Knees, Deu. 28.35. and in the legs with a so Botch that could not be healed, f the sole of the foot unto the top of  head:  to sinite them with the  of Egypt, whereof they could no healed: Thou who by the mouth thine onely sonne diddest fore-tell the Jews, that Nation should rise  gainst Nation, Mat. 24.7 Kingdom against Kin dome, and that there should be Fr mines, and Pestilences in diver places: Be pleased, O thou great o fended Lord, in the bowels of th compassion to let thine anger cease, Psal 85.4
and to bow down thine ear to thy fflicted People in the City of Lon∣don and elsewhere in this Nation. O our God thou seest how this whole Kingdome doth groane under the urden of thy wrathful indignation, emoaning the general sufferances or our more general sins. Our sins, our sins doe far exceed the transgres∣sions of Israel: Yea, they are grea∣ter than those of the Jews against he true Messias; for thine own A∣postle eareth them witnesse, that Had they known it, 1 Cor. 2.8 they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory: but we alas, both have known, and doe know him; Heb. 6.6 and yet we crucifie to our selves the Son of thee our God a∣fresh; and daily put him to an open shame. For these our Offences thou hast begun thy Revenge; yea, and most justly too; for thou art clear, though man should judge thee. Un∣der this thy heavy wrath, we groan O Lord, we cry, we hovle; for sick∣ness increaseth, death approacheth: yea, such a sickness, and such a death, as maketh us feare both our selves, and our neighbours; because we have not feared thee the Lord of hosts. Thou seest, O Lord, their af∣flictions; even that their Houses are
made their Prisons, and their Sou their Companions, whom thou hast been pleased to visite. Our Stre are turned into Pastures, our Tow into Wildernesses; and for our bad∣wardnesse in our Devotions, t very doors we see shut up every d do instruct us to addresse our selve unto thee, and to beseech thee L to have mercy upon us. Our dayes a consumed in sorrows and languis∣ing; and our nights in weeping, a mourning. Thou woundest us, a we cry; thou smitest us, and ∣roare; thou plaguest us, and we are troubled, we are dismayed. O Golgothaes are surfeited with th Dead, and our habitations infecte with the living. We flye from plac to place, from Country to Country and yet we flye not from thy pre∣sence, we avoid not thy judgment. What shall we doe, What shall w∣doe? Is there no balm, O Lord,  Gilead? Jer. 8.22. Is there no Physitian there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of thy people recovered? Thy Son, thy mercifull Son, thy swe Son Jesus was sent to binde up the broken hearted, Isa. 61.1 and to open the pri∣sons to them that were bound,  and he was comfort them that mourn. and he was
not baokward in the performance of this for which he was sent; for he healed all manner of sicknesse, Mat. 4.23 and all manner of Diseases among the people. At thy feet, therefore, O Jesus, Ch. 15.0 thou best Physitian, we cast our selves down. A multitude we are that lye at thy feet: Cure us, O Christ; heale us, O Jesus, as thou diddest the multitude. Lu. 6.19. A whole multitude once did seek to touch thee; for there went vertue out of thee; and thou healest them all. Mat. 14.14. Thou wert moved with compassion, and didest heale their sick. Many didst thou cure of their infir∣mities, and Plagues. Behold thy hand is not shortened that it cannot save; Lu. 7.21 neither is thine eare heavy that thou canst not heare. Is. 59.1. The number of Pe∣titioners cannot deter thee; the multitude of suitors cannot molest thee; for thou hast healed many: Mar 3.10 Therefore, with the multitude in the Gospel, we presse upon thee, that we may but touch thee; for thou hast virtue in thee; thou hast po∣wer to heale. O Lord heare, O Lord forgive, O Lord heale us of our grievous wounds. In the depth of thy fury when thou diddest resolve to be revenged of a Rebel∣lious people, it was yet thy pro∣mise
that thou would leave a few from the Sword, Ez. 12.16 and from the Fe∣mine, and from the Pestilence, th they might declare all their abominati∣ons among the people where th should come; that they might kno that thou art the Lord. Us thou ha plagued, Us thou hast punished,  sorely, so grievously, that but f of us are like to escape: yet O Lord, now at last look in mercy upon us: O Lord let this smal remnant which is left finde thy compassion. O  us, O heale us, O help us for thy mercie's sake. When thou wert an∣gry with Aegypt, thou didst threa∣ten to smite it: Isa. 19.22 but, even at that ve∣ry instant, thou didst likewise pro∣mise to heale it; and that they should return unto thee their Lord, and that thou wouldest be intreated of them. Jer. 33.6 Thou didst proclaim unto Judah that thou wouldest bring it health, and cure; and wouldst cure them, and reveale unto them aboun∣dance of peace, and truth. Thou didst promise unto Zion that thou would∣est restore health unto her, Ch 30.17 and heale her of her wounds, because she was called an out-cast by my people, say∣ing, This is Zion, whom no man seek∣eth after. These were thy promises
even in the middest of thy threat∣nings: and wilt thou be worse unto us than thou wert unto Aegypt, or Judah, or Zion? True it is, that thou expectest our conversion; thou commandest us to Turn unto thee with all our hearts, and with Fasting, Joel 2.12 and with Weeping, and with Mour∣ning. To thee therefore, O God (though formerly we have not, yet now) doe we turn. We turn unto thee both our weeping Eyes, and our dejected countenances, and our wringing Hands, and our bended Knees, and our mournfull Voyces, and our groaning Hearts. Mercifull God, behold our Teares, and view our Countenances, & look upon our Hands, and strengthen our Knees, and hearken to our Voyces, and comfort our Hearts. The Priests,  O Lord, even thine own Ministers doe weep between the Porch and the Altar, and they say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. Our Ezra's pray, and confess & weep, Eze 10.1. and cast themselves down before thine house; and the people assemble them∣selves unto them, both our men and our women, and our children; for we all weep very sore. We weep, Num. 2.56. as the Is∣raelites did before the doore of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, whe twenty and four thousand of the dyed of the Pestilence. Thus  mourn, thus we weep; our Eyes,  Hearts, our very Soules do weep: O let us tast of thy love; let us feele thy compasson. Make us to  of thy praise, as thy servant David did; when be cryed unto thee, and thou diddest heale him. Psal. 30.2 Thou ha been wroth with us, as thou were with the Jews for their Coveteousne and thou hast smitten us: Isa. 57.17 thou  hid thy self, and hast been, angry yet we have gone on frowardly in t ways of our hearts. But, O our God do thou make us as penitent as those Jews; and then say unto us as tho diddest unto thy Judah,  I have  thy wayes, and I will heal thee  will lead thee also, and restore com∣forts unto thee and to thy mourners. Alas, we mourn, and yet we are pu∣nished: we grieve, and yet we are plagued; Jer. 14.7. and all because our ini∣quities doe testifie against us: but for thy name's sake, O Lord, be pleased to spare us.  O the hope of Israel, the Saviour thereof in the time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land; and as a way-faring man that turneth aside to tarry but a night?
Why shouldest thou be as a man astoni∣shed;  as a mighty man that cannot save? Thou O Lord, art still in the midest of us, and we are called by thy name; therefore, we pray thee, leave us not. 1 King 8.37. O here is a Pestilence in our land; and we make our Prayers and Supplications,  and stretch forth our hands toward thine house.  Hear therefore in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive;  that we may fear thee, and walk in thy wayes all the dayes of our lives. Or if the sins of us thy people cause thee to stop thine eares at our Prayers, O hear thou our Hezekiah's, praying for us who have not cleansed our selves. 2 Cho. 30.18. Stay the Plague from us thine Is∣rael, as thou diddest from thy peo∣ple, Ps. 106.30 Na. 16.16 when thy servant Phineas exe∣cuted judgement. Cause our Aarons to take their Censers, and to put fire in them from off the Altar, and to put on incense: O let them come quick∣ly to our Congregations, and make an Attonement for us.  Let them stand between the dead and the living, and let the plague be stayed. Thine Angel stretcheth forth his hand upon our Jerusalem to destroy it: 2 Sam. 24.16. O doe thou as in the time of King David: Repent thee of the evill, and say unto
the destroying Angel, It is enough stay now thine hand. Hear us,  Lord, for thy distressed People;  hear them for us; and hear thy Ch for us all: That to him, and the and thy Blessed Spirit we may rend (as is most due) all Praise,  Glory, and Thanksgiving, and O∣bedience, from this time forth  ever more Amen.
Teares of those whose Houses are shut up of the Plague. The Soliloquie. The Ejaculation. Psal. 5. . . Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for un∣to thee will I Pray. WHAT? Shut up? Why so? Must my House be a Prison; and my self both the Jaylor and the Pri∣soner too? This is a punishment added unto God's, to be thus shut up from the society of men. Is this a visitation, thus to forbid our visi∣tants? Was I wont to be such a gadder abroad, that I must now be kpt at home under lock and key? Lord how suddenly am I transported with passion even beyond the bounds of reason, and Religion
O here is the Messenger of death come into mine house; and now I must be thankfull to Authority for com∣manding me to retire my self to  private, and pensive accounts, wh knoweth yet but that both my self and my family may live, for all  inclosing? It may so please my God that by my being secluded from th multitude, I may shun the infection of the multitude; and so what  conceived an injury, may end  Blessing. I may perhaps say,  say truly, when I am awaked  out of my passion, as Jacob did wh he awoke out of his sleep: Ge. 18.16 Surely  Lord is in this place, and I knew  not. My God is, come indeed, a though I am not worthy that he shall enter under my roof. Lu. 7.6. O he is come but he is come in wrath, and shew∣eth me the tokens of his anger: b I will submit to his pleasure, and say unto him in the language of the blessed Virgin: Behold the Hand∣maid of th Lord: L. 1.37. be it unto me ac∣cording to thy will. Who knowed but that insteed of killing, he may come to raise me a Lazarus; Joh. 11., 44. if oc∣casion serveth, as once he did for Martha and Mary? Peradventure he may come in judgment to others,
and yet to me in mercy. Howsoe∣ver. I will hope that I am one of those who are spoken unto from the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet: Come my people; Isa. 26.20 enter thou into thy Chamber, and shut thy doores about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment, untill the indignation be over past. Since then my Lord is come to be my Guest, my House shall be empty, swept and garnished, that nothing may offend him, nothing may displease him: and thus will I empty it, thus will I sweep it, thus will I garnish it. Fare-well vain world; thou that hast deluded me with thy follies, and cozened me with thy false and brai∣ded wares. Come not neer me; my doores are shut, and none such as thou shall enter here. Fare-well false friends, who onely gaze upon the rising Sun. Yee who were my companions in solly, and inticers to sond and idle sports, fare-well, fare∣well: no more shall yee enter with your bewitching charms: Sports, passe-times, games, merry meetings, gossipings; fare yee all well; come no more to my doores: for if yee do come, ye shall knock, and knock, and knock again, and all in vain;
for even to this purpose also are they now made fast. And now mine eyes, the lustre of my countenance, yee windows of folly, take ye your leave of your vain objects; for I have a task to set you, that ye never yet were acquainted with. First, I will preferr you to attend upon my heart; and whatever sighes and sobs my poore heart shall send forth, it shall be your duty to entertain them by the way, and enforce them to ac∣cept of the company of your teares. Ye shall weep, till ye are weary, and then shall ye read: and when in∣deed ye are weary of poring upon di∣vine Pages, for your recreation ye shall weep again, that by that means ye may be fitted to read again. Next if at any time, I give you leave to consult with the sister of mortality (as some times I shall be necessita∣ted to afford you a time of intermis∣sion by the perswasions of nature) be sure that ye stay not too long from your imployments; for my haste is great, my businesse is of con∣sequence: we have onely a little work to doe for the King of eternity, and then we shall be at ease. And ye, mine Eare, that have so often hearkened to the Syren songs of the
vain world, now bid yee adieu to your musicall harmonies, and ra∣ishing concords; for I must lock e up for a season: and hereafter e shall hear a melody beyond the uning of the spheares; for the Quire of Heaven shall ravish you with their Halelujah's. These hands hat so proudly hid themselves un∣der the skin of the Kid, and blush∣ed when they were beheld by any lesse then an Idolater, shall now en∣wine each other in a mutuall con∣cord, and then revenging the quar∣rell of their sins upon my trecherous heart, they shall smite it, and thump it, and beat it untill they have molli∣fied it; untill they have beaten that stone into flesh, and that flesh into water, and forced that water into teares for the sins of my whole selfe. Next my Tongue, mine un-toward, unruly, wanton tongue, my fals, pick∣thank, tel-tale tongue, that couldest never sinde the way to tell the truth, or not willingly, or not with delight; thou for thy idle, thy prophane, thy wicked speeches, shall send out no∣thing but cryes, and yells, and hide∣ous dins, and horrid screeches for thine offences: and if at any time I shall, by thine obsequious service,
be contented to trust thee with articulate Prayer; be sure that  first take direction from thy  and then chant it out so loud ( forget not discretion) that it be heard up as high as the th my God. Psal. 141.3. Be sure thou doest it, I will have a watch over my  and at the doores of my lips, th may be certain thou offend not.  for the rest of my selfe (since I  not stay now to give every pa charge in particular) I shall  mand them onely to attend the  sure of my royall Guest. Onely  thoughts I must commit to the  on of my heart, although it for∣ly hath been false unto me: and  sirous I am that they may be prese pressed down with great and he burdens. But I charge thee, O Heart, if ever thou hopest to  mine own deer Heart, that thou su∣fer not an imagination, not a though to come neer thee, but what shall b commended unto thee by Religion, & what thou shalt dispatch to thy M∣ker. And now I am prepared for thee. Welcome O my God. If my room are not clean enough for thee, I must intreat from thee both directi∣on, and assistance to cleanse them.
If any dust of wickednesse hath flown about in the sweeping of them, I will now give my mind to wash my chambers with the tears of mine eys; nd that, I know, thou delightest in. O thrice well-come blessed God. Well-come, O welcome my deerest Redeemer. O how truly did the Kingly preacher affirm that, It is better to go to the house of mourning, Eccl. 7.2 then to go to the house of seasting: for that is the end of all, and the living will lay it to heart! My House is shut up indeed; it is shut up for the Infection; for feare of the infection; for fear least others should infect my family; or for fear least my family should be infectious to o∣thers. But what of all that? I am not the first that ever was shut up: I am not the onely one that over was shut up. Lev. 17.4 The Leaper in the law was to be shut up seven dayes: and at the seaven days end when the Priest looked on him,  if the plague in his sight were at a stay, and spreaded not in the skin, he was to shut him up yet seaven dayes more. This shutting up was rather for his cure, then in∣tended for his hurt. Gen. 7.61 Noah was said to be shut up in the Arke; but it was for his preservation: and so may I
be likewise. Jer. 32.2 Jeremiah was shut too; yea, in a prison, although h jayle was the house of a King:  yet, even at that time, he was ∣ted by the best; by one better the the King; even by God himsel For he often spake to him in the  that he was shut up. cap. 33.1 Thus am I s up; even in a prison made of  dwelling: I hope that my God  speak comfortably unto me. I  hope that he hath shut me up  Jewell in a Cabinet; in his ca in his tender compassion. If so,  am sure that no evill shall come i unto me, for he is holy, he is  he is powerfull who hath me in kee∣ping. Rev. 3.7. He hath the key of David:  openeth, and no man shutteth; and  shutteth and no man openeth. True i is, that sometimes he shutteth out; as when he shutteth out from his eac the prayers of his people. Thus the faithfull complain by the mouth of the Prophet: Lam. 3.8 When I cry, and sho, he shutteth out my prayers. Some∣times he shutteth up; and that in judgment too; Isa. 44 18 as He shutteth up the eyes of Idolaters, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot un∣derstand. And sometimes man shut∣teth too, even when he is forsaken
of God: for so saith the wise King;  violent man shutteth his eys, to de∣ise froward things. And again, Prov. 16.30. God  said sometimes in judgement to ut up, even heaven it self; as in a me of drought. Therefore Moses dviseth the Israelites, saying; Deut. 11.16. Take eed to your selves that your heart be ot deceived, and ye turn aside and rve other Gods, and worship them: And then the Lord's wrath be kin∣lled against you,  and he shut up the Heaven, that there be no raine, and hat the land yeeld not her fruit, and est yee perish quickly from off the good and which the Lord giveth you. But sure I am that although he should shut me up in judgement; yet he, whose compassions faile not, in the midst of judgment, Lam. 3.22. Hab. 3.2. will remember mercy. I know that in former times he hath been angry, and then before him went a Pestilence,  and burning coales went forth at his feet. I know that once when the people of Israel had offended, then the sword was without, and the Pestilence and the Famine within: Eze. 7.15. he that was in the Field was threatned that he should die with the Sword; and he that was in the City, Famine and Pestilence should devoure him. I know that
Elijah Prophesied against Jeb saying, 2 Chron. 21.12. Thus saith the Lord, Bee thou hast not walked in the w Jehoshaphat thy father, nor  wayes of Asa King of Judah:  B with a great Plague will the  smite thy people, and thy chil and thy wives,  and all thy goods:  thou shalt have great sicknesse by  ease of thy bowels, untill thy b fall out by reason of the sickness  by day. Job 11.10 And I know also that  cut off, and shut up, or gather toge none can hinder him. But what th What though he hath sht me  Shall I therefore rage, Ch. 30.29 and rave one distracted? What though  a Brother or Sister to Dragons,  a companion to Owles?  W though my skinne should be bl upon me; and my oues be bu with heat? Chap. 3.3 Should I therefore  Let the day perish wherein I was  and the night in which it was , There is a childe conceived? O  I will rather resolve with afflic Job: Ch. 13.15 Though be slay me, yet will trust in him. Why should I  to be dismayed? That God which dwelleth in the heavens hath take up my house, and is come to so jou with me upon earth: I will speak in
the phrase of a King: But will God ed dwell on earth? Behold the ven, 1 Kin. 8.27 and the heaven of heavens not contain thee: how much lesse  house of mine, which thou now est visite! O what a happinesse it to have God for our visitant! hough he cometh in wrath, yet is  well-come. O let me have my d any way, rather then not to ve him at all! If he should not netimes be angry with me, I ould suspect that he loved me not:  if for ever he should be angry ith me, I should feele that he lo∣d me not. He is never angry with e, but when I am not angry with y self. I will soon therefore ap∣ase his anger, by revenging my  upon my self, for the sins which  have committed against his glori∣s name. And if I cannot be re∣enged enough, I will cry for anger; en for anger that I cannot punish my self enough for displeasing him who thus honoureth my roofe. When the Israelites were to eat the Pas∣hall Lamb, they were commanded to take of the blood thereof, Exo. 12.7. and to strike it on the two side-posts, and on the upper doore-post of the houses, wherein they were to eat it:  And the
blood (saith the Lord) shall  you for a token upon the houses  ye are: and when I see the blood will passe over you, and the Pl shall not be upon you to destroy y when I smite the land of Egypt.  here is comfort now in the mid affliction: here is joy in the de of sorrow. See, there there is  token: there is the blood on the  or at least, the representation of for the Red Cross is there. It is to for a token, or a memorial of  Blood of that Innocent Lamb wi spot, that was slaine, that was  cified on the Crosse for the fin the Elect. Now Lord doe what th pleasest: Spare, or strike; it  be all one to me, so long as th givest me a firm assurance that  hath suffered for me. I value  my stesh: I care not for this  of walking dust: let it be blown  way; let this mud-wall be thro down: it is no matter; I am con∣tent, so long as I am sure that th anger of my God will be appeased by the blood of my Redeemer; an that so soon as my soule shall be freed from the prison of my flesh, I shall for ever sit on the right hand of my Jesus. Sure I am, that al∣though
my house be shut up, because  the infection, yet my Christ will canse my soule with his blood. herefore World farewell: shut up om thou pleasest Thy company not so good, nor thy courtesie so eat as to command my joy. Al∣ough my house here be shut up, yet  which is faithfull hath promised at the gates of that new Jerusalm, Rev. 21.25. hich is above, shall not be shut at all  day: and that there shall be no night ere. O let me beg of my Lord, y Land-lord; yea my Guest, my riend, my Brother, my Father that seeing I am a man, a fearefull man ounderfully afraid especially (as I me of a woman) of a Serpent, Ch. 20.2 or  Dragon) he will be pleased to lay old on the Dragon, that old Serpent which is the Devill, and Satan;  and tade him, and cast him into the bot∣tomelesse pit, and shut him up, and set  Seale upon him, that he may deceive e no more. O how contentedly then shall I mourn! How joyfully shall I ieve for all the offences that ever  committed! Well; now my God s pleased to speak to my Consci∣ence, away will I go in private, all alone, and cry in a corner. I will weep by my self: away I will go; and
separate my self from my fam yea even from her who is my s as we are two but one flesh; th may the more freely weep. Th will doe, and this I may doe; when Jerusalem had her great mo∣ning, Zech. 12.12. not onely every family moc apart, but even their Wives  mourned apart. So will I: I will  apart too. But because I must offer to offer unto my God s present as a little poor bottle of to and say nothing to him when ∣der it; Ps. 56.8 humbly therefore upon knees will I fall, and thus will l unto him. The Prayer. GLorious and ever-living  God, Psal. 75.5 who doest suffer the ∣ked to live in prospirity; to be in  trouble like other men, nor to be pl∣gued like other men: Heb. 12.6 but hast to us that whomsoever thou lovest, th doest chasten, and scourgest every ch whom thou receivest: vouchsafe  beseech thee, to sanctifie this affli∣ction which thou hast laid at this time upon me and mine. 1 Kin. 17, 18. Thou at
come, O my God, to call my sins to membrance: O let me not frustrate ine intent, nor repell the motions  thy blessed Spirit. My self, and y family are now shut up from the wde temptations of the seducing World: Lord make me at this time  look into my self, into mine own  and sinfull heart, which hath  so long shut up even from mine wn self, from mine understanding nd my knowledge. This, O Lord,  thy time to speak: let it, I beseech hee, be my time to hear. My house is ecome a house of thy Correction; & ny self and family are the offenders hom thou art pleased to chastise. Je 10.24 Lord correct us, but with judgment, ot in thine anger, Ps. 88.7. least thou bring us o nothing. Thy wrath at this time eth hard upon us; and thou afflictest s with all thy waves.  Thou hast put all our acquaintance farr from us; thou ast made us to be an abomination unto them: we are shut up, Psa. 38.11 and cannot come forth. Our Lovers, and our friends stand aloofe from us; Ps. 88.9. and our neighbours stand afar off. By reason of this affliction mine eyes mourneth: Lord I call daily upon thee, Ps. 69.15. and stretch out mine hands unto thee. O let not the water-stood over-flow us; neither let
the deep swallow us up; and let the pit shut her mouth upon us. Psa. 73.14  the day long are we plagued, Psal. 69.3 and t∣stened every day. I am weary of ∣ing; my throat is dry: my sight  faileth for waiting so long upon th my God. O consider thy distre servants, Psa. 78.39 that we are but flesh: a that we are even a winde that pas away, and that cometh not again  liver us, Psa. 91.3. O Lord, from the snare o fowler, from the noisome Pestil Either send unto us or else be th thy self unto us a staff as well as rodd; Psal. 23.4. a supporter as well as a com∣ctor, Psa. 91 5 that so we may not be afraid s the terrour by night, nor for the arri that flyeth by day;  nor for the Pestilen that walketh in darkns; nor for  destruction that wasteth at noon  Prepare us, O Lord, so those hea∣venly mansions, where thy Son s∣teth at thy right hand making in∣tercession for us. Hear him plea∣ding for our remission, and interce∣ding for our Pardon. Out of his wounds have issued that precious balsamone, which is able to cure the sins of the whole world. In him be pleased to be reconciled unto us: Psa. 31.15 and since our times are in thine hands, Lord either spare us for thine honour
or else receive us to thy mercy. Let the health of our bodies make us mindfull to labour for the health of our soules: and let the sicknesse of our bodies put us in minde of the diseases of our soules. Good God, either preserve us from sickness, or protect us in sickness. Be thou our God, and make us thy servants; and then come either with health, or with sickness; thy will be done. Thou canst cause a thousand to fall at our side, Ps. 91.7 and ten thousand at our right hand, and yet preserve us. Thou canst, if thou pleasest, so protect us,  that no evill may befall us; nor any Plague come nigh our dwelling. O grant therefore,  that we may make thee our refuge; Psal. 3.6. yea thee who art the most high, our habitation. We are trou∣bled, O Lord; we are bowed down greatly; we go mourning all the day long. We eat ashes as it were bread, Psa. 02 9 d mingle our drinke with weeping,  because of thine indignation, and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted us up, and cast us down. Ps. 41.9 But O thou who art our onely rock, why hast thou forgot∣ten us? Psa. 43.2. O why go we thus mourning by reason of this affliction? Thou art th God of our strength, Est 8.3. Why doest thou cast us off? O gve us leave
(with Queen Esther) to speake yet againe before thee the King of Kings, and to fall down at thy feet (as she did at the feet of King Ahasuerus) and to beseech thee with teares to with-draw thy visitation. O Lord our very soules within us doe mourn; Job 14.22 for thou doest cause our Sun to go down at noon; and doest darken our earth in the clear day. Thou hast turned our fasts into mourning, Amos 8.9 and all our songs into lamentation:  thou hast brought sack-cloth upon our loyns; Lam. 5.15 and made our mourning as the mourning of an onely Son.  The joy of our heart is ceased; and the crown is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have sinned. . 61.1. But O thou who wert annoin∣ted to preach good tiding unto the meek: who wert sent to binde up the broken-hearted;  to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound: to pro∣claim the acceptable year of the Lord; yea and the day of vengeance of ou God: to comfort all that mourn: to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion,  to give unto them beauty for ashes; the yle of joy for mownig, the gar∣mnt of praise for the spirit of heavi∣ness: . Thou who sttest up o high those that be low, that use which
mourn may be exalted to safety: Ps. 102.17 Re∣guard thou (we most humbly and earnestly beseech thee) the prayers of us thy poore destitute, and despise not our desires. Thou hast seen our wayes; O do thou heale us: Isa. 57.18 lead us also, and restore comforts unto us, that we may be called Trees of Righ∣teousnesse, the planting of thee our Lord, that thou mayest be glorified. Wound us not, O Father, Jer. 30.14 with the wound of an enemy, with the cha∣stisement of a cruell one, for the mul∣titude of our iniquities.  Let not our sorrow be incurable, because our sinns be increased Though for a small mo∣ment thou hast seemed to forsaked us; Is. 54.7. yet with thy great mercies gather us a∣gain. In a little wrath thou doest bide thy face from us, for a moment;  but with everlasting kindnesse have mercy upon us, O Lord our Redeemer. O thou who art our Redeemer,  the Holy one of Israel, the God of the whol earth, Ps. 34.15. Let thine eares be open unto our cryes: open thine eyes, and see our afflictions, Isa. 37.17 (in so many flying out of London) and how many are shut up from the comforts of the godly, and from the socety of their indea∣red freinds. Consider, and hear us, Psal 13. O Lord our God: Lighten our eyes lest
we sleep the sleep of death. Ps. 123.2. Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon thee, O Lord our God, untill thou have mercy upon them and us. O doe thou grant unto us remssion of our sins; patience in our miseries; comfort in our di∣stresse; physick for our health, and recovery: and in thy blessed time, bring their soules out of prison, that we and they may give thanks unto thy Name: Ps. 142.7. Which thing if thou wilt grant unto us all, then shall the righ∣teous resort again unto our company. So shall we that be thy people, Ps. 79.13. and sheep of thy pasture give thee thanks for ever: and shew forth thy praise from generation to gneration, world without end, Amen.
Tears for them who are visi∣ted with the Pestilence, BEEING: 1. Either wounded with a Sore. 2. Or, marked with the Tokens. The Soliloquie. The Ejaculation. Psal. 5. v. 1, 2. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for un∣to thee will I Pray. OH! 'tis come, Psal. 5.4 'tis come. My heart is sore pained within mee; and the terrors of death are fallen upon me. See, See; What swelling's this? What rising's this? Oh, it is the messenger of death, and biddeth me to enquire into my sinfull life. I am struck, oh, I am struck to the
heart. This is the impression of anger, and the blott of him who in h wrath may justly blott me out of h wonted compassion. Yet let me no despaire: let me not be too mu dismaid. While there is life, there i hope. The woman in the Law whe had gone aside to another man inste of her Husband (whereof her hus∣band was jealous, Nu. 5.20 and brought her to her purgation) was to be charged by the Priest with an Oath of Cursing upon whose drinking of water,   her belly did swell, and her thigh did rot. Surely I have drunk none of that water: or if I have, it cannot hurt me; for by that very law, the inno∣cent escaped free from the punish∣ment.  I have never dishonoured my Nuptiall Bed; nor defiled my selfe with any (man or woman) that this swelling should light upon me. Yet (now I better consider of it) let me not deceive my selfe. There is as well a spiritual, as a carnal Adul∣tery. Even a Virgin may be stiled an Adulteress. Have I never turned from my God? Hath my soule ne∣ver forsaken her deerest Husband my blessed Redeemer, to commit a spi∣ritual whoredome? O guilty, guilty: woe is me, I cannot choose but plead
guilty, to this my indictment. My Conscience telleth me that I have followed the temptations of the ene∣mies of Christ, I cannot tell how of∣ten: and justly therefore (I must confesse) may this swelling be my punishment; for greater than this, hath been my due desert. Perad∣venture to correct my Pride, this thorne in my flesh may be a messenger of Satan, sent to buffet me, 2 Cor. 12 7. as once Saint Paul had one sent unto him: for who of either Sex is not guilty of this folly? Among us are there not some, Deut. 28.5: (the tender and delicate women (such as were among the Is∣raelites) who will not adventure to set the sole of the foot upon the ground, for delicateness, and tenderness) and (not to flatter, or deceive my self) I may peradventure be one of them. Or if I have not had power to put in practise what I desired, yet it may be that my desire hath been to be as de∣licate as the chiefest, and sinest of either of the Sexes Satan is said to have: 1.. gon forth from the presence of the Lord, and to have smote Job with sore boyles, from the sole of the foot to the crown of his hand. O that I were but half so righteous as was holy Job, of whom
God himself beareth witnesse, that There was none like him in the earth; Cha. 1.8 a perfect, and an upright man; one that feared God, and eschewed evill! But alas, I am no such person; for I have, by my wickednesse, as it were taught the serpent to go forth from the presence of the Lord, and to smite me with this sicknesse, this ri∣sing, this swelling, worse then those boyles which infested Job. David had a sore too, 1 Sam. 13.14. Psa. 77.2 a running sore (al∣though he was a man after God's own heart): for so he complained, saying, My sore ran in the night, and ceased not; my soule refused comfort. But his Sore was not like unto mine: for his was in the fierce combat which he had with distrust; and it may as well be meant that his hand by night reached our in Prayer, and ceased not: or by that sore may be meant the running of his eyes, which dropped in the night for his grievous crimes, and ceased not; as well as an impo∣stume, or ulceration. But mine is not such: it is a sore indeed, a Car∣buncle, a Pestilential sore; although as yet it is not come to such maturi∣ty as to do as David spake of his. It is yet but a swelling, a hard swelling, a rising: and for its swelling, and
for its hardness it may either be my very heart removed from the seat appointed it by nature: or else it may be sent to put me in mind of the proud swelling, and the malici∣ous hardnesse of mine impenitent heart. Alas, if I doe but seriously consider of that little morsell of proud flesh, or rather stone, hard stone then flesh, that Adamantine heart, what have I not deserved for that wicked heart, which others were ever punished with? Worse, farre worse doe I deserve then ever did Judah: I onely want a Prophet to lament mine estate as Isaiah did hers, for the judgements of God in∣flicted upon her for her rebellion, and to cry, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint: Isa. 1.5. from the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds and bruises, and putrifying sores:  they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with Oyntment. But what shall I do in this di∣stresse? May not these poisoned hu∣mours that have conspired together in this present tumour; as well be some other disease, as the infectious Pestilence? Lord, how fain would sinners live in ignorance, and never
either understand the offences which they have committed, or know the manner and the kinde of their pu∣nishments! How fain would the sick delude themselves with a conceipt of health; and, hoping for life, co∣zen their knowledge with the fals∣hood of opinion! I cannot deny but it is the sicknesse, which I am stricken with; the infectious sick∣ness, the dreadfull Pestilence: and I can have no hope of life if once it ceazeth on my trembling heart. To prevent that danger therefore, since my heart hath hitherto been, so stony, so hard to entertain the motions of the blessed Spirit, I will request it now to continue its obdu∣racy, not against my great God, but against this sad, and deadly sick∣nesse What it hath usually retein∣ed almost to the utter undoing and destruction of my Soule, I will in∣treat it to continue now for the pre∣servation of my Body. Or if that will not doe; if it resolve to yeeld in this time of distresse, far rather then I will seek to that, I will humbly beseech my offended Lord to take possession of my heart: and if he will vouchsafe to grant my petition, then come what can come, I am
sure I shall have comfort, because I shall have the society of my God. But what if my heart be preserved from these malignant humours? Have I then any assurance that my dis∣ease is mortall? Alas no; but I must use the means, and beseech my God to give them his blessing. I must apply those things which will mollifie this swelling: it must be softned, be broken, be drawn, before it can be healed. Thus, even thus must I deale with my heart too. The malicious humours of sin and corrup∣tion have already assembled there, and caused it to swell. I will hasten therefore to Joh's Physitian, who softened his heart, and troubled him: Job 23.16 and I will beseech him for Christ's sake to mollifie mine; for there are more then the seaven abominations of a dissembler in it. Prov. 26.25. Joel 2.13 Hos. 10.12. I will pray him to rent it; to break it; to break up the fallow ground of it; for he better can break mine, than the misery of reproach could break the beart of the Prophet David. Ps. 61.0. I will intreat him to take away the foreskinne of it, and to wash it from wickednesse, Jer. 4.4. that so I may be saved,  and that no vain thought may lodge in it. I will re∣quest him to search it; Ch. 17 10. that he will
lay something to it; Isa. 44.7 Ps 147.3. even all the wickenesses that ever I have com∣mitted. Then, when he hath bro∣ken it, I know that he will heale it, and binde up the wounds of it: for to this purpose he sent his Son, his one∣ly-begotten Son, my Redeemer, my Jesus; even to binde up the bre∣ken hearted. Isa. 61.1. But when this great Cure shall be wrought for me, what have I to render unto him by way of thankfulnesse? Alas nothing, even just nothing at all, unlesse he will accept of that broken, yet there∣in that whole and cured heart. That, then shall be his, and I know that he will accept of it; Act 13 22 Psa. 51.17 for so saith Da∣vid, that man after his own heart; A broken, and a contrite heart O God thou wilt not despise: from the ma∣lce of this heart doth proceed the malignity of this my disease; for sin is the cause of every sickness But all this while I doe but talk of this maladie; I feek not for a Remedy. Alas to whom shall I go? To what Physitian, or Chyrurgion shall I re∣paire? Lev. 13.2. I read that if any man of the house of Israel had in the skin of his flesh a rising, or a swelling, or a bright spat, and if it were in the skin of the flesh like the plague of Lepros, thn he
was to be brought to Aaron the Priest,  or unto one of his sonnes the Priests, and the Priest was to look on the plague in the skinne of the flesh, and then to proceed according to order. Thus, under the Law, the Priests were the Physitians both for the body and the soule: whereupon the Pro∣phet Jeremiah complained, and ac∣counted it as a great judgment upon the people for their sins, Jer. 6.13. that From the Prophet even to the Priest every one dealt falsely:  they healed also the hurt of the people slightly. Hence also another Prophet reproved them, Eze. 34.4 be∣cause. The diseased they had not strengthened; neither had they heald that which was sick; neither had they bound up that which was broken. Under the Gospel also the Apostles were likewise Physitians for both: for when Christ had called unto him his twelve Disciples, Mat. 10.1. he not onely gave them power against unclean Spirits, to cast them out; but also to heale all manner of sicknesses, and all manner of diseases. Doubtlesse by this I am likewise taught, into whatsoever sicknesse I fall, whatsoever disease I am visited with; first of all to go to the Priest, to the Minister of God: Ps. 110.5. Mal. 4.2. First, to Examine my Soule, before
I look for the cure of my Body. To the Priest will I therefore go;  the Chief Priest, to the High Priest, to the chiefest and highest that eve was; even to him who is a Pries for ever aster the order of Melchiz∣deck: And humbly will I befeed him to teach me to feare his name; and then I know that he who is the Sunne of righteousnes will arise with healing in his wings; and will make me goe forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. Make use of the Prayer which fol∣loweth the next Meditation.
Tears for the visited, being mar∣ked with the Tokens. The Soliloquie. The Ejaculation. Psal. 5. v. 1, 2. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for un∣to thee will I Pray. THERE is a time to kill (saith Solomon) and a time to heale. Ecles. 3.3. O that time to kill is now come upon me; but I know not how so much as to hope for the time of healing; for here I finde the tokens of death, the marks of my mortality. This flesh, this sinfull flesh of mine, which hath been so washed, so unguented, so smoothed and coloured, accor∣ding to the choycest wit of art and industry, hath now the staines in it of a contagious sickness. Where are
now those admirers of comelinesse, and those idolatrous doaters up∣on the Beauty of Women? Let them come and learn the vanity of their opinions; and chide their sim∣plicity by these tokens of vengeance. O what a fraile thing is (man) or woman; easily deluded into a be∣lief of their hansomenesse and beauty, and as easily stricken with their own deformity! But what do these spots mean to die my flesh, and strike such a deep tincture in a smoothed skin? Are diseases blinde, that thus they fasten every where without either choice, or exception? Vaine (Man) or Woman as I am, why do I spend these minuits, these few and winged minuits alotted unto me, in such impertinent quaeres? These blewish stains tell me that I must provide to answer for my sins (yea shortly, spee∣dily) before him who dispatched them hither unto me. Death approach∣eth; mortality knocketh at my bur∣dened heart. Lord, how heavy is my soul! Even as if it were already at the great tribunal, and pleaded guilty of milions of enormities. Thy have corrupted themselves (saith Moses by the Israelites;) their
ot is not the spot of Gods children; Deut. 32.5 y are a perverse, and crooked gene∣tion. Is there a spot then which en the children of God may be sub∣ct unto? Why then may not these e some of those spots and my self be ne of those children of God? Lord, ow willingly, how greedily doth ery one strive to dye the death of e right ous! How easilie are we t, through ignorance, to dwell  the letter of the text, when we ould rather prie into a farther in∣ent of the blessed Spirit! That spot  the children of God is not seated  the body, but in the sol; and hat spot in the soul of thy Israelites as chiefly Idolatry. True it is, Vers. 15.16, 17. that ven the righteous have their stains oo; but not such bloaches, not such reat and fowle spots; or howsoever ot of such a deep tincture, not dyed  in grain as are those of the wicked: or they are washed out with the ears of sorrow through the blood of he Lamb. O that my spots were onely in my skin, and not in my soul; and that I could truly justifie my self in the language of Job. Job 31.6. Let me be weighed in an even hallance that God may know mine integrity.  If a∣ry blot hath cleaved to my hands. But
alas we cannot, we dare not.  if we could come to a sight of  sins, and be truly humbled for th then may we be sure that he  taught Jacob how to increase  flock of the speckled and spot would easily make us white as w But how, Ge. 30.39 Isa. 1.18. or upon what grounds  we expect his mercy, seeing all th we can suffer is not punishment  nough for all that we have trespass Without sheding of blood is no rem∣sion, Heb. 9.20. saith the blessed Apost What comfort then can we expe or what mercy can we hope for, se∣ing that our blood, our life is not  value enough to suffer what our  have merrited; much less to pu chase remission of our sins? what no shall we do? What hope can  have that our body can be free from these spots of our disease, when w know not how to be free from the po∣lutions of our souls? By the Mosai∣cal law. If any one of the common people sinned against any of the com∣mandements of God concerning thing which ought not to be done, Lev. 4.27 A Lm without blemish was to be his offering and so the tonement was made for the sin,  and it was forgiven. Here yet was some ease for a distressed soul:
the sin was forgiven through the ead of the Lamb. But what hope ve we of remission? That Law oth no longer stand in force: nor ill the blood of a common Lamb be accepted for the least, the smallest ffence. Yet Cheer up, O our droop∣ing souls: Let our fainting spirits, nd our sorrowfull hearts take com∣ort in the midst of our deep di∣resses: for there is a Lamb, an in∣cent Lamb, Heb. 9.28. a Lamb without blemish which once was offered to hear the sins of many. We are those many who hve sinned, and why then should We not be of those many too, whose sins he hath borne? Lord make thou us to be thy children through the merits f thy Son; and cleanse the polluti∣ns of our Souls by the blood of that Lamb, Joel 1.29 even that Lamb that taketh a∣way the sins of the world. But whilest I thus meditate upon the staines of my soule, my body bid∣deth me to look upon these unwon∣ted blemishes. Lord, how blewish they appear! Surely if those doaters up∣on our sex should see these spots, they would forget their idolatry, and tremble at the judgment. Est. 8.15. When Mordecay was cloathed in his blew and white, it is said that he went in
royal apparel. The apparel of  skin me thinks doth seem to resem the covering of his body; for here the ancient white which nature co∣ferred, and here is blew come no too, sent me from God. It is roy apparell, because it is sent me by  King of glory: and it is well-co too, 2 Cor. 1.3 Pro. 20.20 because that glorious King is th Father likewise of all mercies, and th God of all consolation. The blewnes of a wound cleanseth away evill, sait the wise King Solomon. Surely h meant not such a wound, such a sp as is each of these; for althoug these are blew, yet certainly they cleanse not; or if they doe cleanse their cleansing concerneth nothing but my soule; they put me in minde of that duty, for my time is short, and suddenly shall my poore soule bid fare-well to this corrupted, to this spotted body: but as for this body it cannot be cleansed, it may be ruined by these blewish wounds. Christ saith to his Church, Thou art all faire my love; Cant. 4.7 there is no spot in thee: and St Paul telleth me how it cometh to passe that it is freed from spots; Eph. 5.25 for Christ (saith he) gave him∣self for it, that he might sanctifie it, and cleanse it with the washing of wa∣ter
by the word, that he might present  himselfe a glorious Church, not ing spot, or wrinkle,  or any such g; but that it should be holy, and bout blemish. Of this Church am member; a poore, weak, unwor∣ member; and yet I have my , my corruptions in my soule, ich these in my body peep out to ember me of. But why did I not  the commandments without spot,  unrebukable? 1 Tim 6. Why have I not  my self unspotted from the world? for this, Jam. 1.27 for this very cause am I w thus visited? am I now thus ined: and no more am I able to e these prints out of my flesh, Je. 13.23. then  Ethiopian is able to change his in, or the Leopard his spots Yet I  comfort in my Redeemer; in  who hath redeemed me (not th corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1.18 as silver ad ) from my vain conversation; but ith the precious blood of himself,   of a Lamb without blemish, d without spot. Though my body therefore decay, yet I have a con∣dence that my soule shall live: I have an assurance of that; for he who ringeth me to a sight of these spots, ath given me likewise a sight of my nnes (his name be for ver mag∣nified
for it;) and me thinks they appear a thousand thousand time more loathsome, more urgly in my soule, then these doe in my body. They are ten million of times more cer∣tainly mortall in their own condi∣tion to my soule with out the mercy of any Jesus, then these are to my body. Yet if it might be safe for me to expostulate with my God, I would say unto him in the language of the Prophet. Jer. 15.18 Why is my paine thus per∣petuall, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? Wilt thou be altogether unto me as waters that faile? Ch. 14.19 Hast thou utterly rejected me? Hath thy soule loathed me? Why hast thou smitten me, and there is no heal∣ing for me? I look for peace, and there is no good; and for the time of heal∣ing, and behold trouble. But if I should thus expostulate in the phrase of the Prophet, yet must I howsoe∣ver conclude with the Prophet, and say,  I acknowledge, O Lord, my wic∣kednesse, and the iniquity of my fa∣thers; for we have sinned against thee. Yet, me thinks, these spots will as hardly go out of my minde, as out of my body The expresse word of God to the Israelites was, Levit. 19. Yee shall not make any cutting in your flesh for the
dead, nor print any marks upon you:  the Lord. And good reason  was for this prohibition; for  were apt to be led by the hea∣s, among whom it was a custome e death of their friends to la∣t and cut themselves: it was  manner also to make incisions heir flesh, and to fill up the nds with Stibium, o Inke But s, doe finde here such prints and s in my flesh, as the very heathen nselves would have stood ama∣at; yet these are no caved by violence of my self, but by the er of my God I must therefore ent my self, and rejoyce at the t of them, since they proceed  him who is the father of lights  though they presage darknesse o me) for every good gift, Jam. 8.17 and e∣prfect gift is from above. This  does not seem in it self to be ei∣r good or perfect; but upon se∣d, and more serious cogitations, my true repentance ensue upon m, I shall finde that they will sten me to the best good, to the efest perfection; even to the ngdome which is purchased for  by the blood of my Redeemer. Job 16.12 , I cannot choose but cry out
with Job, and say, I was at ease but he hath broken me asunder: b hath also taken me by my neck, and sha∣ken me to pieces, and set me up so his marke. Or with Jeremiah: H hath bent his bow, Lam. 3.12 and set me as  mark for the arrow. Or with Job a∣gain, through the extremity of m sorrow I am enforced to expostulat with my God, Job 7.20. and say, Why ha thou set me as a mark against thee, s that I am a burden to my self? But I will silence my self in his words a∣gain, and say, I have sinned; Wha shall I doe unto thee, O thou preserve of men? When it pleased the Almighty to preserve his children in the City of Jerusalem, when the rest should be destroyed, he commanded a man that was cloathed with lnnen, and had a writer's Inke-horn by his side, Eze 9.2. to goe thorow the midst of the City, thorow the midst of Jerusalem,  and to set a marke upon the fore-heads of the men that sighed, and that cryed for all the abominations that were done in the midest thereof A mark I have too; yea more then one, and one, and one, though not in my fore-head; and they are set on as if they proceeded from the Ine of e. Writer: but,
woe is me, I have either not cryed at all, or not enough either for mine own sins, or for the abominations of Jerusalem: how then can I hope to escape the destruction? And yet he that spared them, if he please can spare me likewise: Isa. 59.1. for his hand is not shortned, that it cannot save; nei∣ther is his eare heavy, that he cannot hear. 2 King. 20.1. When Hezekiah was com∣manded to set his house in order; and it was told him that he should die, and not live;  he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore: and presently Isaiah was sent unto him to tell him,   Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have hard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears; behold I will heal thee: and I will adde unto thy dayes fisteen yeers.  He may be pleased to say un∣to me too, as he did unto Hezekiah; for I also weep; yea I weep very sore: and I also pray; yea I pray heartily, and say, Be not thou far from me, Ps. 22.19. O Lord: O my strength hast thee to help me. But Hezekiah was more righte∣ous then I am; for he walked before the Lord in truth, 2 King. 20.3. Rom. 7.18 and with perfect heart, and did that which was good in his fight: whereas in me dwelleth no good thing. But Miriam was a wo∣man
(as I am) yea and sinfull; Num. 12.13. and yet when she was Leprous, Moses cryed unto the Lord for her, and said, Heale her now O God I beseech thee; and she was shut out from the campe but seaven dayes,  and was healed. O but she had a Moses to pray for her, whereas I, alas, have none; I have no such Moses to pray for me. But what, shall I therefore remaine quite destitute of all hopes? Shall I despaire of the goodnesse, and the tender mercies of the most high? No, I may not; I must not; for that would but increase my sin, and adde to my torments. The woman in the Gospel who for twelve years space had an issue of blood, Mar. 5.25. and had suffered many things of many physiti∣ans,   and had spent all that she had and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse; she onely came behinde my Jesus, and touched his garment; and straight way the fountain of her blood was dryed up,  and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.  With that fearing and trem∣bling woman therefore will I in like manner fall down before him, and tell him all the truth. I will confesse unto him all my sins; or, at least, so many as possibly I can call to my
remembrance. Who knoweth but that he may say unto me, as he did unto her,  Daughter (or Son) Thy Faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague. I am resolved to take no repulse. The whole multitude even the the multi∣tude of my sinns shall not hinder me, (though they rebuke me) that I should hold my peace: but (with the blinde man in the Gospel) I will cry so much the more, Lu. 18.39 Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me. Or (if that prayer be too short) while he shall prolong my time I will compose and settle my self to a larger form, and earnestly, fervently, zealously I will pray unto him, and say. The Prayer. O Eternall, and most mercifull Lord God, whose Eyes are ten thous and times brighter then the Sun, and yet thou vouchsafest to look with thine eye of providence even upon the meanest of the children of men: Regard (I beseech thee) the low
estate of thine Afflicted Servant. Lu. 1.48. Ps. 38.9. Thou knowest all my desires; and my groan∣ing is not hid from thee. To thee the pollutions of my poore Soule are more naked and open, then these spots in my flesh are obvious to my fight. The sowlnesse of my Corruptions have conspired with the infectious ayre to cause these staines in my skin: and by them I am comman∣ded to prepare for my dissolution. Lord if thou hast decreed by these meanes to free me from this world of pain and misery, be pleased to translate me from hence to the joy of thee my Lord and Master. Mat. 25.23. Give me (O my Father) a sight of mine imperfections: make me loath them, and tremble at them, more then I doe at these messengers of death. Wean me from the love of sin by the consideration both of thy displeasure, and mine own mortali∣ty. These spots appear like so many Eyes, which seem to stare me in the face, and would affright me with horrour: and all because I had not always a consideration that thine eyes in every place do behold the evill, Pro. 15.3. and the good. Blessed God give me a sight of my corruptions, Ps. 51.9. and a detestation of them; and then turn
thou thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Speak peace, and health unto my wounded soule, which every minuit expecteth thy coming. Lord thou art a God who canst not abide to behold un∣righteousnesse: look not therefore with thy wrathfull eye upon me who am all sin, and pollution; but upon thy Sonne, and his Sufferings. Or if thou canst not choose but look up∣on me, first cloath me with the righ∣teousnesse of that immaculate Lamb; so shalt thou see me with love and delight, and I shall-behold thee with unspeakable joy. Prepare me, Rev. 19.9. O my God, that I may be a fit guest to be called and invited to the Supper of the Lamb. Seale unto my soule the remission of mine offences; and then make me willingly to resigne up my body to thine own disposing. Mat. 8.. Yet thou mayest speak the word (if so thou pleasest) and thy servant may be healed. Lu. 17.15 There was a Leper in the Gospel who fell down at thy feet, O Jesus, giving thee thanks,  and with a loud voice glorifying thy name, because thou hadst healed him. It is as easie for thee to restore me in like manner, as thou diddest that Leper. When Ephraim saw his
sickness, Hos. 5.13. and went to the Assirian; and Judah saw his wound, and sent to King Jareb; there was found no bealing, nor curing of the wounds: but those that come unto thee shall finde that thou art both able and willing to heale all those that are bro∣ken in heart, Ps. 147.3. and to give medicine to heale their sicknesse; for unto Israel thou did dest proclaim thy self, The Lord that healeth. Have mercy there∣fore upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heale me, Ex. 15.26 for my bones are vexed. Ps. 6.2. Strengthen me now upon my bed of languishing: make thou all my bed in my sickness. Ps. 41.3. Jer. 77.14 Heale me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved; for thou art my praise. Ch. 30.12 O let not my bruise be in∣curable, though my wound be grie∣vous. Let me have one to plead my cause,  even that Holy One, thine onely begotten Son; that he may binde me up, and give me healing me∣dicines. Thou art he who didst pro∣mise Jacob to correct him in measure,  though not to leave him altogether un∣punished. Thou rebukest me for my sin, Ps. 39.11. and makest my-beauty to consume away like as it were a moath fretting a garment. These marks in my flesh do cause a trembling even in my spi∣rit.
Lord grant that upon my soul be not found the mark of the beast, Rev. 13.17 Ps. 86 16. but the mark of thy Sonne, that he may own me for his. O turn thou unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy servant, and save thy distressed supplicant. Shew now some good token for good,  that is may ap∣pear unto the world that thou Lord doest help me and comfort me. But if in thy se∣cret purpose thou hast decreed at any time, O gather me unto my fathers; make me with joy and comfort to render mine account unto thee the Lord of heaven and earth. Look not upon the sinns and offences of my misled Life; but rather look upon my Redeemer's Death, Is. 35.5. who was wounded for my transgressions; bruised for mine iniquities: the chastisement of my peace was laid upon him: by his stripes therefore let me be healed. In the midst of the street of thy throne, O God, and of either side of the river of life there is a tree of life bearing twelve maner of fruits; Rev. 22.2. and the leaves of the tree are for the heal∣ing of the nations. O my God let me but come to tast of those fruits: let me but be shaded under the leavs of that tree of life. Be mercifull unto me, heal my soule, Ps. 41.4. Psal. 103.1 V. 3. for I have sinned against thee. Then shall my soule blesse thee O my Lord: and all that is within me shall praise thy holy name, who forgivest all mine iniquities, and canst
hale my diseases. Rer. 22.17 Gen. 3.8. Into thine hands I com∣mand my spirit, for thou hast redeemed me O Lord, thou God of truth. The Spirit and the Bride say Come; therefore let me who now hear it, say Come. Let me hear thy voyce; O God, in the coole of the day; not in the heat of thy displeasure. And thou, O my Jesus, who for such sinners were made a sacrifice on the altar of the Cross; bow down thine ear as thou didst upon the tree, and hear, and sulfill the desires of thy wounded supplicant, Come O Jesus, & embrace me in thine arms: hide me in thy wounded side from the wrath of thy Father. In thee alone doe I trust: to thee alone doe I slee: succour me, help me, save me, O Christ. The world I leave: to thee I come. At the door of thy mercy do I knock, I call, I cry. Lord protect me: Jesus comfort me, strengthen my Faith; and consi my Hope. As my earthly body draweth neerer to the earth; so do thou draw my soul up neerer unto thee who art the fa∣ther of spirits. Heb. 12.9 O God make speed to save me. O Lord make hast to help me. Fi∣nish soon these dayes of sin, and then let me enter into thy celestial Paradice; and that for his sake in whom alone thou art well pleased, even Jesus Christ my one∣ atour, and Redeemer. Amen.
FINIS.
