G1300 E969_3 99866745 119030
AMERICA. Painted to the Life. A True History of the originall undertakings of the advancement of Plantations into those parts, with a perfect relation of our ENGLISH Discoveries, shewing their beginning, progress, and continuance, from the year, 1628. to 1658. declaring the forms of their Government, Policies, Religions, Manners, Customes, Military Discipline, Warres with the INDIANS, the Commodities of their Countries, a Description of their Townes, and Havens, the increase of their trading with the names of their Governours and Magistrates. More Especially an absolute Narrative of the North parts of AMERICA, and of the discoveries and plantations of our English in NEW-ENGLAND. Written by Sir FERDINANDO GORGES Knight and Governour of the Fort and Island of Plimouth in DEVONSHIRE, one of the first and cheifest pro∣moters of those Plantations. Publisht since his decease, by his Grand-child Ferdinando Gorges Esquire, who hath much enlarged it and added severall accurate Descripti∣ons of his owne. A work now at last exposed for the publick good, to stir up the heroick and active spirits of these times, to benefit their Country, and Eternize their names by such honourable attempts. For the Readers clearer understanding of the Country's they are lively described in a compleat and exquisite Map. Vivit post funera virtus. LONDON; Printed by E. Brudenell, for Nathaniel Brook dwelling at the Angel in Corn-hill. 1658.
To the READER. I Thought it a part of my duty in this my briefe Narration of our Plantations to remember the Originall Ʋndertak∣ing of those designes in the parts of America, by such Noble Spirits of our Nation that first attempted it, as well for the justification of the right thereof, properly belonging to Kings of our Nation, before any o∣ther Prince or State, as also the better to cleare the claime made thereunto by the Embassadour of France, in the behalfe of his Master, in the yeare 1624. whereto I was required to make answer (as more at large it appeares in the discourse it selfe, withall to leave to posterity the particular wayes by which it hath beene brought to the height it is come unte, wherein the providence of our Great GOD is especially to be observed, who by the least and weakest meanes, oftentimes effecteth great and wonderfull things; all which I have en∣deavoured
to contract in as short a compasse, as the length of the ime and the variety of the accidents would give leave, as for the truth thereof, I pesume it is so publiquely known, as malice i selfe dares not onely question it, though I know none, I thank my God to whom I have given any just cause maliiously to attempt it ulesse it be for the desire I had to do good to all without wronging of any, as by the course of my life to this present it may appear. If in the conclusion of my undertaking and expence of my fortunes to advance the honour and happinesse of my Nation, I have setled a portion thereof to those that in nature must succeed me; you may be pleased to remember that the Labourer is worthy of his hire. That I have not exceeded others not better deserving that I go hand in hand with the meanest in this great worke, to whom the charge there∣of was commited by royall Authority. That I have opened the way to greater imployments and shalbe (as a hand set up in a crosse way) in a desert Country to point all travellers in such like kind, how they may come safe to finish their journeys nd leaving an example to others best affected to designes of such like nature to prosecute their intents for further in largement of those began Plan∣tations, without trenching or intruding upon the rights and labours of others already possessed, of what is justly granted them. Especially of such, who in some sort may be termed Benefactours a Seconday donors of what (by Gods favour) is had, or to be had from those springs they first found and left to posterity to bath themselves in, but if there be any, otherwise affected, as better delighted to reap what they have not sown, or to possess the fruit another hath laboured for, let such be assured, so great injustice will never want a wofull atten∣dance to follow close at the heeles, if not stayed behind to bring after a more terrible revenge; But my trust is such, impiety will not be sud∣denly harboured where the whole work is I hope still continued for the enlargement of the Christian faith, the supportation of justice, and love of peace, in assurance whereof, I will conclude and tell you (as I have lived long) so I have done what I could, let those that come after me doe for their parts what they may, and I doubt not but the God that governes all, will reward their labours that continue in his service, to whom be Glory for ever, Amen. FERDINANDO GORGES.
VVonder-working PROVIDENCE OF SIONS SAVIOVR. Being a Relation of the first planting in New England, in the Yeare, 1628. CHAP. I. The sad Condition of England, when this People removed. WHen England began to decline in Religion, like luke-warme Laodicea, and instead of purging out Popery, a farther compliance was sought not onely in vaine Idolatrous Ceremonies, but also in prophaning the Sabbath, and by Proclamation throughout their Parish churches, exasperating lewd and prophane persons to celebrate a Sb∣bath like the Heathen to Venus, Baccus and Ceres; in so much that the multitude of irreligious lascivious and popsh affected per∣sons spred the whole land like Grashoppers, in this very time Christ the glorious King of his Churches, raises an Army out of our English Nation, for freeing his people from their long servitude under usurpng Prelacy; and bcause every corner of England was filled with the fury of malignant adversaries, Christ creates a New England to muster up the first of his Forces in; Whose  condition, little number, and remotenesse of place made
these adversaries triumph, despising this day of small things, but in this hight of their pride the Lord Christ brought sudden, and unexpected destruction upon them. Thus have you a touch of the time when this worke began. Christ Jesus intending to manifest his Kingly Office toward his Churches more fully then ever yet the Sons of men saw, even to the uniting of Jew and Gentile Churches in one Faith, begins with our English Nation (whose former Reformation being vere imperfect) doth now resolve to cast down their false foun∣dation of Prelacy, even in the hight of their domineering dig∣nity. And therefore in the yeare 1628. he stirres up his servants as the Heralds of a King to make this Proclamation for Volun∣tiers as followeth. Oh yes! oh yes! oh yes! All you the people of Christ that are here Oppressed, Imprisoned and scurrilously derided, gather your selves together, your Wifes and little ones, and answer to your seve∣rall Names as you shall be shipped for his service, in the Westere World, and more especially for planting the united Collonies of new England; Where you are to attend the service of the King of Kings, upon the divulging of this Proclamation by his Herralds at Armes. Many (although otherwise willing for this service) began to object as followeth: Can it possible be the mind of Christ, (who formerly inabled so many Souldiers of his to keepe their station unto the death here) that now so many brave Souldiers disciplined by Christ him∣selfe the Captaine of our salvation, should turne their backs to the disheartning of their Fellow-Souldiers, and losse of further opportunity in gaining a greater number of Subjects to Christs Kingdome? Notwithstanding this Objection, It was further proclaimed as followeth: What Creature, wilt not know that Christ thy King crusheth with a rod of Iron, the Pompe and Price of man, and must he like man cast and contrive to take his enemies at advan∣tage? No, of purpose hee causeth such instruments to retreate as he hath made strong for himselfe: that so his adversaries glory∣ing in the pride of their power, insulting over the little remnan remaining, Christ causeth them to be cast downe suddenly for∣ever, and wee find in stories reported, Earths Princes have passio
their Armies at need over Seas and deepe Torrents. Could Caesar so suddenly fetch over fresh forces from Europe to Asia Pompy to foyle? How much more shall Christ who createth all power, cll over this 900. league Ocean at his pleasure, such instruments as he thinks meete to make use of in this place, from whence you are now to depart, but further that you may not delay the Voyage in∣tended, for your full satisfaction, know this is the place where the Lord will create a new Heaven, and a new Earth in, new Churches, and a new Common-wealth together; Wherefore, CHAP. II. The Commission of the People of Christ shipped for New England, and first of their gathering into Churches. ATtend to your Commission, all you that are or shall here∣after be shipped for this service, yee are with all possible speed to imbarque your selves, and as for all such Worthies who are hunted after as David was by Saul and his Courtiers, you may change your habit and ship you with what secrecy you can, carrying all things most needfull for the Voyage and service you are to be imployed in after your landing. But as soone as you shall be exposed to danger of tempestious Seas, you shall forth∣with shew whose servants you are by calling on the Name of your God, sometimes by extraordinary seeking his pleasing Face in times of deepe distresse, and publishing your Masters will, and pleasure to all that Voyage with you, and that is his minde to have purity in Religion preferred above all dignity in the world; your Christ hath commanded the Seas they shall not swallow you, nor Pyrates imprison your persons, or possesse your goods. At your landing see you observe the Rule of his Word, for nei∣ther larger nor stricter Commission can hee give by any, and therefore at first filling the Land whither you are sent, with di∣ligence, search out the mind of God both in planting and conti∣nuing Church and civill Government, but be sure they be di∣stinct, yet agreeing and helping the one to the other; Let the matter and forme of your Churches be such as were in the Pri∣mitive Times (before Antichrists Kingdome prevailed) plainly
poynted out by Christ and his Apostles, in most of their Epistles to be neither Nationall nor Provinciall, but gathered together in Covenant of such a number as might ordinarily meete toge∣ther in one place, and built of such living stones as outwardly appeare Saints by calling. You are also to ordaine Elders in every Church, make you use of such as Christ hath indued with the best gifts for that end, their call to Office shall be mediate from you, but their authority and commission shall be immedi∣ate from Christ revealed in his word; which if you shall slight, dspise or contemne, hee will soone frustrate your call by taking the most able among you to honour with an everlasting Crown; whom you neglected to honour on Earth double as their due, or he will carry them remote from you to more infant Churches. You are not to put them upon anxious Cares for their daily Bread for assuredly (although it may now seeme strange) you shall be fed in this Wildernesse, whither you are to goe, with the flower of Wheate and Wine shall be plentifull among you (but be sure you abuse it not) these Doctrines delivered from the Word of God imbrace, and let not Satan delude you by per∣swading their learned skill is unnecessary, soone then will the Word of God be flghted as traslated by such, and you shall be left wildred with strange Revelations of every phantastick brain; which to prevent here are to be shipped among you many both Godly. Juditious and Learned, who CHAP. III. Of the Demeanor of their Church Officers. BEing called to Office are in all humility to feed the flock of Christ, and not for lucre to admit mostly of such sheepe, whose faire fleeces allure much: nor yet for filling the flocks to crowd in infections sheepe, or rather wolves in sheepes cloathing, assuredly it will prove bitternesse in the end: neither shall you for feare your allowance will fall short, hinder the increase of Churches, that so your fellow brethren indued with like gifts fal short of all; But above all beware of any love selfe∣conceited Opinion, stopping your eares from hearing the Coun∣sell of an Orthodox Synod, but by daily communication one
with another impart Christs minde each to other, that you may all speake one and the same things; heale not lightly the wounds that Wolves make, lest from their festering Teeth a Gangrin grow, and further for compleating the Churches of Christ as well in matters as in Doctrine, there are ancient experienced godly Christians shipped among you (but be sure you make choise of such, for feare they be despised) and let them not be led by fa∣vor or affection (as naturally men are) to Administer in your Office partially, for unworthy the name of a Ruling Elder is hee, who loses his Lyon-like courage, when the sound and whole∣some Doctrines delivered by Pastor or Teacher are spoken against by any; unseemly behaviour and sleepy hearing by private exhortation prevent (if possible) lest publick example in open pro∣fessors stumbe some and hinder the operation of his word, es∣pecially in the hearts of those who have bin long time led away with the inventions of man in the worshp of God. Be sure you contradict not but confirme with trienall love the Doctrines of Christ, delivered by your Teaching Elders, which will be a great meanes to make it prevaile, for a three-fold cord is not easily broken, trust not to your own gifts for preventing error, but use all helpes that Christ may blesse his own meanes, cast not away as incorrigible such as at first receive not the word in all points, but wait with patience if at any time the Lord will be pleased to give them a heart to turne unto him. Beware of a proud censorious spirit, and shoud Christ be pleased to place in his building more pollished stones then thy selfe, make it matter of rejoycing and not of envy. And further, because the Preaching of the word is to be continued with all diligence, here are like∣wise inbarked with you faithfull servants of Christ to attend on the Tables of the Churches, plaine-dealing men, yea, indued with wisdome from above, by which they are inabled to man∣nage and improve the Churches Treasury, not greedily given to hoord up for themselves, but by their own example leading others to liberality, and hospitality, having the Earth in low esteeme, and Faith in exercise when Cattell and Corne fayle, not given to magnifie their own gifts, but boldly maayning such sound truths as their Teaching Elders have cleared up from the word of God. And,
CHAP. IV. How the People in Christs Churches are to behave themselves. NOw you his People, who are pickt out by his, provide to passe this Westerne Ocean for this honorable service, be∣ware you call not weake ones to Office in this honorable Ar∣my, nor Novices, lest they be lifted up with pride. You see how full you are furnished for the worke, give no eare to any Braggadociaes, who to extoll themselves will weaken the hands of those whom Christ hath made strong for himselfe. Yea, such will be the phantasticall madnesse of some (if you take not heed) that silly Women laden with diverse lusts, will be had in higher esteeme with them, then those honoured of Christ, indued with power and authority from him to Preach; Abuse not the free and full liberty Christ hath given you in making choyce of your own Officers, and consent in admitting into his Churches, and casting out such Members as walke disorderly; you are to walke in all humility, lest in injoyment of such freedoms as you for∣merly have not exercised, you exceede the bounds of modesty, and instead of having your moderation knowne to all, your im∣becility, and selfe-exaltation bee discovered by many, in admis∣sion of others into Church society. Remember your selves were once Aliens from the Covenant of Grace, and in Excommuni∣cation, consider how your selves have been also tempted: in sin∣cerity and singlenesse of heart, let your words be few, do nothing be had in high esteeme among men; And thinke it no imputati∣on of a weake dicserning to be followes of those are set over you in the Lord as they follow Christ; Let your Profession out∣strip your Confession, for seeing you are to be set as lights upon a Hill more obvious then the highest Mountaine in the World, keepe close to Christ that you may shine full of his glory, who imployes you, and grub not continually in the Earth, like blind Moles, but by your amiable Conversation seeke the winning of many to your Masters service. Beware of a proud censorious spirit, make it no part of your Christian communication to be in continuall discourse of others faults; Let all things be done
in love, and looke not for more smoothnesse in stones as yet un∣placed in Christs building then is in thy selfe, who hast been long layd therein: wait with patience and cast not off as Reprobates such as cannot presently joyne with you in every poynt of Dis∣cipline, and yet hold fast to sound and wholesome Doctrine, if you will be a people to his prayse, who hath called you, seeke the turning of many to Righteousnesse, purge out all the sowre Leven of unsound Doctrine, for the minde of Christ is to build up his Churches, and breake them down no more; And there∣fore be sure there be none to hurt or destroy in all his holy Moun∣taine, and as he hath pressed you for his service, that by passing through the Flouds of Persecution you should be set at liberty, and have power put into your hands. Then let none wrest it from you under pretence of liberty of Conscience, men of per∣verse judgements will draw Disciples after them, but let your consciences be pure, and Christs Churches free from all Doctrines that deceive. And all you, who are or shall be shipped for this worke, thinke it not enough that you injoy the truth, but you must hate every false way and know you are called to be faith∣full Souldiers of Christ, not onely to assist in building up his Churches, but also in pulling downe the Kingdome of Anti-Christ, then sure you are not set up for tollerating times, nor shall any of you be content with this that you are set at liberty, but take up your Armes, and march manfully on till all opposers of Christs Kingly power be abolished: and as for you who are called to sound forth his silver Trumpets, blow lowd and shrill, to this chiefest treble tune; For the Armies of the great Jehovah are at hand. See you not his Enemies stretched out on tiptoe, proudly daring on their thresholds, a certaine signe of their sudden overthrow; be not danted at your small number, for every common Souldier in Christs Campe shall be as David, who slew the great Goliah, and his Davids shall be as the Angels of the Lord who slew. 185000. in the Assyrian Army. Finally, all you who are now sent forth by Christ your Je∣hovah to enter upon a Blessed Reformation, if ever you will have the honours to be provokers of his ancient People Israel (who are againe suddenly to be honoured by him in believing) kindle the fire of jealousy in their brests by your Holy, Heaven∣ly
and humble walking, have you not the most blessedest oper∣tunity put into your hands that ever people had? then CHAP. V. What Civill Government the People of Christ ought to set up, and submit unto in New England. FAyle not in prosecution of the Worke, for your Lord Christ hath furnished you with able Pilots, to steere the Helme in a godly peaceable, Civill Government also, then see you make choyce of such as are sound both in Profession and Confession, men fearing God and hating bribes; whose Commission is not onely limitted with the commands of the second Table, but they are to looke to the Rules of the first also, and let them be sure to put on Joshuas resolution, and courage, never to make League with any of these seven Sectaries. First, the Gortonists, who deny the Humanity of Christ, and most blasphemously and proudly professe themselves to be per∣sonally Christ. Secondly, the Papist, who with (almost) equall blasphemy and pride prefer their own Merits and Workes of Supereroga∣tion as equall with Christs unvaluable Death, and Sufferings. Thirdly, the Familist, who depend upon rare Revelations, and forsake the sure revealed Word of Christ. Fourthly, Seekers, who deny the Churches and Ordinances of Christ. Fifthly, Antinomians, who deny the Morrall Law to be the Rule of Christ. Sixtly, Anabaptists, who deny Civill Government to be proved of Christ. Seventhly, The Prelacy, who will have their own Injunctions submitted unto in the Churches of Christ. These and the like your Civill Censors shall reach unto that the people of, and un∣der your Government, may live a qulet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty, and to the end that you may provoke Kings, Princes, and all that are in authority to cast downe their Crownes at the Feet of Christ, and take them up againe at his
command to serve under his Standard as nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the Churches and people of Christ; when your feete are once safely set on the shores of America, you shall set up and establish civill Government, and pray for the prospe∣rity thereof, as you love the peace of his Churches, who hath cal∣led you to this service, he hath for that end shipped among you, some learned in the Law of God, and practised in rules of good reason or common Lawes proper to our English Nation. Be sure you make choyce of the right, that all people, Nations and Languages, who are soonly to submit to Christs Kingdome, may be followers of you herein, as you follow the Rule of Christ; your Magistrates shall not but open the Gates for all sorts. But know, they are Eyes of Restraint set up for Walles and Bul∣works, to surround the Sion of God; Oh for Jerusalem her peace, see that you mind it altogether, you know right well that the Churches of Christ have not thrived under the tolerating Government of Holland, from whence the Lord hath translated one Church already to the place whither you are now to goe; The Church of Christ at Plimoth was planted in New England, 8. Yeares be∣fore any o∣thers. and further it is well known, loose liberty cannot indure to looke Majesticall authority in the face. And also you shall finde er∣ronious persons will contend with authority for upholding truth irrationally, denying it any power to condemne deceiveable Doctrines, and that upon this very ground, because Tyranny hath inforced error heretofore; be not borne downe with a multi∣tude, neither let any flatter for preferment, which to prevent, honour shall be very chargeable among you; yet let not any de∣ny to beare the burden and cumber of governing this people of Christ; for assuredly, although their recompence fall short from man, it shall not be forgotten with the Lord. Lastly, CHAP. VI. How the People of Christ ought to behave themselves in War-like Discipline. YOu shall with all diligence provide against the Malignant adversaries of the truth, for assure your selves the time is at
hand wherein Antichrist will muster up all his Forces, and make war with the People of God: but it shall be to his utter over∣throw. See then you store your selves with all sorts of weapons for war, furbrish up your Swords, Rapiers, and all other piercing weapons. As for great Artillery, seeing present meanes falls short, waite on the Lord Christ, and hee will stir up friends to provide for you: and in the meane time spare not to lay out your coyne for Powder, Bullets, Match, Armes of all sorts, and all kinde Doctor Wil∣son gave 1000 l. to New Eng∣land, with which they stored them with great Guns. of Instruments for War: and although it may now seeme a thing incredible, you shall see in that Wildernesse, whither you are going, Troopes of stout Horsemen marshalled, and therefore fayle not to ship lusty Mares along with you, and see that withall dilligence you incourage every Souldier-like Spirit among you, for the Lord Christ intends to archieve greater matters by this little handfull then the World is aware of; wherefore you shall seeke and set up men of valour to lead and direct every Soulder among you, and with all diligence to instruct them from time to time. Feare not the misse of men to fill your Townes, and compleat your companies; for although at first struglings for truths ad∣vance there may but a small number appeare of sound judge∣ment: yet shall you not prefer any to Office, whose zeale is not strong for the truth, for now the minde of Christ is to put out the Name of Ammaleck from under Heaven (I meane such at have persecuted the Churches and People of Christ in their low condition) and assuredly unsound Saules will spare such as should not be saved from destruction. Then be strong and of a good courage (all you that are to fight the Lords Battaile) that your Faith faile not at sight of the great Armies of Gog and Magog: and as for you, who shall be preferred to highest places in his New England Regiments, cause your Captaine and other infe∣rior Officers to be diligent in their severall places, that you may lend helpe to your Countreymen, that ere long be will see a ne∣cessity of contending for the truth, as well as your selves in choyce of Military Officers; Let faithfulnesse to the cause in hand, courage, activity and skill have the prehemency of honours; for although it may seeme a meane thing to be a New England Souldier, yet some of you shall have the battering and bearing
down, sealing, winning and wasting the over-topping Towers of the Hierarchy; Lieutenants, Ensigne and Serjeants, exceed not your places, till Experience, Skill and true Valour promote you to higher honour, to which you shall be daily aspiring. As the worthy incouragement of a Souldiers labour, let Militay dis∣cipline be had in high esteeme among you. Gentlemen, Corpo∣ralls and fellow-Souldiers, keepe your weapons in a continuall readinesse, seeing you are called to fight the Battails of your Lord Christ; who must raigne till hee hath put all his enemies un∣der his Feet, his glorious Victories over Antichrist are at hand, never yet did any Souldier rejoyce in dividing the spoyle after Victory, as all the Souldiers of Christ shall, to see his judgement executed upon the great Whore, and withall the Lambs bride prepared for him, who comes Skipping over & trampling down the great Mountaines of the Earth, whose universall Govern∣ment will then appeare glorious, when not onely the Assyrian, Babilonian, Persian, Grecian and Roman Monarchies shall sub∣ject themselves unto him, but also all other new upstart King∣domes, Dukedomes, or what else can be named, shall fall before him; Not that he shall come personally to Reigne upon Earth (as some vainly imagine) but his powerfull Presence and Glo∣rious brightnesse of his Gospell both to Jew and Gentile, shall not onely spiritually cause the Churches of Christ to grow beyond number, but also the whole civill Government of people upon Earth shall become his, so that there shall not be any to move the hand, not dog his tongue against his chosen, And then shall the time be of breaking Speares into Mattocks, and Swords into Sithes; and this to remaine to his last comming, which will be personally to overcome the last enemies of his Saints, even death, which hee will doe by the word of his Mouth, audibly spoken the World throughout. Then all you, who are now, or shall hereafter be shipped for this Voyage, minde the worke of Christ, and not some follow∣ing raigne, titles of honour, others eying the best Grasse-platts and best Situation for Farmes and large Accommodations, crouding our Gods people from sitting down among you. Where∣fore above all beware of covetousnesse; all you that will be ad∣mitted into these selct Bands of Christ Jesus, remember Achan,
whereas Rams Hornes could overthrow the high and strong walles of Jericho, before his theft committed, after it the little number of the men of Ai could put the Host of the living God to flight, see then you stand upon your watch continually in the strength of Christ, for assuredly instead of casting downe the enemies of Christ, thissin will cast down you utterly, disinable you for striking one stroke in the cause of Christ; and whereas he hath purposely pickt ou this People for a patterne of purity and soundnesse of Doctrine, as well as Discipline, that all such may finde a refuge among you, and let not any Merchants, In∣keepers, Taverners and men of Trade in hope of gaine, fling open the gates so wide, as that by letting in all sorts you mar the worke of Christ intended: neither shall such labourers as hee hath pickt out to be Pyoneers in this Campe of his, drinke up like Spunges such meanes as hee hath sent to maintaine both Officers, and private Souldiers. Lastly, let not such as fight, set foote on Land to compose Townes for Habitations, take up large accommodations for sale, to inrich themselves with others goods, who are to follow them, but freely as you have received, so give out to others: for so soone as you shall seeke to ingrosse the Lords wast into your hands, he will ease you of your burden by making stay of any farther resort unto you, and then be sure you shall have wast Land enough. To this Commission was added a strong motive to this work as followeth: Namely, the great enmity betweene that on truth as it is in Jesus, and all other unsound and undeceiveable Doctrines, together with the persons that hold them; insomuch, that they cannot stand in one Common-wealth long together, as sixteene hundred yeares experience will testifie, the which Moses layes down as one maine reason, why he might not admit of a toleration to worship God in Egypt. And therefore all you that believe the Scripture, which so plainly prophecy the destruction of Antichrist and all Antichristian Doctrines; Pray, pray, pray, pray continually with that valiant worthy Joshua that the Sun may stand still in Gibeon, and the Moone in the vally of Aijalon, for assuredly although some small battailes may be fought against the enemies of Christ, yet the great day of their finall overthrow shall not come till the bright Sonne of that one cleare
truth of Christ, stand still in the Gentile Churches, that those who fight the Lords Battells may plainly discerne his enemies in all places, where they finde them, as also such as will continue fight∣ing must have the World kept low in their eyes, as the Moon in the valley of Aijalon. CHAP. VII. Of the goodnesse of God in helping his People to a large liberty in Spirituall things, under the hopes of gaine in Earthly things. THis Proclamation being audibly published through the Ile of Great Brittaine by sundry Herraulds, which Christ had prepared for that end: the rumour ran through Cities, Townes and Villages; when those that were opposites heard it, some cried one thing, and some another, much like the umult in the Town. hall at Ephesus, some said let them goe, others cryed, sweare them first, others said let no Subsidy men passe, others would have strict search made for non-conformants, and that none of the late silenced Ministers might passe into the Ships; Amidst this great hurry the sincere servants of Christ humbly seeke the Lords assistance in days of Humiliation, taking up some serious cogi∣tations, how to begin this worthy worke, upon which it was thought meete a patterne should be procured, comprised after the manner of a Corporation-company or Brotherhood, with as large liberty for government of this Association, as could be got under the Broad Seale of England, which accordingly was done by advise of one Mr. White an honest Counsellor at Law, as also furthered by the honoured Mr. Richard Belinham, and un∣der the name of many worthy personages, as Governour, Dep. Gov. Assistant and Freemen &c. Granted, Ingrossed and Sealed as holding of the manner of East Greenwitch, yeelding by way of homage the sixth part of all such Ore of Gold or Silver, as might for after time be found within the Limits of the said Grant bounded on the North, with the most Northerly part of the pleasant River of Merimech, one mile beyond, and on the South with the most Southern part of that oft frequented River
commonly called Charles, one mile beyond with power to rule and govern in all those parts both by Sea and Land; To lect and set up all sorts of Officers, as well Superior as Inerior; to point out their power and places, to defend and maintaine the said Land, and Inhabitants thereof with all their lawfull liberties (against all such as at any time should Invade, Molest or Disturbe the same) as well by offensive as defensive War, as also to con∣stitute and ordaine Lawes, &c. Thus these Souldiers of Jesus Christ prepared to advance his Kingly Government, much like Samuel, when he went to annoynt David, took up another errant, with∣all that the Malignant spirit of Saul might not hinder the worke, so those Worthies of Christ joyning themselves with Merchants and others, who had an eye at a profitable Plantation, who had not herein been deceived would they have stayed their time, but surely such mist not their marke, whose ayme was at the durable interest, unlesse the fault were their owne, neither let any man thinke Christ will not recompence those one way or other, who have been any way helpfull to his people in this his work; amongst whom the Author will not misse that good Gentleman, Matthew Craddock by the way of thankfullnesse to him, Mr. Goff and others this Verse is tendred: For richest Jems and gainfull things most Merchants wisely venter: Deride not then New England men, this Corporation nter; Christ calls for Trade shall never fade, come Craddock factors send: Let Mayew go and other more, spare not thy coyne to spend; Suck Trades advance did never chance, in all thy Trading yet: Though some deride thy losse, abide, her's gaine beyond mans wit. CHAP. VIII. Of the wonderfull Preparation the Lord Christ by his Providence, wrought for his peoples abode in this Western world. NOw let all men know the admirable Acts of Christ for his Churches, and chosen, are universally over the whole Earth at one and the same time, but sorry man cannot so discourse of them; And therefore let us leave our English Nation in way
of preparation for this Voyage intended, and tell of the marve∣lous doings of Christ preparing for his peoples arrivall in the Western World, whereas the Indians report they beheld to their great wonderment that perspicuous bright blzing Comet (which was so famously noted in Europe) anon after Sun set it appear∣ed as they say in the South-west, about three houres continuing in their Horizon, for the space of thirty sleepes (for so they reckon their dayes) after which uncouth sight they expected some strange things to follow, and the rather, because not long before the whole Nation of the Mattachusets were so affrighted with a Ship that arrived in their Bay, having never seene any before, thus they report some persons among them discerning a great thing to move toward them upon the Waters, wondering what Creature it should be, they run with their light cannowes, (which are a kinde of Beates made of Birch Rindes, and sowed together with the rootes of white Cedar-Trees) from place to place, stir∣ing up all their Countreymen to come forth, and behold this monstrous thing; at this sudden news the shores for many miles were filled with this naked Nation, gazing at this wonder, till some of the stoutest among them manned ou these Cannowes, being armed with Bow and Arrowes, they approached within shot of the Ship, being becalmed they let fly their long shfs at her, which being headed with bone some stuck fast, and others dropped into the water, they wondering it did not cry, but kept quietly on toward them, till all of a sudden the Master caused a piece of Ordnance to be fired, which stroke such feare into the poore Indians, that they hasted to shore, having their wonders exceedingly increased; but being gotten among their great mul∣titude, they waited to see the sequell with much amazement, till the Seamen filing up their salies came to an Anchor, mannedout their long bote, and went on shore, at whose approach, the In∣dians sled, although now they saw they were men, who made signes to stay their flight, that they may have Trade with them, and to that end they brought certaine Copper-Kettles; the Indians by degrees made their approach nearer and nearer till they came to them, when beholding their Vessells, which they had set forth before them, the Indian knocking them were much delighted with the sound, and much more astonished to see they would
not breake, being so thin, for attaining those Vessells they brought them much Bever, fraughting them richly away according to their desires, this was the first working providence of Christ to stir up our English Nation, to plant these parts in hope of a rich Trade for Bever-skins, and this made some of our Countrymen make their abode in these parts, whom this Army of Christ at their comming over found as fit helps to further their designe in planting the Churches of Christ; Who by a more admirable act of his Providence not long after prepared for his peoples arrivall as followeth. The Summer after the blazing Starre (whose motion in the Heavens was from East to West, poynting out to the sons of men the progresse of the glorious Gospell of Christ, the glorious King of his Churches) even about the yeare 1618. a little before the removeall of that Church of Christ from Holland to Plimoth in New England, as the ancient Indians report, there befell a great mortality among them, the greatest that ever the memory of Fa∣ther to Sonne tooke notice of, chiefly desolating those places, where the English afterward planted the Country of Pokanoky, Agssawamg, it was almost wholy deserted, insomuch that the Neighbour Indians did abandon those places for feare of death, fleeing more West & by South, observing the East and by Northern parts were most smitten with this contagion, the Abarginny▪ men consisting of Mattachusets, Wippanaps and Tarratines were great∣ly weakned, and more especially the three Kingdomes, or Sag∣gamore ships of the Mattachusets, who were before this mor∣tality most populous, having under them seven Dukedomes or petty Saggamores, and the Nianticks and Narrowganssits, who before this came were but of little note, yet were they now not much increased by such as fled thither for feare of death, the Pecods (who retained the Name of a war-like people, till af∣terwards conquered by the English) were also smitten at this time. Their Disease being a sore Consumption, sweeping away whole Families, but chiefly yong Men and Children, the very seeds of increase, their Powwowes, which are their Doctors, work∣ing partly by Charmes, and partly by Medicine, were much a∣mazed to see their Wigwams lie full of dea Corpes, and that now neither Squantam nor Abbamocho could helpe, which are
their good and bad God and also their Powwows themselves were oft smitten with deaths stroke, howling and much lamentation was heard among the living, who being possest with great feare, oftimes left their dead unburied, their manner being such, that they remove their habitations at death of any, this great mortali∣ty being an un vonted thing, feare them the more, because na∣turally the Country is very healthy. But by this meanes Christ (whose great and glorious workes the Earth throughout are al∣together for the benefit of his Churches and chosen) not onely made roome for his people to plant; but also tamed the hard and cruell hearts of these barbarous Indians, insomuch that halfe a handfull of his people landing not long after in Plimoth-Plantation, found little resistance, of whom the Author purposes not to speake particularly, being prevented by the honoured Mr. Winslow, who was an eye-witnesse of the worke: onely thus much by the way, they were sent to keepe possession for their Brethren and fellow Souldiers, who arrived eight yeares after them, as in processe of this story will God-willing appeare: and verily herein they quit themselves like men, or rather Christ for and by them, maintaining the place notwithstanding the multi∣tude of difficulties they met withall at their first landing, being in doubtfull suspence what intertainment these Barbarians would give them, having with prayer supplicated the Lord in the Name of Christ their King and guide in this their undertaking, they manned out a Boate to discover what store of the Inhabitants were there. Now these men, whose courage exceeded the num∣ber, being guided by the provident hand of the most high, landed in some severall places; and by making fires gave signes of their approach, now the Indians, whose dwellings are most neer the water side, appeared with their Bowes bent and Arrowes one the string, let fly their long shifts among this little company, whom they might soon have inclosed, but the Lord otherwise disposed of it, for one Captaine Miles Standish having his fowl∣ing-peece in a reddinesse, presented full at them, his shot being directed by the provident Hand of the most high God, strook the stourest Sachem among them one the right Arme, it being bent over his shoulder to reach an Arrow forth his Qiver, as their manner is to draw them forth in fight, at this stroke they
all fled with great swiftnesse through the Woods and Thickets, then the English, who more thirsted after their conversion than destruction, returned to their Bote without receiving any dam∣age, and soon after arrived where they left their Brethren, to whom they declared the good hand of God toward them, with thankfull acknowledgement of this great worke of his in pre∣serving them; Yet did they all remaine full of incumbred thoughts, the Indians, of whose multitudes they had now some intelligence, together with experience of spirits, and also knew well without commerce with them they were not like long to subsist. But hee, whose worke they went about, wrought so rare a Providence for them, which cannot but be admired of all that heare it. Thus it befell as they were discoursing in the Bote they had built for shelter, all of a sudden an Indian came in among them, at whose speech they were all agast, he speaking in the English Language, Much welcome Englishmen, their wonder was the greater, because upon those Costes they supposed no English had so much as set foote, and verily Christ had prepared him on purpose to give his people intertainment, the Indian having li∣ved in England two year or thereabout, after which he returned home, and at this time had wandred into those parts in compa∣ny of other Indians, all this, and the condition of the neere adjoy∣ning Indians, hee soon discovered unto them, at which they were transported beyond themselves very much, what with joy and the mixture of their former feare and affection intervening with the other, surprised all their senses of a sudden, that long it was ere each party could take its proper place, yea, and beyond all this Christ Jesus, by the power of his blessed Spirit, did now work upon all their faculties both of Soule and Body, the great im∣pression of his present Providence might not soon be washed off with the following incumbred cares of a Defart Wildernesse; but to contract, they made use of the present opprotunity, and by the instrumentall meanes of this Indian, became acquainted and reconciled with most of the Neighbouring Indians. And af∣terward planted a Church of Christ there, and set up civill Go∣vernment, calling the Name of the place Plimoth: under this jurisdiction there are ten Churches at this very day, this being the
first place any English resorted unto for the advancement of the Kingly Government of Christ in this Westerne World. CHAP. IX. Of the first preparation of the Marchant Adventurers, in the Mattachusets. NOw it will be time to returne againe to England, to speake further of the people that wee left in way of preparation; who in the yeare 1628. sent forth some store of servants to pro∣vide against the wants of a Desart Wildernesse, amongst whom came over a mixt multitude, insomuch that very little appeared of the following worke, onely the much honoured Mr. John In∣dicat, came over with them to governe, a fit instrument to be∣gin this Wildernesse-worke, of courage bold undanted, yet soci∣able, and of a chearfull spirit, loving and austere, applying him∣selfe to either as occasion served. And now let no man be offen∣ded at the Authors rude Verse, penned of purpose to keepe in memory the Names of such worthies as Christ made strong for himselfe, in this unwonted worke of his. John Endicat twice Governour of the English, inhabiting the Mattachusets Bay in N. England. STrong valiant John wilt thou march on, and take up station first, Christ cal'd hath thee, his Souldier be, and faile not of thy trust; Wilderness-wants Christs grace supplants, thē plant his Churches pure, With Tongues gifted, and graces led, help thou to his procure; Ʋndanted thou wilt not allow, Malignant men to wast: Christs Vineyard heere, whose grace should cheer, his well-beloved's tast. Then honoured be thy Christ hath thee their Generall promoted: To shew their love, in place above, his people have thee voted. Yet must thou fall, to grave with all the Nobles of the Earth, Thou rotting Worme to dust must turn, and worse but for new birth. The place picked out by this People to settle themselves in, was in the bosome of the out-stretched arme of Cape Anne, now
called Gloster, but at the place of their abode they began to build a Town, which is called Salem, after some little space of time having made tryall of the Sordid spirits of the Neighbouring Indians, the most bold among them began to gather to divers places, which they began to take up for their owne, those that were sent over servants, having itching desires after novelties, found a reddier way to make an end of their Masters provision, then they could finde meanes to get more; They that came over their own men had but little left to feed on, and most began to repent when their strong Beers and full cups ran as small as wa∣ter in a large Land, but little Corne, and the poore Indians so far from relieving them, that they were forced to lengthen out their owne food with Acorns, and that which added to their present distracted thoughts, the Ditch betweene England and their now place of abode was so wide, that they could not leap over with a lope-staffe, yet some delighting their Eye with the rarity of things present, and feeding their fancies with new dis∣coveries at the Springs approach, they made shift to rub out the Winters cold by the Fire-side, having fuell enough growing at their very doores, turning down many a drop of the Bottell, and burning Tobacco with all the ease they could, discoursing be∣tweene one while and another, of the great progresse they would make after the Summers-Sun had changed the Earths white furr'd Gowne into a greene Mantell. Now the vernall of thirty nine being come, they addrest themselves to coste it as far as they durst for feare of loosing themselves, or falling into the hands of unknown Indians, being kept in awe by a report of a cruell people, not far of called the Tarratines. All this while little like-lihood there was building the Temple for Gods worship, there being only two that began to hew stones in the Mountaines, the one named Mr. Bright, and the other Mr. Blaxton, and one of them began to build, but when they saw all sorts of stones would not fit in the building, as they supposed, the one betooke him to the Seas againe, and the other to till the Land, retaining no simbole of his former profession, but a Canonicall Coate.
CHAP. X. Of the first Church of Christ, gathered at Salem in the Mattachusets Government. THis yeare 1629. came over three godly Ministers of Christ Jesus, intending to shew his power in his peoples lowest condition as his manner is, thereby to strengthen their Faith in following difficulties, and now although the number of the faith∣full people of Christ were but few, yet their longing desires to gather into a Church was very great; And therefore addressed themselves to finde out the blessed Rules of Christ for preserving herein, who through the assistance of his Blessed Spirit, found that the Word of God, penned by the Apostles in many Epistles, written to particular Churches, consisting of such as are beloved. Saints, by calling appearing so in the judgement of Charity, being tryed by the rule of the word, not scandalous in their Lives, for the society of such they sought, and in these beginnings found ve∣ry few, seven being the lest number a Church can be gathered, or conceived by just consequence from the Word of God. Having fasted and prayed with humble acknowledgement of their own unworthinesse to be called of Christ to so worthy a worke, they joyned together in a holy Covenant with the Lord, and one with another promising by the Lords Assistance to walke toge∣ther in Exhorting, Admonishing, and Rebuking one another, and to cleave to the Lord with a full purpose of heart, accord∣ing to the blessed Rules of his Word made known unto them, and further they seeing by light of Scripture the Lord Christ a∣scended up on high to give gifts unto men, not onely extraordi∣nary as Apostles, &c. before the Canon of the Scripture was perfected but also ordinary as Pastors and Teachers, and that such are to be fitted with gifts according, for so mighty a worke, as is the Feeding and Ruling the Flock of Christ. Wherefore they Elected and Ordained one Mr. Higgingson to be Tracher of this first Church of Christ, set up in those parts, a man indued with grace apt to teach, and mighty in the Scriptures, Learned in the Tongues, able to convince gain-sayers, aptly applying the word to his hearers, who departed this life not long after, of whom it may be said.
The Reverend Mr. Higgingson, first Pastor of the Church of Christ at Salem in New England. WHat Golden gaine made Higginson remove, From fertill Soyle to Wildernesse of Rocks; 'Twas Christs rich Pearle stir'd up thee toile to love, For him to feed in Wildernesse his flocks. First Teacher, he here Sheepe and Lambs together, First crownd shall be, hee in the Heavens of all, Christs Pastors here, but yet Christ folke had rather, Him here retaine, blest he whom Christ hath call'd. They also called to the Office of an Exhorting Elder Mr. Scel∣ton, a man of a gratious Speech, full of Faith and furnished by the Lord with gifts from above, to begin this great worke of his, that makes the whole Earth to ring againe at this pre∣sent day. The Reverend Mr. Scelton first Pastor of the Church of Christ, at Salem in New England, 1630. SCelton for Christ did leave his Native soile, Christ Grace first wrought for him, or he had never A Pastor been in Wildernesse to toile, Where Christ his Flock doth into Churches gather; For five yeares space to end thy war-faire thou, Must meete with wantes, what wants can be to him? Whose Shepheard's Christ Earths fullnesse hath for you; And Heavens rich Crowne for thee, with's conquest win. This Church of Christ, being thus begun, the Lord with the Water spouts of his tender Mercy caused to increase and fructi∣fy. And now let every Eare listen, and every heart admire, and inlarge it selfe to the astonishment of the whole man at this wonderous worke of the great Jehovah; That in thrice seven yeares (after the beginning of this Worke) wrought such fear∣full Desolations, and wonderfull Alterations among our English
Nation, and also in this dismall Desart, wasting the naturall In∣habitant with deaths stroke, and that as is former touched, the Mattachusets, who were a populous Nation, consisting of 30000 able men, now brought to lesse then 300. and in their roome and place of abode this poore Church of Christ consisting at their beginning, but of seven persons, increased to forty three Churches in joyne Communion one with the other, professing One God, One Christ, and one Gospell, and in those Churches about 7750. Soules in one profession of the Rules of Christ, and that which makes the worke more admirable in the Eyes of all beholders, mens habitations are cut out of the Woods and Bushes, neither can this place be entered by our English Nation, but by passing through a dreadfull and terrible Ocean of nine hundred Leagues in length. CHAP. XI. Of the Glorious beginnings of a thorough Reformation in the Churclses of Clorist. FUrther know these are but the beginnings of Christs glorious Reformation, and Restauration of his Churches to a more glorious splendor than ever. Hee hath therefore caused their dazeling brightnesse of his presence to be contracted in the bur∣ning Glasse of these his peoples zeale, from whence it begins to be left upon many parts of the World with such hot reflecti∣on of that burning fight, which hath fired many places already, the which shall never be quenched till it hath burnt up Babilon Root and Branch, and now let the Reader looke one the 102. Psalme, the Prophet Isaia 66. Chapter, take this sharpe Sword of Christs Word, and all other Scriptures of like nature, and fol∣low on yee valiant of the Lord; And behold the worthies of Christ, as they are boldly leading forth his Troopes into these Westerne Fields, marke them well Man by Man as they march, terrible as an Army with Banners, croud in all yee that long to see this glorious sight, see ther's their glorious King Christ one that white Horse, whose hooses like flint cast not only sparkes, but flames of fire in his pates. Behold his Crown be∣set
with Carbunkles, wherein the names of his whole Army are written. Can there be ever night in his Presence, whose eyes are ten thousand times higher than the Sun? Behold his swiftnes all you that have said, where is the promise of his comming? Listen a while, hear what his herauld proclaimes, Babylon is sallen, is fallen, both her Doctrine & Lordly rabble of Popes, Cardinalls, Lordly-Bshops, Friers, Monks, Nuns, Seminary-Priests, Je∣suits, Ermites, Pilgrims, Deans, Prebends, Arch-Deacons, Commissaries, Officialls, Proctors, Somners, Singing-men, Choristers, Organist, Bellows-blowers, Vergers, Porters, Sex∣tons, Beads-men, and Bel-ringers and all others who never had name in the Word of God; together with all her false Doctrines, although they may seeme otherwise never so contradictory as Arians, who deny the God-head of Christ, and Gortenists, who deny the Humanity of Christ: Papists, who thinke to merit Heaven by the Workes of the Law, Antinomians, who deny the Law of God altogether as a rule to walke by in the obedience of Faith, and deny good works to be the Frutit of Faith, Arminians, who attribute Gods Election, or Reprobation to the will of Man, and Familists, who forsake the revealed Will of God, and make men depend upon strong Revelations, for the knowledge of Gods Electing Love towards them. Conformitants o Formalists, who bring in a forme of worship of their owne, and joyne it with the worship God hath appointed in his Word Seekers, that deny all manner of worship or Ordinances of Christ Jesus, affirming them to be quite lost, and not to be attained till new Apostles come. CHAP. XII. Of the voluntary banishment, chosen by this People of Christ, and their last farewell taken of their Country and Friends. ANd now behold the severall Regiments of these Souldiers of Christ, as they are shipped for his service in the Western World, part thereof being come to the Towne and Port of Southamptan in England, where they were to be shipped, that
they might prosecute this designe to the full, one Ship called the Eagle, they wholy purchase, and many more they hire, filling them with the seeds of man and beast to sow this yet untilled Wildernesse withall, making sale of such Land as they possesse, to the great admiration of their Friends and Acquaintance, who thus expostulate with them, What, will not the large income of your yearly revenue content you, which in all reason cannot chuse but be more advantagious both to you and yours, then all that Rocky Wildernesse, whither you are going, to run the hazard of your life? Have you not here your Tables filled with great variety of Foode, your Coffers filled with Coyne, your Houses beautifully built and filled with all rich Furniture? (or otherwise) have you not such a gainfull Trade as none the like in the Towne where you live? Are you not inriched daily? Are not your Children very well provided for as they come to years? (nay) may you not here as pithily practise the two chiefe Du∣ties of a Christian (if Christ give strength) namely Mortificati∣on and Sanct fication as in any place of the World? What helps can you have there that you must not carry from hence? With bold resolvednesse these stout Souldiers of Christ reply; as Death, the King of terror with all his dreadfull attendance inhu∣mane and barbarous, tortures doubled and trebled by all the in∣fernall furies have appeared but light and momentany to the Souldiers of Christ Iesus, so also the Pleasure, Profits and Ho∣nours of this World set forth in their most glorious splend or, and magnitude by the alluring Lady of Delight, proffering pleasant embraces, cannot intice with her Syren Songs, such Souldiers of Christ, whose aymes are elevated by him, many Millions above that brave Warrier Vlysses. Now seeing all can be said will but barely set forth the im∣moveable Resolutions that Christ continued in these men; Passe on and attend with teares, if thou hast any, the following dis∣course, while these Men, Women and Children are taking their last farwell of their Native Country, Kindred, Friends and Ac∣quaintance, while the Ships attend them; Many make choise of some solitary place to eccho out their bowell-breaking affections in bidding their Friends farwell, deare friends (sayes one) as neare as my owne soule doth thy love lodge in my brest, with
thought of the heart burning Ravishments, that thy Heavenly speeches have wrought: my melting soule is poured out at present with these words, both of them had their farther speach stran∣gled from the depth of their inward dolor, with breast-breaking sobs, till leaning their heads each on others shoulders, they let fall the salt-dropping dews of vehement affection, striving to exceede one another, much like the departure of David and Jonathan: having a little eased their hearts with the still streames of Teares, they recovered speech againe. Ah! my much ho∣noured friend, hath Christ given thee so great a charge as to be Leader of his People into that far remote, and vast Wildernesse, I, oh, and alas thou must die there and never shall I see thy Face in the flesh againe, wert thou called to so great a taske as to passe the pretious Ocean, and hazard thy person in Battell against thousands of Malignant Enemies there? there were hopes of thy return with triumph, but now after two three, or foure moneths spent with daily expectation of swallowing Waves, and cruell Pirates, you are to be Landed among barbarous Indians, famous for nothing but cruelty, where you are like to spend your days in a famishing condition for a long space; Scarce had he utter∣ed this, but presently hee lockes his friend fast in his armes, hold∣ing each other thus for some space of time, they weepe againe, But as Paul to his beloved flock: the other replies what doe you weeping and breaking my heart? I am now prest for the service of our Lord Christ, to re-build the most glorious Edifice of Mount Sion in a Wildernesse, and as John Baptist, I must cry prepare yee the way of the Lord, make his paths strait, for be∣hold hee is comming againe, hee is comming to destroy Anti∣christ, and give the whore double to drinke the very dregs of his wrath. Then my deare friend unfold thy hands, for thou and I have much worke to doe, I and all Christian Souldiers the World throughout▪ then hand in hand they leade each other to the San∣dy-banks of the brinish Ocean, when clenching their hands fast, they unloose not til inforced to wipe their watery-eyes, whose constant streames forced a watery-path upon their Cheekes, which to hide from the eyes of others they shun society for a time, but being called by occasion, whose bauld back-part none
can lay hold one; They thrust in among the throng now ready to take Ship, where they beheld the like affections with their own among divers Relations, Husbands and Wives with mu∣tuall consent are now purposed to part for a time 900 Leagues asunder, since some providence at present will not suffer them to goe together, they resolve their tender affections shall not hinder this worke of Christ, the new Married and betrothed man, exempt by the Law of God from war, now will not claime their priviledge, but being constrained by the Love of Christ, lock up their naturall affections for a time, till the Lord shall be plea∣sed to give them a meeting in this Westerne World, sweetly mix∣ing it with spirituall love, in the meane time many Fathers now take their yong Samuells, and give them to this service of Christ all their Lives. Brethren, Sisters, Unkles, Nephewes, Neeces, together with all Kindred of bloud that binds the bowells of affection in a true Lovers knot, can now take their last farewell, each of other, although naturall affection will still claime her right, and manifest her selfe to bee in the body by looking out at the Windowes in a mournefull manner among this company, thus disposed doth many Reverend and godly Pastors of Christ present themselves, some in a Seamans Habit, and their scattered sheepe comming as a poore Convoy loftily take their leave of them as followeth, what dolefull dayes are these, when the best choise our Orthodox Ministers can make is to take up a perpetuall banishment from their na∣tive soile, together with their Waves and Children, wee their poore sheepe they may not feede, but by stoledred should they abide here. Lord Christ, here they are at thy command, they go, this is the doore thou hast opened upon our earnest request, and we hope it shall never be shut: for Englands sake they are going from England to pray without ceasing for England, O England! thou shalt finde New England prayers prevailing with their God for thee, but now woe alas, what great hardship must these our indeared Pastors indure for a long season, with these words they life up their voyces and wept, adding many drops of sale liquor to the ebbing Ocean; Then shaking hands they bid a∣due with much cordiall affection to all their Brethren, and Sisters in Christ, yet now the Scorne and Derifion of those times,
and for this their great enterprise counted as so many crackt. braines, but Christ will make all the Earth know the wisdome he hath indued them with, shall over-top all the humane policy in the World, as the sequell wee hope will shew; Thus much shall suffice in generall to speak of their peoples farewell they tooke from time to time of their Country and Friends. CHAP. XIII. Of the charges expended by this poore People, to injoy Christ in his purity of his Ordinances. ANd now they enter the Ships, should they have cast up what it would have cost to people New England before hand, the most strongest of Faith among them would certainly have staggered much, and very hardly have set saile. But behold and wonder at the admirable Acts of Christ, here it is cast up to thy hand, the passage of the persons that peopled New Eng∣land cost ninety five thousand pounds, the Swine, Goates, Sheepe, Neate and Horse, cost to transport twelve thousand pound, be∣sides the price they cost, getting food for all persons for the time till they could bring the Woods to tillage amounted unto forty five thousand pounds; Nayles, Glasse and other Iron∣worke for their meeting-houses, and other dwelling houses be∣fore they could raise any meanes in the Country to purchase them, Eighteene thousand pounds. Armes, Powder, Bullet and Match, together with their great Artillery, twenty two thou∣sand pounds: the whose sum amounts unto one hundred ninety two thousand pound, beside that which the Adventurers laid out in England, which was a small pittance compared with this, and indeed most of those that cast into this Banke were the chiefe Adventurers. Neither let any man thinke the sum above expres∣sed did defray the whole chrge of this Army, which amounts to above as much more, onely this sum lies still in banke, and the other they have had the income agains; This therefore is chiefly presented to satisfie such as thinke New England men have beene bad husbands in mannaging their Estates, assuredly
here it lies in banke, put out to the greatest advantage that ever any hath beene for many hundred of yeares before, and verily although in casting it up some hundreds may be miscounted (for the Author would not willingly exceede in any respect) but to be sure Christ stands by and beholds every mite that (in the obedience of Faith) is cast into this Treasury: but what doe wee answering men? the money is all Christs, and certainly hee will take it well that (his) have so disposed of it to his advantage; by this meanes hee hath had a great income in England of late, Prayers, Teares and Praise, and some Reformation; Scotland and Ireland have met with much of the profit of this Banke, Virginia, Bermodas and Barbados have had a taste, and France may suddenly meete with the like. Therefore repent you not, you that have cast in your Coyne, but tremble all you that with a penurious haud have not onely cast, in such as are taking out to hord it up in your Napkins, remember Ananias and Sa∣phirah, how darest thou doe it in these dayet, when the Lord hath need of it? Gentle Reader make use of this memorable Providence of Christ for his New England Churches, where had this poore people this great sum of money? the mighty Princes of the Earth never opened their Coffers for them, and the ge∣nerality of these men were meane and poore in the things of this life, but sure it is the work is done, let God have the glory, who hath now given them food to the full, and some to spare for other Churches. CHAP. XIV. Of the wonderfull preservation of Christ, in carrying his People. Men, Women, Children, through the largest Ocean in the World. ANd now you have had a short survay of the charges of their New England Vayages, see their progresse being safe aboard weighing Anker, and hoysting saile they betooke them to the protection of the Lord on the wide Ocean, no sooner were they dispersed by reason of the widenesse of the Sea, but the Arrabella (for so they called the Eagle, which the compa∣ny
purchased in honour of the Lady Arrabella, Wife to that godly Esquire, Izack Johnson) espied foure Ships, as they sup∣posed, in pursuit of them, their suspition being the more aug∣mented by reason of a report (when they lay in harbor) of foure Dunkerk-men of war, who were said to lie wating for their comming forth, at this sight they make preparation, ac∣cording to their present condition, comforting one another in the sweete mercies of Christ: the weaker sex betooke them to the Ships hold, but the men one Decks waite in a readinesse for the enemies approach. At whose courage many of the Seamen wonder, not knowing under whose command these their passen∣gers were, even he who makes all his Souldiers bold as Lions, Yet was he not minded to make triall of his peoples valiantey in fight at this time, for the ships comming up with them proved to be their own Countrymen and friends, at which they greatly rejoyced, seeing the good hand of their God was upon them, and are further strengthened in Faith to rely one Christ, for the future time against all Leakes, Stormes, Rockes, Sands, and all other wants a long Sea-voyage procures, sustaining them with a I meeknesse and patience, yet sensible of the Lords frownes, humbling their soules before him, and also rejoyeing in his de∣liverauces in taking the cup of Salvation, and paying the tribute of thankfulnesse to the most high, whose provident hand was diversly directed toward them, purposely to point out the great hardships they must undergoe in this their Christian warfare, and withall to tell them, although their difficulties were many and moumfull, yet their victories shou'd be much more glorious and joyfull, eminently eyed of the whole World, but now keeping their course so neere as the winds will suffer them, the billowes begin to grow lofty and rageing, and suddenly bringing them into the vale of death, covering them with the formidable flouds, and dashing their bodies from side to side, hurling their unfixed goods from place to place at these unwonted workes. Many of these people amazed finde such opposition in nature, that her principles grow feeble, and cannot digest her food, loathing all manner of meat, so that the vitall parts are hindered from co∣operating with the Soule in spirituall duties, insomuch that both Men, Women and Children are in a helplesse condition
for present, and now is the time if ever of recounting this service they have, and are about to undertake for Christ; but he, who is very sensible of his peoples infirmities, rebukes the winds, and Seas for their sakes, and then the reverend and godly among them begin to exhort them in the name of the Lord, and from the Lord, being fitted with such words as much incourrages the worke they are going about, many of their horses and other Cattell are cast over-board by the way, to the great disheartning of some, but Christ knew well how for his peoples hearts would be taken off the maine worke with these things. And therefore although he be very tender in providing outward necessaries for his, yet rather than this great worke (he intends) should be hin∣dered, their Tables shall be spred but thinly in this wildernesse for a time. After the Lord had exercised them thus severall ways, he sent Diseases to visit their Ships, that the desart Land they were now drawing near unto might not be deserted by them at first enterance, which sure it would have been by many, had not the Lord prevented by a troublesom passage: At forty dayes end, or thereabout, they cast to sound the Seas depth, and find them sixty fadom, by which they deem the bankes of New sound Land are near, where they being provided with Cod-line and Hooke hale up some store of fish to their no small refreshing, and within some space of time after they approach the Cost of New England, where they are againe provided with Mackarell, and that which was their greater rejoycing, they discover Land, at sight thereof they blessed the Lord. But before the Author proceed any further in this Discourse, take here a short survay of all the Voyages by Sea, in the trans∣portation of these Armies of the great Jehova, for fifteene years space to the year 1643. about which time England began to in∣deavour after Reformation, and the Souldiers of Christ were set at liberty to bide his battells at home, for whose assistance some of the chiefe worthies of Christ returned back: the number of Ships that transported passengers in this space of time, as is sup∣posed is 298. Men, Women and Children passing over this wide Ocean, as near as at present can be gathered, is also supposed to be 21200. or thereabout.
CHAP. XV. An Exhortation to all People, Nations and Languages, to indeavour the advancing of the Kingdome of Christ in the purity of his Ordinances, seeing he hath done, such admirable Acts for these poore shrubs. ANd now all you whose affections are taken with wonder∣full matters (Attend) and you that thinke Christ hath forgotten his poore despised people (Behold) and all you that hopefully long for Christs appearing to confound Antichrist (Con∣sider) and rejoyce all yee his Churches the World throughout, for the Lambe is preparing his Bride, and oh  yee the antient Beloved of Christ, whom he of old led by the hand from Egypt to Canaan, through that great and terrible. Wildernesse, looke here, behold him whom you have peirced, preparing to peirce your hearts with his Wonder-working Providence, and to provoke you by this little handfull of his people to looke on him, and mourne. Yet let no man think these few weake Wormes would restraine the wnoderfull Workes of Christ, as onely to them∣selves, but the quite contrary, these but the Porch of his glori∣ous building in hand, and if hee have shewed such admirable acts of his providence toward these, what will he doe when the whole Nation of English shall set upon like Reformation ac∣cording to the direct Rule of his Word? Assured confidence there is also for all Nations, from the undoubted promise of Christ himselfe. The Winter is past, the Raine is changed and gone, come out of the holes of the secret places, feare not because your number is but small, gather into Churches, and let Christ be your King, yee Presbytery, Lord it not over them or any Churches, but feed every one, that one flock over which Christ hath made you over-seers, and yee people of Christ give your Presbytery double ho∣nours, that they with you may keepe the watch of the Lord over his Churches. Yee Dutch come out of your hods-podge, the great mingle mangle of Religion among you hath caused the Churches of Christ to increase so little with you, standing at
stay like Corne among Weeds, Oh, yee French! feare not the great swarmes of Locusts, nor the croking Frogs in your Land, Christ is reaching out the hand to you, look what hee hath done for these English, and sure hee is no Respecter of Persons, &c. yee Germanes that have had such a bloudy bickering, Christ is now comming to your aide, then cast off your loose, and care∣lesse kinde of Reformation, gather into Churches, and keepe them pure, that Christ may delight to dwell among you: oh Italy! The Seat and Center of the Beast, Christ will now pick out a People from among you for himselfe, see here what won∣ders hee workes in little time. Oh! yee Spaniards and Portu∣galls, Christ will shew you the abominarions of that beastly Whore, who hath made your Nations drunke with the Wine of her Fornication. Dread not that cruell murtherous Inquisition, for Christ is now making Inquisicion for them, and behold, here how hee hath rewarded them, who deale cruelly with these his people. Finally, oh all yee Nations of the World, behold great is the worke the glorious King of Heaven and Earth hath in hand; beware of neglecting the call of Christ: and you the Seed of Israel both lesse and more, the ratling of your dead bones toge∣ther i at hand, Sinewes, Flesh and Life: at the Word of Christ it comes Counsellers and Judges, you shall have as at the begin∣ing to fight for you, as Gidion, Bareck, Jeptha, Samson &c. then sure your deliverance shall be sudden and wonderfull, if Christ have done such great things for these low Shrubs, what will his most Admirable, Excellent and wonderfull Worke for you be, but as the Resurrection from the dead, when all the miraculous acts of his wonderfull power shewed upon Pharoah? for your fore-Fathers deliverance shall be swallowed up with those far greater workes that Christ shall shew for your deliverance upon the whole World, by Fiers and Bloud destroying both Pope and Turke, when you shall see great smoake and flames ascend∣ing up on high, of that great Whore, Revel. 14 & 11. verse, and the 17. & 16. verse, and the 18. the 8. and 18. vers. Then oh! you People of Israel gather together as one Man, and grow together as one Tree. Ezek. 37. & 23. For Christ the great King of all the Earth is now going forth in his great Wrath and terrible In∣dignation
to avenge the bloud of his Saints, Ezek 38 & 19. vers. and now for the great and bloudy Battell of Gog and Magog, Ri∣vers of bloud, and up to the Horse-bridles, even the bloud of those have drunke bloud so long, oh I dreadfull day, when the pati∣ence and long-suffering of Christ, that hath lasted so many hun∣dreds of yeares shall end, what wonderous workes are now suddenly to be wrought for the accomplishment of these things▪ Then judge all you (whom the Lord Christ hath given a discer∣ning spirit) whether these poore New England People be not the fore runners of Christs Army, and the marvelous provi∣dences which you shall now heare, be not the very Finger of God, and whether the Lord hath not sent this people to Preach in this Wildernesse, and to proclaime to all Nations, the neere approach of the most wonderfull workes that ever the Sonnes of men saw. Will not you believe that a Nation can be borne in a day? here is a worke come very neare it; but if you will believe you shall see far greater things than these, and that in very lit∣tle time, and in the meane time looke on the following Dis∣course. CHAP. XVI. Of the admirable Acts of Christs Providence, in delivering this his people in their Voyages by Sea, from many foule dangers. YOu have heard of about 198. Ships passing the perillous Ocean, of all which I heare of but one that ever miscarried; yet shall you here see some of the great dangers they were in the Ship, this Author came in a foggy morning, anon by breake of day was ready to be steamed by a Pirate, but being unready for sight they passed by; others by a fog, have been delivered from farther chase of them, so that of this great number never did any Pirate make one shot at them, according to best intelligence. Their deliverance from leakes also hath been no lesse wonder∣full, some so neare sinking, that the loving affection betweene Husband and Wife, hath caused them to fould each other in their Armes, with Resolution to die together, and make the Sea
their Grave, yet not ceasing to call on the Lord, their present helpe in time of need, who is minded to manifest his great care for this his people to all that shall come to hear thereof. And therefore directs to meanes for freeing their ships, being now ready to founder in the depthlesse Ocean. And further, as if these deliverances were too little to expresse the tender care Christ hath of his, to free them from all dangers, those that occupy their businesse in the deepe, and see the Wonders of God upon the waters, are taken with great astonishment to behold the extra∣ordinary hand of the most High, in transportation of this people, in that their Ships all of a sudden are brought so neer the ground, and yet strike not their Pilots, missing ofttimes of their skill on those unwandered. Coasts, but their Jehovah hee misses not to be an exact Pilot in the most thickest foggs and darkest nights, for thus it befell. The night newly breaking off her darknesse, and the day-light being clouded with a grosse vapor, as if nights Curtaines re∣mained halfe shut, the Sea-men and Passengers standing on the Decks, suddenly fixed their eyes one a great Boat (as they deemed) and anon after they spied another, and after that an∣other; but musing on the matter, they perceived themselves to be in great danger of many great Rocks, with much terror and affrightment, they turned the Ship about, expecting every mo∣ment to be dasht in pieces against the Rocks. But he whose pro∣vidence brought them in, Piloted them out againe, without any danger, to their great Rejoycing. And assuredly) so extraordi∣narily eminent and admirable to the eyes of many beholders, was the wonderfull workes in magnifying the Rich grace toward this his people in prefering them) that many Masters of Ships left their See imployment for a time, and chose rather to suffer the wante of a Wildernesse with the people of God, than to in∣crease their Estates in a full-fed Land, and verily so taken they were, that they fell down at Christs Feet, and were placed by him as living stones, Elect and Pretious in his Churches; also many other Seamen were brought to seeke after Christ in his Ordinan∣ces, by which it appeares some great worke, by some far surpas∣sing all this, hath Christ ere long to doe, that hee thus fitteth In∣struments. Then all you that occupy shipping prepare for his
service, who will assuredly prove the best owner that ever you went to Sea for. Furthermore, the condition of those persons passed the Seas, in this long and restlesse Voyage (if rightly considered) will more magnifie the grace of Christ in this great Worke. First, such were many of them that never before had made any path through the Waters, no not by boat, neither so much as seene a Ship, others so tenderly brought up that they had little hope of their Lives continuance under such hardships, as so long a Voyage must needs inforce them to indure, others there were, whose Age did rather call for a quiet Couch to rest them on, than a pinching Cabbin in a Reeling Ship, others whose weake natures were so borne downe with Disease, that they could hard∣ly craule up the Ships-side, yet ventured their weake Vessells to this Westurne World. Here also might you see weakly Wo∣men, whose hearts have trembled to set foote in Boate, but now imboldened to venter through these tempestuous Seas with their young Bbes, whom they nurture up with their Breasts, while their bodies are tossed on the tumbling Waves; also others whose Wombes could not containe their frut, being ready for the Worlds-light, travailed and brought forth upon this depthlesse Ocean in this long Voyage, lively and strong Children yet living, and like to prove succeeding Instruments in the Hands of Christ, for furthering this worke; among other Sea-borne Cotten, now a young student in a Colledge in Cambridge, being Son to that Famous and Renowned Teacher of Christ, M. John Cotten; by all this and much more that might be said, for allmost every one you discourse withall will tell you of some Remarkeable Providence of God shewed to∣ward them in this their Voyage, by which you may see the Worke of Christ is not to bee laid aside because of diffi∣culties.
CHAP. XVII. Of the first leading of these People of Christ, when the Civill Government was Established. BUt to goe on with the Story, the 12 of July or thereabout 1630. these Souldiers of Christ first set foote one this Westerne end of the World; where arriveing in safety, both Men, Women and Children. On the North side of Charles River, they landed neare a small Island, called Noddells Island, where one Mr. Samuel Mavereck then living, a man of a very loving and curteous behaviour, very ready to entertaine strangers, yet an enemy to the Reformation in hand, being strong for the Lordly Prelaticall power one this Island, he had built a small Fort with the helpe of one Mr. David Tompson, placing there∣in foure Murtherers to protect him from the Indians. About one mile distant upon the River ran a small creeke, taking its Name from Major Gen. Edward Gibbons, who dwelt there for some yeares after; One the South side of the River one a point of Land called Blaxtons point, planted Mr. William Blaxton, of whom we have formerly spoken: to the South East of him, neare an Island called Tompsons Island lived some few Planters more, these persons were the first Planters of those parts, having some small Trading with the Indians for Beaver-Skins, which moved them to make their aboade in those parts, whom these first Troopes of Christs Army, found as fit helpes to further their worke. At their arrivall those small number of Christians ga∣thered at Salem, greatly rejoycing and the more, because they saw so many that came chiefly for promoting the great Work of Christ in hand, the Lady Arrabella and some other godly Women aboad at Salem, but their Husbands continued at Charles Town, both for the settling the civill Government, and gathering another Church of Christ. The first Court was holden aboard the Arrabella the 23. of August. When the much honoured John Wintrope Esq. was chosen Governour for the remainder of that yeare, 1630. Also the worthy Thomus Dudly Esq. was chosen Deputy Governour, and Mr. Simon Brodestreet Secretary, the people after their long Voyage were many of them troubled
with the Scurvy, and some of them died: the first station they tooke up was at Charles Towne, where they pitched some Tents of Cloath, other built them small Huts, in which they lodged their Wifes and Children. The first beginning of this worke seemed very dolorous; First for the death of that worthy per∣sonage Izaac Johnson Esq. whom the Lord had indued with ma∣ny pretious gifts, insomuch that he was had in high esteeme among all the people of God, and as a chiefe Pillar to support this new erected building, He very much rejoyced at his death, that the Lord had been pleased to keepe his eyes open so long, as to see one Church of Christ gathered before his death, at whose depar∣ture there was not onely many weeping eyes, but some fainting hearts, fearing the fall of the present worke. For future Remem∣brance of him mind this Meeter. Izaac Johnson Esquire, beloved of Christ and his people, and one of the Magistrates of New England. WHat mov'd thee on the Seas upon such toyle with Lady. taking; Christs drawing love all strength's above, when way for his hee's making. Christ will have thee example be, honoured with's graces, yeilding His Churches aid, foundation laid, now new one Christ a building. Thy Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Meeknesse prove improved for thy Lord, As he to thee, to people be, in Government accord. Oh! people why, doth Christ deny this worthies life to lengthen? Christ onely trust, Johnsons turnd dust, and yet hee's crownd and strengthend. The griefe of this people was further increased by the sore sicknesse which befell among them, so that almost in every Fa∣mily Lamentation, Mourning, and woe was heard, and no fresh food to be had to cherish them, it would assuredly have moved the most lockt up affections to Teares no doubt, had they past from one Hut to another, and beheld the pteous case these people were in, and that which added to their present distresse was the want of fresh water, for although the place did afford
plenty, yet for present they could finde but one Spring, and that not to be come at, but when the tide was downe, which caused many to passe over to the South-side of the River, where they afterward erected some other Townes, yet most admirable it was to see with what Christian courage many of these Souldiers of Christ carried it amidst all these calamities, and in October, the Governour Deputy and Assistants, held their second Court on the South-side of the River; Where they then began to build, holding correspondency with Charles Towne, as one and the same. At this Court many of the first Planters came, and were made free, yet afterward none were admitted to this fellowship, or freedome, but such as were first joyned in fellowship with some one of the Churches of Christ, their chiefest aime being bent to promote his worke altogether. The number of Free∣men this yeare was 110. or thereabout. CHAP. XVIII. Of the second Church of Christ, gathered at Charles Towne in the Mattacusets Bay, 1631. AND now the new-come Souldiers of Christ strengthen themselves in him, and gather a Church at Charles Towne, whose extent at present did reach to both sides of the River, and in very little time after was divided into two Churches, the Reverend and judicious Mr. John Wilson was called to be Pastor thereof, a Man full of Faith, Courage and Zeale, for the truth of Christ persecuted, and hunted after by the usurping Prelates (and forced for present to part from his indeared Wife) yee honoured by Christ, and made a powerfull instrument in his hands for the cutting downe of Error, and Schisme, as in the sequell of this History will appeare, in whose weakenesse Christs power hath appeared.
The Grave and Reverend Mr. John Wilson, now Pastor of the Church of Christ at Soston, in New England. JOhn VVilson will to Christs will submit, In Wildernesse, where thou hast Trialls found, Christ in new making did compose thee fit, And made thy Love zeale, for his truth abound. Then it's not Wilson, but Christ by him hath, Error cut down when it o'retopping stood, Thou then 'Gainst it didst shew an holy wrath; Saving mens soules from this o're-flowing floud. They thee deprave, thy Ministrey dispise, By thy thick utterance seeke to call Men back, From hearing thee, but Christ for thee did rise. And turnd the wheel-right over them to crack. Yea, caused thee with length of dayes to stand, Steadfast in's house in old Age fruit to bring, I and thy seed raise up by his comman▪ His Flock to feed, rejoyce my Muse and sing. That Christ doth, dust regard so plentiously, Rich gifts to give, and heart to give him his, Estate and person thou spends liberally; Christ thee, and thine will Crown with lasting Blisse. This, as the other Churches of Christ, began with a small num∣ber in a desolate and barren Wildernesse, which the Lord in his wonderfull mercy hath turned to fruitfull Fields. VVherefore behold the present condition of these Churches compared with their beginnings; as they sowed in teares, so also have they Reap∣ed in joy, and shall still so go on if plenty and liberty marre not their prosperity. This Towne of Charles is situated one the North-side of Charles River, from whence it tooke its Name, the River being about five or six fathom deepe; Over against the Town many small Islands lieing to the Seaward of it, and Hills one either side. By which meanes it proves a very good harbor for Ships, which hath caused many Sea-men and Merchants to
sit downe there, the forme of this Towne in the frontice piece thereof, is like the Head, Neck and Shoulders of a Men, onely the pleasant, and Navigable River of Mistick runs through the right shoulder thereof, and by its neare approach to Charles River in one place makes a very narrow neck, by which meanes the chiefe part of the Towne, whereon the most building stands, becomes a Peninsula: it hath a large Market-place neer the wa∣ter side built round with Houses, comly and faire, forth of which there issues two streetes orderly built with some very faire Houses, beautified with pleasant Gardens and Orchards, the whole Towne consists in its extent of about 150. dwelling Houses. Their meeting house for Sabbath assembly stands in the Market-place, very comly built and large, the Officers of this Church are at this day one Pastor, and one Teacher, one Ruling Elder, and three Deacons, the number of Soules are about 160. wonderfull it is to see that in so short a time such great alterati∣ons Christ should worke for these poore people of his: their Corne Land in Tillage in this Towne is about 1200. Acres, their great Cattell are about 400. head, Sheepe neare upon 400. as for their horse you shall hear of them, God willing, when we come to speak of their Military Discipline. CHAP. XIX. Of the Third Church of Christ gathered at Dorchester, 1631. THe third Church of Christ gathered under this Government was at Dorchester, a frontire Town scituated very pleasant∣ly both for facing the Sea, and also its large extent into the main Land, well watered with two small Rivers; neere about this Towne inhabited some few ancient Traders, who were not of this select band, but came for other ends, as Morton of Merry∣mount, who would faine have resisted this worke, but the pro∣vident hand of Christ prevented. The forme of this Towne is almost like a Serpent turning her head to the North ward; over against Tompsons Island, and the Castle, her body and wings being chiefly built on, are filled somewhat thick of Houses, onely
that one of her Wings is clipt, her Tayle being of such a large ex∣tent that shee can hardly draw it after her; Her Houses for dwelling are about one hundred and forty, Orchards and Gar∣dens full of Fruit-trees, plenty of Corne-Land, although much of it hath been long in tillage, yet hath it ordinarily good corps, the number or Trees are neare upon 1500. Cowes, and other Cattell of that kinde about 450. Thus hath the Lord been pleas∣ed to increase his poore dispersed people, whose number in this Flock are neare about 150. their first Pastor called to feede them was the Reverend, and godly Mr. Maveruck. MAveruck thou must put period to thy dayes, Mr. Wareham and other of their Teaching Elders, you shall reade of when the Can∣ko is plant∣ed. In Wildernesse thy Kindred thee provoke To come, but Christ doth thee for high ends Raise; Amongst his worthies to strike many a stroke. Thy godly Life, and Doctrine speake, though thou In dust art laid, yet Christ by thee did feede His scattered Lambes, they gathered are by you; Christ calls thee home, but flock he leaves to seede. CAHP. XX. Of the Fourth Church of Christ gathered at Bosten, 1631. AFter some little space of time the Church of Christ at Charles Town, having their Sabbath assemblies oftenest o the South side of the River, agreed to leave the people on that side to themselves, and to provide another Pastor for Charles Towne, which accordingly they did. So that the fourth Church of Christ issued out of Charles Towne, and was seated at Boston, being the Center Towne and Metropolis of this Wildernesse worke (but you must not imagine it to be a Metropolitan Church) invironed it is with the Brinish flouds, saving one small Istmos, which gives free accesse to the Neighbour Townes; by Land on the South side, on the North-west, and North East, two constant Faires are kept for daily traffique thereunto, the forme of this Towne is like a heart, naturally scituated for For∣tifications, having two Hills on the frontice part thereof next
the Sea, the one well fortified on the superfices thereof, with store of great Artillery well mounted, the other hath a very strong battery built of whole Timber, and filled with Earth, at the de∣scent of the Hill in the extreme poynt therof betwixt these two strong armes lies a large Gave or Bay, on which the chiefest part of this Town is built, over-topped with a third Hill, all three like over-topping Towers keepe a constant watch to fore-see the approach of forrein dangers, being furnished with a Beacon and lowd babling Guns, to give notice by their redoubled eccho to all their Sister townes, the chiefe Edifice of this City-like Towne i crowded on the Sea-bkes, and wharfed out with great indu∣stry and cost, the buildings beautifull and large, some fairely see forth with Brick, Tile, Stone and Slate, and orderly placed with comly streets, whose continuall inlargement presages some sump∣uous City. The wonder of this moderne Age, that a few yeares should bring forth such great matters by so means a handfull, and they so far from being inriched by the spoiles of other Nations, that the states of many of them have beene spoiled by the Lord∣ly Prelacy, whose Lands must assuredly make Restitutions. But now behold the admirable Acts of Christ, at this his peoples landing, the hideous Thickets in this place were such, that Wolfes and Beares nurst up their young from the eyes of all beholders, in those very places where the streets are full of Girles and Boys sporting up and downe, with a continued concourse of people. Good store of Shipping is here yearly built, and some very faire ones: both Ta and Mastes the Countrey affords from its own soile; also store of Victuall both for their owne and Forreiners∣ships, who resort hither for that end: this Town is the very Mart of the Land, French, Portugalls and Dutch, come hither for Traf∣fique. CHAP. XXI. Of the Fift Church of Christ, gathered at Roxbury, 1631. THe fift Church of Christ was gathered at Roxbury, scituated between Boston and Dorchester, being well watered with coole and pleasant Springs issuing forth the Rocky-hills, and with
small Freshets, watering the Vallies of this fertill Towne, whose forme is somewhat like a wedge double pointed, entring be∣tweene the two foure-named Townes, filled with a very labori∣ous people, whose labours the Lord hath so blest, that in the roome of dismall Swampes and tearing Bushes, they have very goodly Fruit-trees, fruitfull Fields and Gardens, their Heard of Cowes, Oxen and other young Cattell of that kind about 350. and dwelling-houses neere upon 120. Their streetes are large, and some fayre Houses, yet have they built their House for Church-assembly, destitute and unbeautified with other buildings. The Church of Christ here is increased to about 120. persons, their first Teaching Elder called to Office is Mr. Eliot a yong man, at his comming thither of a cheerfull spirie, walking unblame∣able, of a godly conversation, apt to teach, as by his indefatigable paines both with his own flock, and the poore Indians doth appeare, whose Language he learned purposely to helpe them to the knowledge of God in Christ, frequently Preaching in their Wigwams, and Catechizing their Children. Mr. Eliot Pastor of the Church of Christ at Roxbury, in New England, much honoured for his labours in the Lord. GReat is thy worke in Wildernesse, Oh man, Young Eliot neere twenty yeares thou bast, In Westerne world with miccle toile thy span Spent well-neere out, and now thy gray hayrs gracest, Are by thy Land-Lord Christ, who makes use of thee To feede his flock, and heathen people teach In their own Language, God and Christ to see; A Saviour their blind hearts could not reach, Poore naked Children come to learne Gods Mind Before thy face with reverend regard; Blesse God for thee may these poore heathen blind, That from thy mouth Christs Gospell sweete have heard. Eliot thy Name is, through the wild woods spread, In Indians mouths frequent's thy fame, for why?
In sundry shapes the Devills made them dread; And now the Lord makes them their Wigwams fly, Rejoyce in this, nay rather joy that thou, Amongst Christs Souldiers bast thy name sure set. Although small gaine on Earth accrew to you, Yet Christ to Crowne will thee to Heaven soone fet. CHAP. XXII. Of the Sixth Church of Christ, gathered at Linn. 1631. THe Sixth Church of Christ was gathered at Linn, betweene Salem and Charles Towne, her scitnation is neere to a River, whose strong freshe at breaking up of Winter filleth all her Bankes, and with a furious Torrent ventes it selfe into the Sea; This Towne is furnished with Mineralls of divers kinds, espe∣cially Iron and Lead, the forme of it is almost square, onely it takes two large a run into the Land ward (as most Townes do) it is filled with about one hundred Houses for dwelling; Here is also an Iron Mill in constant use, but as for Lead they have tried but little yet. Their meeting-house being on a levell Land undefended from the cold North west-wind; And therefore made with steps descending into the Earth, their streetes are straite and comly, yet but thin of Houses, the people mostly in∣clining to Husbandry, have built many Farmes Remote there, Cattell exceedingly multiplied, Goates which were in great e∣steeme at their first comming, are now almost quite banished, and now Horse, Kine and Sheep are most in request with them, the first feeder of this flock of Christ was Mr. Stephen Batchelor, gray and aged, of whom as followeth: THrough Ocean large Christ brought thee for to feede, His wandering flock with's word thou hast oft taught, Then teach thy selfe with others thou hast need; Thy flowing fame unto low ebbe is brought▪ Faith and Obedience Christ full near hath joyn'd, Then trust on Christ, and thou againe mayst be Brought on thy race though now far cast behinde, Run to the end, and crowned thou shalt be.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the seventh Church of Christ gathered at Water-Towne, 1631. THe Seaventh Church of Christ gathered out of this wander∣ing Race of Jaccobites was at Water-Towne, scituate upon one of the Branches of Charles River, a fruitfull plat, and of large extent, watered with many pleasant Springs, and small Rivulets, running like veines throughout her Body, which hath caused her inhabitants to scatter in such manner, that their Sabbath-Assem∣blies prove very thin, if the season favour not, and hath made this great Towne (consisting of 160. Families) to shew nothing de∣lightfull to the eye in any place; this Towne began by occasion of Sir Richard Saltingstall, who at his arrivall, having some store of Cattell and servants, they wintered in those parts: this Town aboundes in severall sorts of Fish at their seasons, Basse, Shad, Alewifes, Frost fish, and Smelts: their herd of Kine, and Cat∣tell of that kinde are about 450. with some store of Sheepe and Goates, their Land in tillage is neere upon 1800. Acres, this Church is increased to neer about 250. soules in Church-fellow∣ship, their first Pastor was Mr. Phillips, a man mighty in the Scrip∣tures, and very dilligent to search out the minde of Christ therein contained, of whom as followeth: THe pennury of Wildernesse shall not Daunt Phillips, and diswade his undertaking This Voyage long: for Christ hath made him hot With zeal for's truth, thy native soile forsaken To follow Christ his bannisht flock to feede, With restlesse toile thus honour'd Christ hath thee, Then it maintaine though thou thy people neede; Christ would thou shouldst of them aye honoured be, Till death thou hast been souldier in this War, Darke types the shaddowes of good things now come, By thee have been unfoulded very far; Cleer'd baptimes light from error broch'd by some.
As by thy worke in Print appeares this day, Though thou thy days hast ended on this Earth, Yet still thou livest in Name and Fame alway; Christ thee poore dust doth crowne with lasting Mirth. CHAP. XXIV. Of the great cheerefulnesse of their Souldiers of Christ, in and under the penuries of a Wildernesse. THese were the beginnings of these resolute Souldiers of Christ Jesus in the yeare, 1631. Even to lay the Foundati∣on of their severall Churches of Christ, built onely on him as their chiefe Corner Stone. But as his chosen Israel met with many difficulties after their returne from Captivity, in building the Temple and City, which they valiantly waded through; So these weake wormes (Oh Christ to thy praise be it spoken) were most wonderfully holpen in such distresses, as to appear∣ance of man seemed to be both hopelesse, and helplesse, threat∣ning destruction to the whole building and far from accomplish∣ing such great things as you have in part seene already, and shall in the following discourse (God willing) see more abundantly, adding a strong testimony to the work, that as it was begun by Christ, so hath it beene carried on by him, and shall to the ad∣miration of the whole World be perfected in his time, and un∣lesse men will be wilfully blinde, they must needs see and con∣fesse the same, and that the influence thereof hath already run from one end of the Earth unto the other. This yeare 1631. John Winthrop Esq. was chosen Governour, pickt out for the worke, by the provident hand of the most high, and inabled with gifts accordingly, then all the folke of Christ, who have seene his face and beene partaker of the same, remem∣ber him in this following Matter.
Iohn Winthrope Esq. Eleven times Governour of the English Nation, inhabiting the Mattacusets Bay in New England. WHy leavest thou John, thy station, in Suffolk, thy own soile, Christ will have thee a pillar be, for's people thors must toyle, He chang'd thy heart, thē take his part,' gainst prelates proud invading (His Kingly throne) set up alone, in wildernesse their shading. His little flocks from Prelates knocks, twice ten years rut'd thou hast, With civill sword at Christs word, and eleven times been trast. By Name and Note, with peoples vote, their Governour to be, Thy means hast spent, 'twas therefore lent, to raise this work by thee. Well arm'd and strong with sword among, Christ armies warcheth he. Doth valiant praise, and weak one raise, with kind benignity. To lead the Van,' gainst Babylon, doth worthy Winthrop call, Thy Progeny, shall Battell try, When Prelacy shall fall. With fluent Tongue thy Pen doth run, in learned Latine phrase, To Sweads, French, Dutch, thy Neighbours, which thy lady rhetorick praise, Thy bounty feeds, Christs servants needs, in wilderness of wants To Indians thou Christs Gospell now, 'mongst heathen people plants. Yet thou poore dust, now dead and must, to rottennesse be brought, T'ill Christ restore thee glorious, more then can of dust be thought. The much honoured Thomas Dudly Esquire was chosen Deputy Governour, and the number of Free-men added was about 83. Those honoured persons who were now in place of Government, having the propagation of the Churches of Christ, in their eye laboured by all meanes to make roome for Inhabitants, know∣ing well that where the dead carkass is, thither will the Eagles resort. But herein they were much opposed by certaine persons, whose greedy desire for land much hindered the worke for a time, as indeed all such persons do at this very day, and let such take notice how these were cured of this distemper, some were taken away by death, and then to be sure they had Land enough, others fearing poverty, and famishment, supposing the present scarcity would never be turned into plenty, removed them∣selves away, and so never beheld the great good the Lord hath
done for his people, but the valiant of the Lord waited with pa∣gience, and in the misse of beere suppled themselves with water, even the most honoured as well as others, contentedly rejoyeing in a Cup of cold water, blessing the Lord that had given them the taste of that living water, and that they had not the water that slckes the thrist of their naturall bodies, given them by measure, but might drinke to the full; as also in the absence of Bread they feasted themselves with fish, the Women once a day, as the eide gave way, resorted to the Mussells, and Clambankes, which are a Fish as big as Horse-mussells, where they dai'y ga∣thered their Families food with much heavenly discourse of the provisions Christ had formerly made for many thousands of his followers in the wildernesse. Quoth one, my Husband hath tra∣vailed as far as Plimoth (which is neere 40 miles,) and hath with great toile brought a little Corne home with him, and before that is spent the Lord will assuredly provide: quoth the other, our last peck of Meaie it now in the Oven at home a baking, and ma∣ny of our godly Neighbours have quite spent all, and wee owe one Loafe of that little wee have; Then spake a third, my husband hath veatured himselfe among the Indians for Corne, and can get none, as also our honoured Governour hath distributed his so far, that a day or two more will put an end to his store, and all the rest, and yet methinks our Children are as cheerefull, fat, and lusty with feeding upon those Mussells, Clambanks and other Fish as they were in England, with their fill of Bread, which makes mee cheerfull in the Lords providing for us, being further confirmed by the exhoreation of our Pastor to trust the Lord with providing for us; whose is the Earth and the fulnesse there∣of. And as they were incouraging one another in Christs carefull providing for them, they lift up their eyes and saw two Ships comming in, and presently this newes came to their Eares, that they were come from Jacland full of Victualls, now their poore heares were not so much refreshed in regard of the food they saw they were like to have, as their soules rejoyced in that Christ would now manifest himselfe to be the Commissary Ge∣nerall of this his Army, and that hee should honour them so far as to be poore Sutlers for his Camp, they soone up with their Mussells, and hie them home to stay their hungry stomacks.
After this manner did Christ many times graciously provide for this his people, even at the last cast. CHAP. XXV. Of the Lords gracious protection of his people, from the barbarous cruelties of the Heathen. ABout this time the Indians that were most conversant s∣mong them, came quaking and complaining of a barbarous and cruell people called the Tarratines, who they said would eat such Men as they caught alive, tying them to a Tree, and gnaw∣ing their flesh by peece-meales off their Bones, as also that they were a strong and numerous people, and now comming, which made them flee to the English, who were but very few in num∣ber at this time, and could make but little resistance, being much dispersed, yet did they keepe a constant watch, neglecting no meanes Christ had put into their hands for their owne safety, in so much that they were exceedingly weaked with continued la∣bour, watching and hard diet, but the Lord graciously upheld them in all, for thus it befell neere the Towne of Linn, then cal∣led Saugust, in the very dead of the night (being upon their watch, because of the report that went of the Indians approach to those parts) one Lieurenant Walker, a man indued with faith, and of a couragious spirit, comming to relieve the Centinell be∣ing come up with him, all of a sudden they heard the Sticks crack hard by them, & with all he felt something bush hard upon his shoulder, which was an Indian arrow shot through his Coat, and the wing of his buffe-Jacket. Upon this hee discharged his Culliver directly toward the place, where they heard the noise, which being deep'y loden brake in pieces, then they returned to the Court of Guard, and raised such small forces as they had; comming to the light they perceived he had an other Arrow shot through his Coat betwixt his Legs. Seeing this great pre∣sertation they stood upon their Guard till Morning, expecting the Indians to come upon them every moment, but when day∣light appeared, they soone sent word to other parts, who ga∣thered together, and tooke counsell how to quit themselves of
these Indians, whose approach they demed would be sudden, they ugreed to discharge their great Guns, the redoubling eccho rattling in the Rocks caused the Indians to betake themselves to slight (being a terrible unwonted sound unto them) or rather he who put such trembling feare in the Assyrians Army, struck the like in these cruell Canniballs. In the Autumne following, the Indians, who had all this time held good correspondency with the English, began to quarrell with them about their bounds of Land, notwithstanding they purchased all they had of them, but the Lord put an end to this quarrell also, by smiting the Indians with a sore Dsease, even the smll Pox; of the which great numbers of them died, yet these servants of Christ minding their Masters businesse, were much moved in affection toward them to see them depart this life without the knowledge of God in Christ. And therefore were very frequent among them for all the noysome∣nesse of their Disease, entring their Wigwams, and exhorting them in the Name of the Lord. Among others one of the chiefe Saggamores of the Mattachusets, whom the English named Saggemore John, gave some good hopes, being alwayes very cour∣teous to them, whom the godly, and much honour'd among the English, visiting a little before his death, they instructing him in the knowledge of God. Qaoth hee by and by mee Mattamoy may be my two Sons live, you take them to teach much to know God. Accordingly the honoured Mr. John Winthrop, and the Reve∣rend Mr. John Wilson tooke them home, notwithstanding the in∣fectiousnesse of the Disease their Father died of. The mortality among them was very great, and increased among them daily more and more, insomuch that the poore Creatures being very timorous of death, would faine have fled from it, but could not tell how, unlesse they could have gone from themselves; Re∣lations were little regarded among them at this time, so that many, who were siten with the Disease died helplesse, un∣lesse they were neare, and known to the English: their Pow∣wowes, Wizards, and Charmers, Athamochas Factors were possest with greatest feare of any. The Winters piercing cold stayed not the strength of this hot Disease, yet the English endeavouring to visit their sick Wigwams, helpe them all they could, but as
they entred one of their matted Houses, they beheld a most sad spectacle, death having smitten them all save one poore Infant, which lay on the ground sucking the Breast of its dead Mother, seeking to draw living nourishment from her dead breast. Their dead they left oft-times unburied, wherefore the English were forced to dig holes, and drag their stinking corps into them. Thus did the Lord allay their quarrelsome spirits, and made roome for the following part of his Army. This yeare came over more supplies to forward the worke of Christ. CHAP. XXVI. Of the gratious provisions the Lord made for his people. THe yeare 1632. John Winthrope Esquire, was chosen Go∣vernour againe, and the antient Thomas Dudly Esquire, was Deputy Governour, a man of a sound judgement in matters of Religion and well read, bestowing much labour that way, of whom as followeth: The honoured, aged, stable and sincere servant of Christ, zealous for his truth Thomas Dudly, Esq. foure times Governour of the English Nation, in the Mattacusets, and first Major Generall of the Millitary Forces. WHat Thomas now believe dost thou that riches men may gaine, In this poore Plot Christ doth allot his people to sustaine; Rich Truth thou'lt buy and sell not, why no richer Jem can be, Truths Champion in campion, Christ's grace hath placed thee, With civill Sword, at Christs Word early cut off wilt thou, Those Wolvish sheep, amongst flocks do creep, and damned doctrine low▪ To trembling age, thou valiant sage, one foot wilt not give ground, Christs Enemies from thy face flies, his truth thou savest sound. Thy lengthened dayes, to Christs praise, continued are by him: To set by thee his people free, from foes that raging bin. Wearied with yeares, it plaine appeares, Dudly not long can last, It matters not, Christ Crown thee got, its now at hand, hold fast.
This yeare was the first choise of Migistrates by free-men, whose number was now increased, fifty three or thereabout, to declare the manner of their Government is by the Author de∣ferred till the year. 1637. where the Reader may behold Go∣vernment both in Churches and Common-wealth, to be an in∣stitution of the Lord, and much availeable through his blessing for the accomplshment of his promises to his people. This year these fore-runners of the following Army of Christ, after the sight of many of the admirable Acts of his providence for them, begun to take up steddy resolution through the helpe of him to wade through the Ocean, they were farther like to meete withall, and therefore began to plant the yet untilled Earth, having as yet no other meanes to teare up the bushy lands, but their hands and howes, their bodies being in very ill temper by reason of the Scurvy (a Disease in those dayes very frequent) to undergoe such extremity, but being prick'd on with hungers sharpe gode, they keepe doing according to their weake abili∣ties, and yet produce but little food for a long season, but being perswaded that Christ will rather raine bread from Heaven, then his people should want, being fully perswaded, they were set on the worke at his command. Wherefore they followed on with all hands, and the Lord (who hath the Cattell of thousand Hills, and the Corne of ten thousand Vallies, the whole Earth, and fulnesse of it) did now raise up fresh supplies to be added to these both of men and provision of food, men no lesse valiane in Faith then them, the former amongst whom was the Reverend Mr. Welds and Mr. James, who was welcomed by the people of Christ at Charles Towne, and by them called to the Office of a Pastor, where hee continued for some yeares, and from thence removed to New haven, upon some seed of prejudice sowne by the enemies of this worke. But good Reader doe thou behold, and remember him farther in the following Liues; THy Native soile, Oh James did thee approve, Gods people there in Lincolneshe commend; Thy courteous speech and worke of Christian love, Till Christ through Seas did thee on Message send.
With learned skill his mind for to unsold, His people in New England thou must feed, But one sad breach did cut that band should hold; Then part wilt thou least farther jars should breed. Yet part thou wilt not with Christs Truth, thy crowne But my Muse waile that any souldier should, In fighting slip, why James thou fallest not downe, Back thou retreats their valiant fighting, hold Fast on thy Christ, who thine may raise with thee, His bands increase, when leaders he provides, Thy Son young student may such blessing be; Thy losse repayre, and Christ thee crown besides. Although the great straites this Wildernesse people were in for want of food, was heard of among the godly people in Eng∣land, yet would they not decline the worke, but men of Estates sold their possessions, and bought plenty of food for the Voyage, which some of them sent before hand, by which meanes they were provided for, as also the Lord put it into the hearts of such as were Masters, and Undertakers of Ships to store their Vessells so well that they had to spare for this peoples need, and further Christ caused abundance of very good Fish to come to their Nots and Hookes, and as for such as were unprovided with these meanes, they caught them with their hands, and so with Fsh, wild Onions and other Herbs were sweetly satisfied till other provisions, came in, here must labouring men a little be minded, how ill they recompenced those persons, whose estates helpe them to food before they could reape any from the Earth, that forgetting those courtesies they soon by excessive prises took for their worke, made many File-leaders fall back to the next Ranke, advancing themselves in the meane time. About this time the Church of Christ at Roxbury, being a diligent people, early prevented their Brethren in other Churches by calling the Re∣verend Mr. Welds to be their Pastor, of whom you may see some∣what farther in the following lines:
TO worke oh Welds! in wildernesse betime Christ thee commands, that thou his folke should's follow: And feede his flock in Covenant bandcombine, With them through him his glorious name to hallow; Seven yeares thou stoutly didst wade through with toile, These desare caros, back by advice againe, Thou didst returne unto thy native soile, There to advance Christs Kingdome now remeine. In Pulpit, and with Pen thou hast the truth Maintained, and clear'd from scandalous reproach Christs churches here, and shew'd their lasting Ruth, That dare 'gainst Christ their own inventions broach; Then sage, in age, continue such to be, Till Christ thee crowne, his gifts to thee are free. This yeare of sad distresses was ended with a terrible cold Winter, with weekly Snowes, and fierce Frosts betweene while congealing Charles River, as well from the Towne to Sea ward, as above, insomuch that men might frequently passe from one Island to another upon the Ice. Here Reader thou must be min∣ded of an other admirable Act of Christ for this yeare, in chang∣ing the very nature of the seasons, moderating the Winters cold of late very much, which some impute to the cutting downe the woods, and breaking up the Land; But Christ have the praise of all his glorious Acts. About this time did the valiant in faith, and Reverend Pastor Mr. John Wilson returne to England, and surely the power of Christ hath notably appeared in this weake sorry man. You must needs see the Author will flatter no man, yet will he not be wanting to tell the noble Acts of Christ Jesus, in making men strong for himselfe, here is one borne up in the armes of his mercy, often through the perillous Seas night and dayes, yea: weeks and months upon the great deepe, and now having with his owne eyes beheld the manifold troubles these poore were in, yet at this very time hies him back to his Native soile, where his indeared Wife did yet remaine, purpose∣ly to perswade her to east her cares upon the Lord, as he himself had already done, and then assuredly the wants of a Wildernesse
would never hurt her: at the departure of this holy Man of God, many of his peoples hearts waxed very sad, and having looked long for his returne; Their eyes now began to faile in missing of their expectation, they according to their common course in time of great straites, set and appointed a day wholy to be spent in seeking the pleasing Face of God in Christ, purposing the Lord assisting to afflict their soules, and give him the honour of his All-seeingness, by a downe right acknowledgement of their sinnes, but the Lord, whose Grace is alwayes undeserved, heard them before they cried, and the afternoone before the day ap∣pointed brought him, whom they so much desired, in safety to shore, with divers other faithfull servants of Christ ready armed for the Battell, the day was turned to a day of rejoycing and bles∣sing the Lord, even the mighty God of Iacob, the God of Armies is for us a refuge high Shela. The yeare 1633. the honoured John Winthrope Esquire, was chosen Governour againe, and Thomas Dudly Esq. Deputy Go∣vernour, the number of Freemen added, or Souldiers listed was 46. the Winters Frost being extracted forth the Earth, they fall to tearing up the Roots, and Bushes with their Howes; even such men as scarce ever set hand to labour before, men of good birth and breeding, but comming through the strength of Christ to war their warfare, readily rush through all difficulties, cutting down of the Woods, they inclose Corne fields, the Lord having mitigated their labours by the Indians frequent fiering of the woods, (that they may not be hindered in hunting Venson, and Beares in the Winter season) which makes them thin of Timber in many places, like our Parkes in England, the chiefest Corne they planted before they had Plowes was Indian Graine, whose increase is very much beyond all other, to the great refreshing of the poore servants of Christ, in their low begin∣ings, all kinde of Gardens Fruits grew very well, and let no man make a jst at Pumpkins, for with this fruit the Lord was pleased to feed his people to their good content, till Corne and Cattell were increased. And here the Lords mercy appeared much in that those, who had beene formerly brought up tender, could now contentedly feed on bare and meane Diet, amongst whom the Honoured
and upright hearted in this worke of Christ, Mr. Increase Nowell, shall not be forgotten, having a diligent hand therein from the first beginning. INcrease shalt thou, with honour now, in this thy undertaking, Thou hast remain'd, as yet unstained, all errors foule forsaking; To poore and rich, thy Justice much hath manifested bin: Like Samuel Nathanaell, Christ hath thee fram'd within; Thy faithfulnesse, people expresse, and Secretary they Chose thee each year, by which appeare, their love with thee doth stay. Now Nowell see Christ call'd hath thee, and work thou must for him, In beating down the triple Crown, and all that his foes ben. Thus doest thou stand by Christ fraile man, to tell his might can make Dust do his will, with graces fill, till dust to him he take. CHAP. XXVII. Of the gratious goodnesse of God, in hearing his peoples prayers in times of need, and of the Ship-loades of goods the Lord sent them in. HEre againe the admirable Providence of the Lord is to be noted, That whereas the Country is naturally subject to drought, even to the withering of their summers Fruits, the Lord was pleased, during these yeares of scarcity, to blesse that small quantity of Land they planted with seasonable showers, and that many times to the great admiration of the Heathen, for thus it befell: the extreame parching heare of the Sun (by reason of a more constant clearnesse of the Aire then usually is in England) began to scorch the Herbs and Fruits, which was the chiefest meanes of their livelyhood, they beholding the Hand of the Lord stretched out against them, like tender hearted Children, they fell down on their knees, begging mercy of the Lord, for their Saviours sake, urging this as a chiefe argument, that the malignant adversary would rejoyce in their destruction, and blaspheme the pure Ordinances of CHRIST, trampling down his Kingly Commands with their owne inventions, and in uttering these words, their eyes dropped down many teares,
their affections prevailing so strong, that they could not refraine in the Church-Assembly. Here admire and be strong in the Grace of Christ, all you that hopefully belong unto him, for as they powred out water before the Lord, so at that very instant, the Lord showred down water on their Gardens and Fields, which with great industry they had planted, and now had not the Lord caused it to raine speedily, their hope of food had beene lost: but at this these poore wormes were so exceedingly taken, that the Lord should shew himselfe so neere unto their Prayers, that as the drops from Heaven fell thicker, and faster, so the teares from their eyes by reason of the sudden mixture of joy and sor∣row, and verily they were exceedingly stirred in their affections, being unable to resolve themselves, which mercy was greatest, to have a humble begging heart given them of God, or to have their request so suddenly answered. The Indians hearing hereof, and seeing the sweet raine that fell, were much taken with Englishmens God, but the Lord seeing his poore peoples hearts were to narrow to beg, his bounties exceeds toward them at this time, as indeed hee ever hitherto hath done for this Wildernesse-People, not onely giving the full of their requests, but beyond all their thoughts, as witnesse his great worke in England of late, in which the prayers of Gods people in New England have had a great stroke; These people now rising from their knees to receive the rich mercies of Christ, in the refreshed fruits of the Earth; Behold the Sea also bring∣ing in whole Ship-loades of mercies, more being filled with fresh forces, for furthering this wonderfull worke of Christ, and indeed this yeare came in many pretious ones, whom Christ in his grace hath made much use of in these his Churches, and Com∣mon-wealth, insomuch that these people were even almost over-ballanced with the great income of their present possessed mercies, yet they addresse themselves to the Sea shore, where they courteously welcom the famous servant of Christ, grave god∣ly and judicious Hooker, and the honoured servant of Christ, M John Haynes, as also the Reverend and much desired Mr. John Cotton, and the Retoricall, Mr. Stone, with divers others of the sincere servants of Christ, comming with their young, and with their old, and with their whole substance, to doe him service in
this Desart wildernesse. Thus this poore people having now tast∣ed liberally of the salvation of the Lord every way, they deeme it high time to take up the Cup of thankfulnesse, and pay their vowes to the most high God, by whom they were holpen to this purpose of heart, and accordingly set apart the 16. day of October (which they call the eighth Moneth, not out of any pe∣vish humor of singularity, as some are ready to censor them with, but of purpose to prevent the Heathenish and Popish ob∣servation of Dayes, Moneths and Yeares, that they may be for∣gotten among the people of the Lord) this day was solemnly kept by all the seven Churches, rejoycing in the Lord, and ren∣dering thanks for all their benefits. Here must not be omitted the indeared affections Mr. John Wilson had to the worke in hand, exceedingly setting forth (in his Sermon this day) the Grace of Christ in providing such meet helps for furthering thereof, really esteeming them beyond so many Ship-loading of Gold; manifesting the great humility Christ had wrought in him (not complementing, but in very deede prefering the Reverend Mr. John Cotton, many hundreds before himselfe, whom they within a very little time after called to the Office of a Teaching Elder of the Church of Christ at Boston, where hee now remaines, of whom at followeth: WHen Christ intends his glorious Kingdome shall Exalted be on Earth, he Earth doth take, Evon sinfull Man to make his worthies all; Then praise I Man, no Christ this Man doth make, Sage, sober, grave and learned Cotten thou: Mighty in Scripture, without Booke repeat it, Annatomise the sence, and shew Man how Great mysteries in sentence short are seated. Gods Word with's word comparing oft unfould: The secret truths Johns Revelations hath By thee been open'd, as nere was of old; Showes cleere, and neere 'gainst Romes whore is Gods wrath. Then Churches of Christ, rejoyce and sing, John Cotten hath Gods minde, I dare believe,
Since he from Gods Word doth his witnesse bring; Saints cries are heard they shall no longer grieve. That song of songs, 'twixt Christ and's Church thou hast Twice taught to all, and sweetly shewed the way, Christ would his Churches should, in truth stand fast; And cast off mans inventions even for aye. Thy labours great have met with catching cheats, Mixing their Brasse with thy bright Gold, for why? Thy great esteeme must cover their ill feates, Some soile thou gett'st, by comming them so nie. But i'ts wipt off, and thou Christs Champion left, The Faith to fight for Christ hath arm'd thee well, His worthies would not, thou shoulds be bereft, Of honours here thy Crown shall soon excell. These people of God having received these farther helps, to instruct, and build them up in the holy things of Christ, being now greatly incouraged, seeing the Lord was pleased to set such a broad Seale to their Commission for the worke in hand, not onely by his Word and Spirit moving thereunto, but also by his Providence in adding such able instruments for furthering this great worke of Reformation, and advancing the Kingdome of Christ, for which they spent this day of rejoycing, and sure the Lord would have all that hear of it know, their joy lay not in the increase of Corne, or Wine, or Oyle, for of all these they had but very little at this time, yet did they not spare to lend such a they had unto the poore, who could not provide, and verily the joy ended not with the day, for these active instruments of Christ, Preaching with all instancy the glad Tidings of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, rejoyced the Heart of this People much. CHAP. XX VIII. Of the Eighth Church of Christ, gathered at Cambridge, 1633. AT this time those who were in place of civill Government, having some addition Pillars to under-prop the building,
begun to thinke of a place of more safety in the eyes of Man. then the two frontire Towns of Charles Towne, and Boston were for the habitation of such as the Lord had prepared to Governe this Pilgrim People. Wherefore they rather made choice to en∣ter farther among the Indians, then hazard the fury of malig∣nant adversaries, who in a rage might pursue them, and there∣fore chose a place scituate on Charles River, betweene Charles Towne, and Water-Towne, where they erected a Towne cal∣led New-Towne, now named Cambridge, being in forme like a list cut off from the Broad-cloath of the two fore-named Towns, where this wandering Race of Jacobits gathered the eighth Church of Christ. This Town is compact closely within it selfe, till of late yeares some few stragling houses have been built, the Li∣berties of this Town have been inlarged of late in length, reach∣ing from the most Northerly part of Charles River, to the most Southerly part of Merrimeck River, it hath well ordered streets and comly pompleated with the faire building of Harver Col∣ledge, their first Pastor was the faithfull and laborious Mr. Hooker, whose Bookes are of great request among the faithfull people of Christ; Yee shall not misse of a few lines in remembrance of him. COme, Hooker, come forth of thy native soile: Christ, I will run, sayes Hooker, thou hast set My feet at large, here spend thy last dayes toile; Thy Rhetorick shall peoples affections whet. Thy Golden Tongue, and Pen Christ caus'd to be The blazing of his golden truths profound, Thou sorry worme its Christ wrought this in thee; What Christ hath wrought must needs be very sound▪ Then looke one Hookers workes, they follow him To Grave, this worthy resteth there a while: Die shall he not that hath Christs warrier bin; Much lesse Christs Truth, cleer'd by his peoples toile. Thou Angell bright, by Christ for light now made, Throughout the World as seasoning salt to be, Although in dust thy body mouldering fade; Thy Head's in Heaven, and hath a crown for thee.
The people of this Church and Towne have hitherto had the chiefest share in spitituall blessings, the Ministry of the Word, by more then ordinary instruments as in due time and place (God willing) you shall farther heare, yet are they at this day in  thriving condition in outward things, also both Corne and Cattell, Nate and Sheepe, of which they have a good flocke, which the Lord hath caused to thrive much in these latter dayes then formerly. This Towne was appointed to be the seate of Government, but it continued not long, this yeare a small gleane of Rye was brought to the Court as the first fruits of English graine at which this poore people greatly rejoyced to see the Land would beare it, but now the Lords blessing that way hath exceeded all peoples expectation, cloathing the Earth with plenty of all kinde of graine. Here minde I must the Reader of the admirable acts of Christs Providence toward this people, that although they were in such great straites for foode, that many of them eate their Bread by waight, and had little hopes of the Earths fruit∣fullnesse, yet the Lord Christ was pleased to refresh their spirits with such quickning grace, and lively affections to this Temple-worke, that they did not desert the place; and that which was more remarkable, when they had scarce houses to shelter them∣selves, and no doores to hinder the Indians accesse to all they had in them, yet did the Lord so awe their hearts, that although they frequented the Englishmens places of aboade, where their whole substance, weake Wives and little ones lay open to their plunder; during their absence being whole dayes at Sabbath. Assemblies, yet had they none of their food or stuffe diminished, neither Children nor Wives hurt in the least measure, although the Indians came commonly to them at those times, much hun∣gry belly (as they use to say) and were then in number and strength beyond the English by far. Yet further see the great and noble Acts of Christ toward this his wandering people, feeling againe the scarcity of foode, and being constrained to come to a small pittance daily, the Lord to provide for them, causeth the Deputy of Ireland to set forth a great Ship unknowne to this people, and indeed small reason in his own apprehensions why he should so do (but Christ will
have it so.) This Ship ariving, being filled with food, the godly Governors did so order it that each Town sent two men aboard of her, who tooke up their Townes allowance, it being ap∣pointed before hand, what their portion should be, to this end that some might not by all, and others be left destitute of food. In the vernall of the yeare 1634. This people being increased, and having among them many pretious esteemed instruments for furthering this wonderous worke of Christ, they began to thinke of fortifying a small Island about two miles distant from Boston to Sea-ward, to which all the Vessells come in usually and passe. To this end the honoured Mr. John Winthrope with some 8. or 10. persons of noe, tooke boate and arrived on the said Island in a warme Sun shineday, just at the breaking up of Winter as they deemed, but being they were sulden surprised with a cold North-west storme (which is the sharpest winde in this Country) freezing very vehemently for a day and a night, that they could not get off the Island, but were forced to lodge there, and lie in a heape one upon another (on the ground) to keepe themselves from freezing. This yeare 1634. the much honoured Thomas Dudly Esquire, 1634. was chosen Governor, and Mr. Roger Ludlow Deputy Gover∣nor, the Freemen added to this little Common-wealth this year were about two hundred and foure, about this time a sincere servant of Christ Mr. Stone was added to the Chureh of Christ at New-towne, as a meet helpe to instruct the People of Christ there, with the above named Mr. Hooker, and as he hath hether∣to bin (through the blessing of God) an able instrument in his hands to further the worke. So let him be incourraged with the Word of the Lord in the spirit of his might to go on. THou well smoth'd Stone Christs Work-manship to be: In's Church new laid his weake ones to support, With's word of might his foes are foild by thee; Thou daily dost to godlinesse exhort. The Lordly Prelates people do deny Christs Kingly power Hosanna to proclaime, Mens mouths are stopt, but Stone poore dust doth try, Throughout his Churches none but Christ must raignt.
Mourne not Oh Man, thy youth and learning's spent: In desart Land, my Muse is bold to say, For glorious workes Christ his hath hither sent; Like that great worke of Resurrection day. CHAP. XX IX. Of the Lords remarkable providence toward his indeared servants M. Norton and Mr. Shepherd. NOw my loving Reader, let mee lead thee by the hand to our Native Land, although it was not intended to speake in particulars of any of these peoples departure from thence, purposing a generall relation should serve the turne, yet come with mee and behold the wonderous worke of Christ in pre∣serving two of his most valiant Sou'diers, namely Mr. John Nor∣ton; and that soule ravishing Minister Mr. Thomas Shepheard, who came this yeare to Yarmouth to ship themselves for New England, where the people of God resorted privately unto them to hear them Preach, during the time of their aboade the Ene∣mies of Christs Kingdome were not wanting to use all meanes possible to intrap them, in which perilous condition they re∣mained about two months, waiting for the Ships readinesse, in which time some persons eagerly hunting for Mr. Thomas Shep∣heard, began to plot (for apprehending of him) with a Boy of sixteene or seventeene yeares of Age, who lived in the House where hee Lodged to open the doore for them at a certaine houre in the night; But the Lord Christ, who is the Shepheard of Israel kept a most sure watch over his indeared servants, for thus it befell, the sweet words of grace falling from the of lips of this Reverend and godly Mr. Thomas Shepheard in the hearing of the Boy (the Lords working withall) hee was perswaded this was an holy man of God, and therefore with many troubled thoughts, began to relate his former practise, although hee had a great some of money promised him, onely to let them in at the houre and time appointed; but the Boy, the more neere the time came, grew more pensive and sad, insomuch that his Master
taking notice thereof began to question him about the cause of his heavinesse, who being unwilling to reveale the matter, held of from confessing a long time, till by urgent and insinuating search of his godly Master, with teares hee tells that on such a night hee had agreed to let in Men to apprehend the godly Preacher. The good Man of the house forthwith gave notice thereof unto them, who with the helpe of some well-affected persons was convay'd away by boate through a back Lane, the men at the time appointed came to the house, where finding not the doore open (when they lifted up the Latch) as they expect∣ed, they thrust their staves under it to lift it from the hookes, but being followed by some persons, whom the good man of the house had appointed for that end: yet were they boulstred out in this their wicked act by those who set them one worke. Not∣withstanding they were greatly ashamed when they mist of their end. But the Lord Christ intending to make his New England Souldiers the very wounder of this Age, brought them into grea∣ter straites, that this Wonder Working Providence might the more appeare in their deliverance, for comming a shipboard, and hoiseing saile to accomplish their Voyage, in little time after they were tossed and sore beaten with a contrary winde, to the losse of the Ships upper worke, with which losse and great pe∣ill they were driven back againe, the Lord Christ intending to confirme their Faith in shewing them, that although they were brought back, as it were into the mouth of their enemies, yet hee could hide them from the hand of the Hunter, for the space of six moneths longer or thereabout, even till the Spring of the yeare following, at which time (God willing) you shall hear of them againe, in the meane time the Master, and other Sea men made a strange construction of the sore storme they met withall, saying, their Ship was bewitched, and therefore made use of the common Charme ignorant people use, nailing two red hot horse-shoos to their maine mast. But assuredly it was the Lord Christ, who hath command both of Winds and Seas, and now would have his people know he hath delivered, and will deliver from so great a death.
CHAP. XXX. Of the Ninth Church of Christ, gathered at Ipswitch. THis year came over a farther supply of Eminent instruments for furthering this admirable Worke of his, amongst whom the Reverend and judicious servant of Christ Mr. Nathaniel Ward, who tooke up his station at the Towne of Ipswich, where the saithfull servants of Christ gathered the Ninth Church of his. This Towne is scituated on a faire and delightfull River, whose first rise or spring begins about five and twenty Miles farther up in the Countrey, issuing forth a very pleasant pond. But soone after it betakes its course through a most hideous swamp of large extent, even for many Miles, being a great Harbour for Beares: after its comming forth this place, it groweth larger by the in∣come of many small Rivers, and issues forth in the Sea, due East over against the Island of Sholes, a great place of fishing for out English Nation, the peopling of this Towne is by men of good ranke and quality, many of them having the yearly Revenue of large Lands in England before they came to this Wildernesse, but their Estates being imployed for Christ, and left in banke, as you have formerly heard, they are well content till Christ shall be pleased to-restore it againe to them or theirs, which in all reason should be out of the Prelates Lands in England. Let all those, whom it concernes (to judge) consider it well, and do Justice herein. This Towne lies in the Saggamooreship, or Earldome of Ag∣gawam, now by our English Nation called Essex. It is a very good Haven Towne, yet a little barr'd up at the Mouth of the River, some Marchants here are, (but Boston, being the chiefest place of resort of Shipping, carries away all the Trade) they have very good Land for Husbandry, where Rocks hinder not the course of the Plow: the Lord hath beene pleased to increase them in Corne and Cattell of late; Insomuch that they have many hundred quarters to spare yearly, and feed, at the latter end of Summer, the Towne of Boston with good Beefe a their Houses are many of them very faire built with pleasant Gardens and Orchards, consisting of about one hundred and forty Families.
Their meeting-house is a very good prospect to a great part of the Towne, and beautifully built, the Church of Christ here con∣sists of about one hundred and sixty soules, being exact in their conversation, and free from the Epidemicall Disease of all Re∣forming Churches, which under Christ is procured by their pious Learned and Orthodox Ministery, as in due place (God willing) shall be declared, in the meane time, look on the following Meeters concerning that Souldier of Christ Master Nathaniel Ward. THou ancient Sage, come Ward among Christs folfe, take part in this great worke of his, Why do'st thou stand and gaze about so long; Do'st war in jest, why, Christ in earnest is, And hath thee arm'd with weapons for that end, To Wound and heale his enemies submitting, Not carnally, then to this Worke attend; Thou hast prevail'd the hearts of many hitting. Although the Presbytery unpleasant jar, And errors daily in their braines new coyne: Despayer not, Christs truth they shall not mar; But with his helpe such drosse from Gold refins. What Man do'st meane to lay thy Trumpet downe? Because thy son like Warrier is become, Hold out or sure lesse bright will be thy crowne; Till death Christs servants labour is not done. At this time came over the much honoured Mr. Richard Bel∣lingham whose Estate and person did much further the civill Go∣vernment of this wandering people, hee being learned in the Lawes of England, and experimentally fitted for the worke, of whom I am bold to say as followeth: RIchardus now arise must thou, Christ seed hath thee to plead, His peoples cause, with equall Laws, in wildernesse them lead; Though slow of speech, thy counsell reach, shall each occation well, Sure thy sterne looke it cannot brook those wickedly rebell.
With labours might thy pen indite doth Lawes for peoples learning: That judge with skill, and not with will, unarbitrate discerning; Bellingham thou on valiant now, stop not in discontent, Eor Christ with crown, will thee renown, then spend for him, be spent; As thou hast done, thy race still run till death, no death shall stay, Christs work of might, till Scripture light, bring Resurection day. As also about this time for further incouragement in this work of Christ, hee sent over the Reverend servant of his Mr. Lothrop to helpe on with the planting of Plimoth, which increased but little all this time, although shee be the elder sister of all the united Colonies; Some reasons in due place may be rendered. This Reverend Minister was soone called to Office by the Church of Christ at Scicuate. CHAP XXXI. Of the Church of Christ gathered at Newberry. IN the latter end of this yeare, two sincere servants of Christ, inabled by him with gifts to declare his minde unto his people, came over this broad Ocean, and began to build the Tenth Church of Christ at a Towne called Newberry, their names being Mr. James Noise, and Mr. Thomas Parker, somewhat dif∣fering from all the former, and after mentioned Churches in the preheminence of their Presbytery, and it were to be wished that all persons, who have had any hand in those hot contentions, which have fallen out since about Presbyterian and Independent Government in Churches, would have looked on this Example, comparing it with the Word of God, and assuredly it would have stayed (all the godly at lest) of either part from such un∣worthy expressions as have passed to the grief of many of Gods people; And I doubt not but this History will take of that unjust accusation, and standerous imputation of the rise of that floud of errors and false Doctrines sprung up of late, as flowing from the Independent or rather congregationall Churches. But to follow on, this Town is scituate about twelve miles from Ips∣witch, neere upon the wide venting streames of Merrimeck River,
whose strong current is such, that it hath forced its passage through the mighty Rocks, which causeth some sudden falls, and hinders Shipping from having any accesse far into the Land, her bankes are in many places stored with Oken Timber of all sorts, of which, that which they commonly call'd white Oke, is not in∣feriou to our English Timber; in this River lie some few Islands of fertill Land, this Towne is stored with Meddow and upland, which hath caused some Gentlemen, (who brought over good Estates, and finding then no better way to improve thm) to see upon husbandry, amongst whom that Religious and sincere hearted servant of Christ Mr. Richard Dummer, sometime a Ma∣gistrate in this little Common-wealth, hathholpen on this Town, their houses are built very scattering, which hath caused some contending about removall of their place for Sabbath-Assemblies, their Cattell are about foure hundred head, with store of Corne-land in tillage, it consists of about seventy Families, the sou'es in Church fellowship are about an hundred, the teaching Elders of this Congregation have carried it very lovingly toward their people, permitting of them to assist in admitting of persons into Church-society, and in Church censures, so long as they Act regularly, but in case of their male-administration, they assume the power wholly to themselves, their godly life and conversa∣tion hath hitherto been very amiable, and their paines and care over their flock not inferiour to many others, and being bound together in a more stricter band of love then ordinary with promise to spend their dayes together (if the Lord please) and therefore shall not be disuaited in the following Verse: LOe here Loves twinnes by Christ are sent to Preach In wildernesse his little flock among, Though Christs Church-way you fully cannot reach; So far hold fast as you in's word are strong. Parker thy paines with Pen, and Preaching hath Roomes buildings left in Prelacy cast downe, Though' gainst her thou defer Gods finall wrath; Keepe warring still, and sure thou shalt have crowne.
Thy Brother thou oh Noise hast holpe to guide: Christ tender Lambs within his fold to gather, From East to West thou dost Christs Warrier bide; Faint not at last, increase thy fighting rather. CAHP. XXXII. Of good supply, and seasonable helpes the Lord Christ was pleased to send to further his Wildernesse worke, and particular for his Churches of Charles Towne, and Ipswich, and Dorchester. YEt farther for the incouragement of the people of Christ in these their weak beginnings, he daily brings them in fresh sup∣plies, adding this yeare also the reverend and painfull Minister of his Gospell Mr. Zachary Simmes, who was invited soone after his comming over to assist in planting of another Church of Christ, but the place being remote from the pretious servants of Christ already setled, be chose rather to joyne with some Church among them, and in a short space after hee was called to the Office of a Teaching Elder in the Church of Christ at Charles Towne, together with Mr. James, who was then their Pastor, as you have formerly heard. Among all the godly Women that came through the perilous Seas to war their warfare, the wife of this zealous Teacher, Mrs. Sarah Simmes shall not be omitted, nor any other, but to avoid tediousnesse the vertuous Woman, in∣dued by Christ with graces fit for a Wildernesse condition, her courage exceeding her stature, with much cheerfulnesse did un∣dergoe all the difficulties of these times of straites, her God through Faith in Christ supplying all her wants with great indu∣stry, nurturing up her young Children in the feare of the Lord, their number being ten both Sons and Daughters, a certaine signe of the Lords intent to people this vast Wildernesse: God grant they may be valiant in Faith against Sin, Satan and all the enemies of Christs Kingdome, following the example of their Father, and Grandfather, who have both suffered for the same, in remem∣brance of whom these following lines are placed.
COme Zachary, thou must reedfie, Christ Churches in this Desart Land of his, With Moses zeale stampt unto dust defie All crooked wayes that Christ true worship misse. With spirits sword and armor girt about: Thou lay'st on load proud Prelats crowne to crack, And wilt not suffer Wolfes thy flock to rout; Though close they creepe, with sheepe skins on their back. Thy Fathers spirit doubled is upon Thee Simmes, then war, thy Father fighting died, In prayer then prove thou like Champion; Hold ou till death, and Christ will crown provide. After these poore people had welcomed with great joy their newcome Guests, all of a sudden they spy two tall Ships, whose colours shewed them to be some forrein Nation, at which time this little handfull of people began to be much troubled, deem∣ing them to be Rovers, they gathered together such forces as their present condition would afford, very ill fitted as then to rescue an enemy, but their Lord and Master Christ Jesus would not suffer any such to come, and instead of enemies brought in friends, even Dutchmen to furnish them with farther necessary Provision. For the yeare 1635, the honoured Mr. Iohn Haines was chosen Governour, and the honoured Mr. Richard Bellingham Deputy Governour, the number of Free-men added to this little Com∣mon wealth, were about one hundred forty and five. The time now approaching, wherein the Lord Christ would have his people come from the Flaile to the Fan, threshing out much this yeare, increasing the number of his Troopes, and valiant Lea∣ders, the Ships came thicker and faster filled with many worthy parsonages; Insomuch that the former people began to forget their Poverty, and verily Cold, Purity, Peace and Plenty run all in one channell, Gods people here should sure have met with none other, but the still waters of Peace and Plenty for back and belly soone contract much mudde, as you shall he are (God willing) in the following History: this yeare came in the honoured
Sir Henry Vaine, who aboad not long in this worthy worke, yet mind him I will in the following Lines. Sir Henry Vaine once Governour of the English People in New England. THy Parents Vaine, of worthy fame, in Christ and thou for him: Through Ocean wide in new World trid a while his warrier bin, With small defeat thou didst retreat to Brittaine ground againe, There stand thou stout, for Christ hold out, Christs Champion a remain. Also at this time Christ sent over the much honoured and up∣right hearted servant of his Richard Saltingstall Esquire, Son to the before-named Sir Richard Saltingstall, who being weary of this Wildernesse worke, returned home againe not long before, and now his Son being chose to the Office of a Magistrate, con∣tinued for some good space of time, helping on the affaires of this little Common wealth, to the honour of Christ, who hath called him: both Father and Son are here remembred. THou worthy Knight, Saltingstall hight, her's gaine doth gold exceed Then trifle not, its to be got, if thou can'st see thy neede. Why wilt thhu back, and leave as wreck, this worthy worke begun, Art thou back-bore, Christ will send more, and raise instead thy son. His Fathers gon, young Richard on here valiantly doth War, For Christ his truth, to their great Ruth, Heathens opposers are: To study thou, thy mind dost how, and daily good promote, Saltingstall why, then dost thou fly, let all Gods people note. That thou wilt stand, in thy own Land, Christ there thē strengthen thee With grace thee heate, that thy retreate, may for his glory be: At ending day, he thee array, with Glory will not faile, Breaking graves bands, with his strong hands, and free dust from death's goale. Among these Troopes of Christs Souldiers, came at this time, the godly servant, of Christ Mr. Roger Harlackenden, a young Gentleman valiant in Faith, and appointed by Christ to assist his
people in this Desart, he was chose to the Office of a Magistrate, as also to be a choise Leader of their Military Forces, which as yet were but in a strange posture; And therefore till the yeare 1644. (at which time the Countrey wis really placed in a posture of War, to be in a readinesse at all times) there shall not be any thing spoken concerning their Military Discipline, the con∣tinuance of this Souldier of Christ was but short, the Lord taking him to rest with himselfe. HArlackenden, among these men of nose Christ hath thie seated: In warlike way Christ thee aray, with zeal and love well he ated. As generall belov'd of all, Christ Souldiers honour thee: In thy young yeares, courage appeares, and kinde benignity. Short are thy days, spēt to his praise, whose Church work thou must aid, His work shall bide, silver tride, but thine by death is staid. The number of Ministers that came over this yeare was about eleaven, and many other like faithfull servants of Christ, among whom arrived those two Reverend and laborious servants of his Mr. Norton, and Mr. Shepheard, of whose narrow escape you have heard the last yeare: Mr. Norton, was called to the Office of a Teaching Elder at the Towne of Ipswich to the Church of Christ there, where Mr. Warde as yet remained in Office. Also the learned labours of this Souldier of Christ are obvious to our Countreymen, hee Preaching there, the blessing of God hath not onely built up many in the Knowledge of Christ, but also been the meanes of converting diverse soules, turning them from the power of Satan to Faith in Christ, whom the Lord long continue; you shall further hear of Christs gratious assisting of him in the first and last Synod holden here at Cambridge, and in the meane time let no man be offended that the Author quickens up his own dull effections, in telling how largely the Lord hath bestowed his Graces upon these Instruments of his, al∣though sinfull dust and ashes.
THou Noble Norton, who art honoured by Thy Christ, with learned Arguments doth fill Thy mouth with might new errors to destroy; And force deceivers silently to yeild. Weake dust waite on thy Christ for further strength: Who doth his Davids make as Angels bright, To trample down his enemies at length; All breake or bow unto his Kingdomes might. Illettered Men and Women that doe love, Preheminence, condemne thy learned skill, But Christ hath given his blessing from above Ʋnto thy workes the World with light to fill. Christs faithfull servants met in Synod, take Thee for their Pen-men Scriptures light to cleere, With Scripture shew what Government Christ gave; To's Churches till himselfe againe appeare. Here my indeared Reader, I must mind thee of the industrious servant of Christ Mr. John Wilson, who this yeare landed the third time upon this American shore from his Native Country, where now againe by the Divine Providence of Christ, hee narrowly escaped the Hunters hands, being cloathed in a Country-mans habit, passing from places to place, declared to the people of God what great Workes Christ had already done for his people in New England, which made many Christian soules long to see these admirable Acts of Christ, although it were not to be injoy∣ed, but by passing through an Ocean of troubles, Voyaging night and day upon the great deep, which this zealous servant of Christ had now five times passed over: at this time came over the Sage, grave, reverend and faithfull servant of Christ M. Richard Mather, indued by the Lord with many Heavenly gifts, of a plaine and upright spirit, apt to teach, full of gratious expressions, and Re∣solvedly bent to follow the truth, as it is in Jesus, hee was anon after his comming called to Office in the Church of Christ at the Towne of Dorchester, to assist in the Worke of the Lord, with Mr. Marareck, whose worke not long after was ended by death, leaving Mr. Mather alone to continue the same.
WIth cheerfull face Mather doth toile indure In wildernesse, spending the prime of's age, To build Christs Churches, and soules health procure; In battell thou dost deepe thy selfe ingage. Marvell not Man that Mather through an host Of enemies doth breake, and fighting stands, It's Christ him keepes, of him is all his boast; Who power gives to do, and then commands. With gratious speech thy Masters Message thou Declarest to all, and all wouldst have submit, That to his Kingdome every knee might bow; But those resisthis sword shall surely hit, Till age doth crown thy head with hoary hairs: Well hast thou warr'd, till Mathers young againe, Thy son in fight his Fathers strength repairs; Father and Son beate down Christs foes amaine. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the beginning of the Churches of Christ, to be planted at Canectico, and first of the Church of Christ removall to Hartford, 1635. THis yeare the servants of Christ, who peopled the Towne of Cambridge, were put upon thoughts of removing, hear∣ing of a very fertill place upon the River of Canectico low Land, and well stored with Meddow, which is greatly in esteeme with the people of New England, by reason the Winters are very long: This people seeing that Tillage went but little on, Resolved to remove, and breed up store of Cattell, which were then at eight and twenty pound a Cow, or neare upon, but assuredly the Lord intended far greater matters than man purposes, but God dis∣poses these men, having their hearts gone from the Lord, on which they were seated, soone tooke dislike at every little mat∣ter, the Plowable plaines were too dry and sandy for them, and the Rocky places, although more fruitfull, yet to eate their bread with toile of hand, and how they deemed it unsupportable;
And therefore they onely waited now for a people of stronger Faith than themselves were to purchase their Houses and Land, which in conceipt they could no longer live upon, and accord∣ingly they met with Chapmen, a people new come, who having ught their possessions, they highed them away to their new Pattion With whom went the Grave and Reverend servant of Christ Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Stone, for indeed the whole Church re∣moved, as also the much honoured Mr. Haynes & divers other men of note for the place, being out of the Mattacusets Patten; they erected another Government, called by the Indian name, Ca∣nectico, being farther incouraged by two honourable personages, the Lord Say, and Lord Brookes, who built a Forrest at the mouth of the River, and called it Say-brook Forrest: passing up the Ri∣ver they began to build a Towne, which they called Hartford, where this Church of Christ sat down their station, there went to these parts also the Reverend Mr. Wareham, and divers from the Towne of Dorchester. The place of setling themselves, and erecting a Towne was far upon the River, the part next the Sea being very Rocky, but on the banke of this River they planted the good Towne of Hartford, and established civill Government: of their gathering into a Church, you have formerly heard. Onely here minde the gratious servant of Christ, Mr. Wareham, whose long labours in this worke are exprest. WIth length of dayes Christ crowned hath thy head. In Wildernesse to mannage his great War, 'Gainst Antichrist by strength of him art lead; With steady hand to sling thy stone from far. That groveling in his gore may lie smit downe This mighty Monster, that the Earth hath taken, With's poysons sweet in cup of Gold drunke down; Dead drunke those lie whom Christ doth not awaken. But Wareham thou by him art sent to save, With's word of truth Christ to their soules apply, That deadly sin hath laid in rotting Grave Dead, live in Christ here, and Eternally.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of Cambridge second Church, being the 11. of Christ gathered in the Mattacusets, and of further supply for Salem Church. THese people and Church of Christ being thus departed from New-towne, the godly people, who came in their roomes, gathered the eleaventh Church of Christ, and called to the Office of a Pastor, that gratious sweete Heavenly minded, and soule-ravishing Minister, Mr. Thomas Shepheard, in whose soule the Lord shed abroad his love so abundantly, that thousands of souls have cause to blesse God for him, even at this very day, who are the Seale of his Ministrey, and hee a man of a thousand, indued with abundance of true saving knowledge for himselfe and others, yet his naturall Parts were weake, but spent to the full as solloweth: NO loungr Hawke poore Patridge to devoure More eager is then Prelates Nimrod power Thomas to hunt, my Shephard sweet pursue To seas brinke, but Christ saves his soule for you; Sending thee Shepheard, safe through Seas awaie, To feede his stock unto thy ending day, Where sheepe seek Wolves) thy bosome lambs would catch; But night and day thou ceasest not to watch. And Warne with teares thy flock of cheaters vile, Who in sheepes cloathing would the weak beguile, With dropping dewes from thy lips Christ hath made Thy hearers eyes oft water springing blade. With pierced hearts they cry aloud and say, Shew us sweet Shepheard our salvations way, Thy lovely speech such ravishment doth bring; Christ gives thee power to heale as well as sting. Thou gates sets ope for Christ thy King to enter, In hearts of many spirits joy to center, But mourne my Muse, hang downe thy head with woe, With teares, sighs, sobs lament thy Shepheard so.
(Why?) hee's in Heaven, but I one Earth am left: More Earthly, 'cause of him I am bereft. Oh Christ why dost thou Shepheard take away, In erring times when sheepe most apt to stray. The many Souldiers and Officers of Christ that came over this yeare, moved some wonder in the mindes of those, whom he had beene pleased to give a great measure of discerning, yet here they fell abundantly short, deeming almost an impossibility of improving their Talents in this Wildernesse, the Indian-people being uncapable of understanding their Language, the English▪ congregations that were already set downe, being fully furnish∣ed with Teaching Elders, and that which was most strange they were perswaded they should meet with no enemies to oppose them, as if Christ would lead them forth into the Field in vaine. But Christ Iesus, having the hearts of all Men opened before him, soon shewed them, their worke, and withall made roome for them to set downe, I and many more beside, yea, and beyond expectation made this poore barren Wildernesse be∣come a fruitfull Land unto them that waited on him for the ac∣complshing thereof, feeding them with the flower of Wheat, as in its time and place (God willing) shall be shewed, although it pleased him this yeare to visit them, and try them againe with a great scarcity of Bread, by reason of the multitude that came brought somewhat shorter Provisions then ordinary, which caused them to be in some straites. But their Lord Christ gives cut a Word of command to those, who occupy their businesse in the great deepe, to furnish from Ireland some Ships laden with food for his people. Also hee commands the Winds and the Seas to beare up these Ships, and blow them forth on their way, till they arrive among his people in New England, whose appetities were now sharpe∣set for Bread. One poore man among others deeming hee had found out some forsaken Barnes of the Indians (whose manner it to lay up their Corne in the Earth, lighteh one a grave, where finding bones of the dead instead of Corne, hee was taken with feare of this, as a sad omen that hee should then die for want of food, but in this hee proved no true Prophet, for the
Lord was pleased to bring in seasonable supply, and the man is living at this very day. This yeere came over the Famous servant of Christ M. Hugh Peters, whose courage was not inferiour to any of these transported servants of Christ, but because his native Soile hath had the greatest share of his labours, the lesse will be said of him here, hee was called to Office by the Church of Christ, at Salem, their former Pastor, the Reverend M. Higging son, having cnded his labours resting with the Lord. WIth courage bold Peters a Souldier stout In Wildernesse for Christ begins to war, Much worke he finds mongst people, yet hold out; With fluent tongue he stops phantastickjar. Swife Torrent stayes of liberties large vent: Through crooked wayes of error daily flowing, Shiloes soft streames to bath in would all bent; Should he while they in Christian freedome growing. But back thou must, thy Talents Christs will have Improved for him, his glory is thy crowne, And thou base dust till he thee honour gave; It matters not though the world on thee do frown. CHAP. XXXV. Of the Twelfth Church of Christ gathered at Concord. YEt further at this time entered the Field two more valiant Leaders of Christs Souldiers, holy men of God, Mr. Buckly and M. Jones, penetrating further into this Wildernesse then any formerly had done, with divers other servants of Christ: they build an Inland Towne, which they called Concord, named from the occasion of the present time, as you shall after heare: this Towne is seated upon a faire fresh River, whose Rivulets are fil∣led with fresh Marsh, and her streames with Fish, it being a branch of that large River of Morrimeck Allwifes, and Shad in their season come up to this Towne, but Salmon and Daice cannot come up, by reason of the Rocky salles, which causeth
their Meddowes to lie much covered with water, the which these people together with their Neigbour Towne, have severall times assayed to cut through but cannot, yet it may be turned another way with an hundred pound charge as it appeared, this Towne was more populated once then now it is (some faint-hearted Souldiers among them fearing the Land would prove barren, sold their possessions for little, and removed to a new Plantation, (which have most commonly a great prize set on them) the num∣ber of Families at present are about 50. their buildings are con∣veniently placed chiefly in one straite streame under a sunny-banke in a low levell, their heard of great Cattell are about 300. the Church of Christ here consists of about seventy soules, their teach∣ing Concord the 12. Church. Elders were Mr. Buckly, and Mr. Jones, who removed from them with that part of the people, who went away, so that onely the reverend grave and godly Mr. Buckly remaines. RIches and honours Buckly layes aside To please his Christ, for whom he now doth war, Why Buckly thou hast Riches that will bide, And honours that exceeds Earths honour far. Thy bodies worne, and dayes in Desert spent To feede a few of Christs poore scattered sheepe, Like Christ's bright body, thy poore body rent; With Saints and Angells company shall keepe. Thy Tongue, and Pen doth to the World declare: Christs covenant with his flock shall firmly stand, When Heavens and Earth by him dissolved are; Then who can hold from this his worke at hand. Two Bucklies more Christ by his grace hath taken, And sent abroad to mannage his great wars. I'ts Buklies joy that Christ his sons new making, Hath placest in's churches for to shine as Stare. This holy and sincere servant of Christ was put upon the grea∣ter tryall, by reason he and his were tenderly brought up, and now by the provident hand of Christ were carried far into this desart-land, where they met with some hardships for a long time, till the place was well peopled, they lived barely.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of the laborious worke Chrsts people have in planting this wilder∣nesse set, forth in the building the Towne of Concord, being the first in-land Towne. NOw because it is one of the admirable acts of Christ Pro∣vidence in leading his people forth into these Westerne Fields, in his providing of Huts for them, to desend them from the bitter stormes this place is subject unto, therefore here is a short Epitome of the manner how they placed downe their dwellings in this Desart Wildernesse, the Lord being pleased to hide from the Eyes of his people the difficulties they are to en∣counter withall in a new Plantation, that they might not there∣by be hindered from taking the worke in hand; upon some in∣quiry of the Indians, who lived to the North-west of the Bay, one Captaine Simon Willard being acquainted with them, by rea∣son of his Trade, became a chiefe instrument in erecting this Town, the land they purchase of the Indians, and with much diffi∣culties traveling through unknowne woods, and through watery scrampes, they discover the fitnesse of the place, sometimes pas∣sing through the Thickets, where their hands are forced to make way for their bodies passage, and their feete clambering over the crossed Trees, which when they missed they sunke into an uncertaine bottome in water, and wade up to the knees, tum∣bling sometimes higher and sometimes lower, wearied with this toile, they at end of this meete with a scorching plaine, yet not so plaine, but that the ragged Bushes scratch their legs fouly, even to wearing their stockings to their bare skin in two or three houres; if they be not otherwise well defended with Bootes, or Bukings, their flesh will be torne: (that some being forced to passe on without further provision) have had the bloud trickle downe at every step, and in the time of Summer the Sun casts such a reflecting heate from the sweet Ferne, whose scent is very strong so that some herewith have beene very nere fainting, al∣though very able bodies to undergoe much travell, and this not to be indured for one day, but for many, and verily did not the Lord incourage their naturall parts (with hopes of a new and
strange discovery, expecting every houre to see some rare sight never seene before) they were never able to hold out, and breake through: but above all, the thirsting desires these servants of Christ have had to Plant his Churches, among whom the fore∣named Mr. Jones shall not be forgotten. IN Desart's depth where Wolves and Beares abide, There Jones sits down a wary watch to keepe, O're Christs deare flock. who now are wandered wide; But not from him, whose eyes ne're close with sleepe. Surely it sutes thy melancholly minde, Thus solitary for to spend thy dayes, Much moe thy soule in Christ content doth finde, To worke for him, who thee to joy will raise. Leading thy son to Land, yet more remote, To feede his flock upon this Westerne wast: Exhort him then Christs Kingdome to promote; That he with thee of lasting joyes may tast. Yet farther to tell of the hard labours this people found in Planting this Wildernesse, after some dayes spent in search, toy∣ling in the day time as formerly is said; like true Jacob, its they rest them one the Rocks where the night takes them, their short repast is some small pittance of Bread, if it hold out, but as for Drinke they have plenty, the Countrey being well watered in all places that yet are found out, their farther hardship is to travell, sometimes they know not whether, bewildred indeed without sight of Sun, their compasse miscarrying in crouding through the Bushes, they sadly search up and down for a known way, the Indians paths being not above one foot broad, so that a man may travell many dayes and never find one. But to be sure the directing Providence of Christ hath beene better unto them than many paths, as might here be inserted, did not hast call my Pen away to more waighty matters; yet by the way a touch thus, it befell with a servant maide, who was travelling a∣bout three or foure miles from one Towne to another, loosing her selfe in the Woods, had very diligent search made after her for the space of three dayes, and could not possible be found,
then being given over as quite lost, after three dayes and nights, the Lord was pleased to bring her feeble body to her own home in safety, to the great admiration of all that heard of it. This intricate worke no whit daunted these resolved servants of Christ to goe on with the worke in hand, but lying in the open aire, while the watery Clouds poure down all the night season, and sometimes the driving Snow dissolving on their backs, they keep their wee cloathes warme with a continued fire, till the renew∣ed morning give fresh opportunity of further travell; after they have thus found out a place of aboad, they burrow themselves in the Earth for their first shelter under some Hill-side, casting the Earth aloft upon Timber; they make a smoaky fire against the Earth at the highest side, and thus these poore servants of Christ provide shelter for themselves, their Wives and little ones, keep∣ing off the short showers from their Lodgings, but the long raines penetrate through, to their great disturbance in the night season: yet in these poore Wigwames (they sing Psalmes, pray and praise their God) till they can provide them houses, which ordinarily was not wont to be with many till the Earth, by the Lorde bles∣sing, brought forth Bread to feed them, their Wives and little ones, which with sore labours they attaine every one that can lift a hawe to strike it into the Earth, standing stoutly to their labours, and teare up the Rootes and Bushes, which the first yeare beares them a very thin crop, till the soard of the Earth be rotten, and therefore they have been forced to cut their bread very thin for a long season. But the Lord is pleased to provide for them great store of Fish in the spring time, and especially Alewives about the bignesse of a Herring, many thousands of these, they used to put under their Indian Corne, which they plant in Hills five foote asunder, and assuredly when the Lord created this Corne, hee had a speciall eye to supply these his peoples wants with it, for ordinarily five or six graines doth produce six hundred. As for flesh they looked not for any in those times (although now they have plenty) unlesse they could barter with the Indians for Venison or Rockoons, whose flesh is not much inferiour un∣to Lambe, the toile of a new Plantation being like the labours of Hercules never at an end, yet are none so barbarously bene
(under the Mattacusets especially) but with a new Plantation they ordinarily gather into Church-fellowship, so that Pastor and people suffer the inconveniences together, which is a great meanes to season the sore labours they undergoe, and verily the edge of their appetite was greater to spirituall duties at their first comming in time of wants, than afterward: many in new Plan∣tations have been forced to go barefoot, and bareleg, till these latter dayes, and some in time of Frost and Snow: Yet were they then very healthy more then now they are: in this Wilder∣nesse-worke men of Estates speed no better than others, and some much worse for want of being inured to such hard labour, having laid out their estate upon cattell at five and twenty pound a Cow, when they came to winter them with in-land Hay, and seed upon such wild Fother as was never cut before, they could not hold out the Winter, but ordinarily the first or second yeare after their comming up to a new Plantation, many of their Cat∣tell died, especially if they wanted Salt-marshes: and also those, who supposed they should feed upon Swines flesh were cut short, the Wolves commonly feasting themselves before them, who never leave neither flesh nor bones, if they be not seared away be∣fore they have made an end of their meale, as for those who laid out their Estate upon Sheepe, they speed worst of any at the be∣ginning (although some have sped the best of any now) for untill the Land be often fed with other Cattell Sheepe cannot live; And therefore they never thrived till these latter dayes: Horse had then no better successe, which made many an honest Gentleman travell a foot for a long time, and some have even perished with extreame heate in their travells: as also the want of English graine, Wheate, Barly and Rie proved a sore afflicti∣on to some stomacks, who could not live upon Indian Bread and water, yet were they compelled to it till Cattell increased, and the Plowes could but goe: instead of Apples and Peares, they had Pomkins and Squashes of divers kinds, their lonesome con∣dition was very grievous to some, which was much aggravated by continuall feare of the Indians approach, whose cruelties were much spoken of, and more especially during the time of the Peqot wars. Thus this poore people populate this howling Desart,
marching manfully on (the Lord assisting) through the greatest difficulties, and sorest labours that ever any with such weak means have done. CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Thirteenth Church of Christ gathered at Hingham, 1636. AT this time also came to shore the servant of Christ Master Peter Hubbord, whom the Lord was pleased to make use of for feeding his people in this Wildernesse, being called to Office by the Church of Christ at the Town of Hingham, which is scituate upon the Sea coasts South-east of Charles River, being a place nothing inferiour to their Neighbours for scituation, and the people have much profited themselves by transporting Tim∣ber, Planke and Mast for Shipping to the Town of Boston, as also Ceder and Pine-board to supply the wants of other Townes, and also to remote parts, even as far as Barbadoes. They want not for Fish for themselves and others also. This Towne consisted of about sixty Families, the forme is somewhat intricate to describe, by reason of the Seas wasting crookes, where it beates upon a mouldering shore, yet have they compleat streetes in some places, the people joyned in Church covenant in this place, were much about an hundred soules, but have been lessened by a sad unbrotherly contention, which fell out among them, wasting them every way, continued already for seven yeares space, to the great griefe of all other Churches, who held out the right hand of fellowship unto them in Bro∣therly communion, which may (the Lord helping) demonstate to all the true Churches of Christ the World throughout, al∣though they be distanced by place or Nation, yet ought they ne∣ver to take up such an Independent way, as to reject the advise and counsell of each other, for although the Lord Christ have compleated his commission in giving full power to every par∣ticular Church to exercise all his Ordinances in and toward their owne body, yet hath the Lord so dispensed his gifts, that when the one want, the other shall abound both in spirituall and tem∣porall,
that by giving and receiving mutuall love may be main∣tained, the intire truthes of Christ continued, the Churches of Christ supported, superiority of any may be avoided, and all such as raise discord among Brethren may be retarded, the down∣fall of Antichrist, and restauration of that antient people of the Lord furthered, through the Unity of Christs Churches the World throughout: this Church I hope will give signall to others (the Lord assisting) that they split not upon the Rock. Of their Pastors I shall say no more, but this at present. OH Hubbard! why do'st leave thy native soile? Is't not to war 'mongst Christ's true worthies here, What wilt give out, thou'lt loose thy former toile? And starve Christs flock, which he hath purchast deare. What would's thou have, speake plaine, truth bides the light: To Gods word goe, it's that must triall be, Hath cruell sword, not het one thy side right, Increase in love, and thou wilt Justice see. With humble, holy, learned men converse, Thee and thy flock they would in one unite, And all the fogs of selfe conceit disperse; Thee and thy sons the Lord Christ guide aright. Some other of the Ministers of Christ arrived this yeare 1635. As Mr. Flint, Mr. Carter, and Mr. Walton and some others, of whom we shall speake (by the Lord assistance) in due time and place, in the meane time here is to be remembred Mr. Thomas Flint a sincere servant of Christ, who had a faire yearly Revenue in England, but having improved it for Christ, by casting it in the common Treasury, as it appeares in the former part of this History, he waites on the Lord for doubling his Talent, if it shall seeme good unto him so to doe, and the meane time spending his person for the good of his people in the Office of a Magi∣strate.
AT Christs commands, thou leav'st thy lands, and native habitation: His folke to aid, in Desart straid, for Gospells Exaltation, Flint Hardy thou, wilt not allow, the underminding Fox, With subtill skill, Christsvines to spill, thy sword shall give thē knocks. Yet thou base dust, and all thou hast is Christ's, and by him thou: Art made to be, such as we see, hold fast for ever now. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the placing down of many Souldiers of Christ, and gathering the Church of Christ at Sanowitch in Plimouth patten, and further supply for the Churches of Ipswich and Linne. THis yeare 1636. Sir Henry Vaine, was chosen Governour, and John Winthrope Esquire Deputy Governour, the number of Freemen added were about eighty three. This yeare came over the much honoured Mr. Fenwick a godly and able instrument to assist in helping to uphold the civill Government of the second, and third Colonies here planted, by the Divine Providence of the most high God, hee having purchased the Plantation of Say∣brooke. Fore, became a good incourager to the Church of Christ at Hartford, where the reverend Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Stone were Officers. In remembrance of whom a few lines take here. FEnwick among this Christian throng, to wildernesse doth fiee: There learn'd hast thou, yet further how, Christ should advanced be, Who for that end, doth back thee send, their Senator to sit; In native soile, for him still toile, while thou hast season fit, His Churches peace, do thou not cease, with their increase to bring, That they and thee, in lasting Glee may Hallelujaeh sing. The beginning of this yeare was spent in accommodating these new come Guests in the former yeare, whose numbers was neer about three thousand, and now they began to be perswaded they should be a setled people, not minding the present dangers they were in, as you shall hear anon, onely in the meane time
take notice of further supply the Lord Christ was pleased to send before the cattell increased to its strength, among whom the aged, and long continned Souldiers of Christ Jesus Mr. Partrich, as also Mr. Nathaniel Rogers an able disputant, whose mouth the Lord was pleased to fill with many arguments for the defence of his truth, Mr. Samuel Whiting, who hath also, with keeping to the patterne of sound and wholesome Doctrine, much stopped the spreading Leaven of the Pharises, Mr. Partrich was called to Office at a Towne then named Dukes Berry in Plimoth Go∣vernment, scituated upon the Sea-coast, where the people of Christ being gathered into a Church, Ordained him to be their Pastor. IN thine owne soile well rooted in the truth, Thou didst stand fast by Prelates power unbow'd, But Laude layes load on Gods solke to his Ruth, By whom thou mayst, no longer, be alow'd. Then Partrich thou thy wings begins to spread Of Faith and Love to flie these long Seas o're, To wildernesse where thou Christs Lambes hast fed; With's sincere Milke this fourteene yeare and more. But now with age thy Almon Tree doth flourish, Yet spreading like the Palme Tree dost thou stand, I'th house of God Christ Roote thy Boughs do nourish; And for thy head he hath a Crowne in's hand. Mr. Nathaniel Rogers being landed, after a long and tedious Voyage at Sea, was welcomed by the Church of Christ at Ips∣witch, where the Reverened and Judicious Mr. Nathaniel Ward, although a very able Preacher, and much desired, yet for some naturall infirmity (himselfe being best privy unto) desired to be unbound of his ingagement with his people in point of Office: that being left to his liberty, hee might Preach more seldom, in whose stead the Church called to Office this Reverend and Holy Man of God Mr. Nathaniel Rogers, whose labours in this Westerne World, have been very much: a very sweet heavenly minded man, of whom the Author is bold to say as followeth:
THrough boystrous Seas thy brittle frame of Man It safely is in Christ's sweet armes infold, No wonder then thou weake dust stotly can Preach Christs in's truths, why he doth thee uphold? Why Rogers lee thee over-Sea hath fett Against the day of Battell, now at hand, No sooner are thy feet one those shores set, But Leaders do Christ truth withstand. Ʋndaunted thou these Westerne Fields dost enter, Filld with the spirits ready sword at hand, Ingage thou wilt thy selfe, 'mongst hardships venter; Valiant thou foughtst under thy Christ's command. And yet with all men wouldst have peace thy aime, If deepe to wound, and sweetly then to say, Come to my Christ, hee'l heale your wounds againe; Canst but submit hee'l never say thee nay. With learned Method thou Gods Word divides: Long labouring that each soule may take his part, Thy gratious speech with grave impression bides; Thus Christ by thee is pleas'd to win the heart. My Muse lament, Nathaniel is decaying: Why dost thou grutch him Heaven, such toile hath had, In Christ his Vineyard rather be thou praying; That in Christs armes he resting may be glad. Mr. Samuel Whiting was well welcomed by the Church of Christ at Cawgust, which Towne, being now of age to receive an English name, was called Linne, where this Reverend man now hath his aboade. THy ardent Love, the countlesse Oceans measure Quench cannot, for thy love on him is set, Who of true love hath aie the depthlesse Treasure, Doth thine increase, least thou should'st, his forget. Love Christ in's truths my Whiting thou hast done: Thou wilt not suffer with their leaven sower, False Doctrines 'mongst thy tender flock to run; Timely cut off wilt thou all those devour.
Samuel mourne not thy strength in Desart's spent: Rather rejoyce thy Christ makes use of thee Soules to convert, his Kingdomes large extent From East to West shall shortly setled be. Thine Eyes and Eares have seen and heard great things Done by thy Christ, shewes he thy toile accepts, Though thy weake flesh weaker to dust hee'l bring; Thy quickned spirit increast in his joy leaps. CHAP. XXXIX. Of the first appearing in the Field, of the enemies of Christs people in point of-Reformation. ANd now to follow our first simile of a Souldier, the Lord Christ having safely landed many a valiant Souldier of his on these Westerne shores, drawes hither also the common enemies to Reformation, both in Doctrine and Discipline; But it was for like end, as the Lord sometime drew Sisera the Captaine of Jabins army to the River Kishon for their destruction, onely herein was a wide difference; there Sisera was delivered into the hands of a Woman, and here Sisera was a woman; their wea∣pons and warre was carnall, these spirituall; there Jabin was but a man, here Jabin was the common enemy of mans salvation. In the yeare 1636. the Angels of the severall Churches of Christ in N. England sounding forth their silver Trumpets, heard ever and anon the jarring sound of ratling Drums in their eares, striking up an alarum to the battell, it being a frequent thing publikely to oppose the pure and perfect truths of Christ (deli∣vered by the mouth of his Ministers) and that by way of question as the Pharises, Sadduces and Herodians did Christ. But to bring this disorderly worke of theirs into some order, for assuredly could the Author come up to relate the full of the matter in hand, it would through the mercy of Christ make much for the good of Gods people the World throughout, and helpe to dis∣cover the last (I hope) but most subtile practises of Satan to hin∣der the Restauration of the purity of Christs Ordinances in his Churches in all places; As also used by him and his instruments
to divert the hands of those, to whom it belongs, from pulling downe Antichrist, to which end he stirreth up some of his instru∣ments (well educated in the Masking schoole of Hippocrisy) to take upon them this long Voyage, giving them in charge by all meanes to carry it more close, then his Jesuites had done, and for their paines they should have the honours to be counted such, as were of a sharper fight, and deeper discerning then any others. Satan, knowing right well that at the fall of Antichrist hee must be chained up for a thousand years, strives with all the wicked craft his long experienced maliciousnesse could possibly invent, to uphold the same, having already perswaded many that his Kingdome was wholy ruinated with our English Nation, and so diswaded them a long time from further prosecuting against him. But Antichrists Kingdome, as it plainly appeares by Scrip∣ture, consists chiefly in two parts, his deceaveible Doctrines, and his Kingly power. The first of these being in measure abolished, the latter was still retained by the Prelacy, and some Lording Presbytery in greater or lesser measure, as they could attaine un∣to it. Now Satan, who is daily walking to and fro compassing the Earth, seeing how these resolved Souldiers of Christ in New England with indefatigable paines laboured, not onely the finall ruine of Antichrist, in both, but also the advance of Christs Kingdome, in seting up daily Churches according to his first in∣stitution. Wherefore he sets upon a new way to stop (if it were possible) this worke of Reformation, and seeing no other way will serve, he stirs up instruments to cry down Antichrist as much as the most, I and more too, but by this project they should leade people as much out of the way on the other hand, and in the Doctrinall part of Antichrists Kingdome, fall to more hor∣rid Blasphemies then the Papist (as God willing) you shall heare some of them did, namely the Gortenist, who most blasphemously professe themselves to be personally the Christ: and as for the other part of his Kingdome, namely the power or Dominion of the beast, this they should with all violence batter downe also, but it must be none other then to make way for their owne ex∣altation, and pay them their wages in the former page promised them, as also withall to overthow the authority Christ hath or∣dained
to be continued in his Churches, in and under him, and furthermore to lock up the Sword of Civill Government for ever, especially in matters that concerne the foure first Com∣mands of God, a cunning way to save the beasts head whole. You have now heard of the intention, you shall now see their actions. The Lord Christ in his boundlesse mercy give all his people eyes to see, and hearts to believe, that after they have in measure escaped the filthy pollutions of the beast, they may not againe be intangled with these damnabled Doctrines, stealing away their hearts by degrees, under a seeming shew of pulling down Antichrist. The Embassadors of Christ Jesus, having full li∣berty to deliver their masters minde, Preach unto all the Doctrine of Free grace, beseeching them to be reconciled unto God in Christ, and that the revealed will of God is, that all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and that God hath given his onely begotten Son, That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. Yet withall mind∣ing them that Faith is the gift of God, and none can come un∣to Christ, but such as the Father drawes, and withall that the whole will not see any need of the Phisicians, but the sick, adding also that none can come to the sight of his sicknesse or dead con∣dition but by the Law of God, unlesse they be quicker sighted then the Apostle; They indevour also to build up others in their holy Faith, that they might come to see the Love of God in Christ, which passeth knowledge, and to this end they shew them the fruits of Faith which worketh by love, and that love will be obedient to all the commands of Christ, who saith, if you love me keepe my Commandements; And further that Faith purifies the heart, and that a constant supply must be had from Christ. With these and the like sound and wholsome truths the Mini∣sters of Christ feeds their severall flocks in New England, drawing their Doctrines plainly from their Text, and substantially back∣ing them with store of Scripture, and undeniable reason, and then delivering to every Man his portion. But this good old way would not serve the turne with cer∣taine Sectaries that were hither come, who like cunning Sophi∣sters, seeing the bent of the peoples hearts (after so many mer∣cies received) was to magnifie the rich Grace of God in Christ;
they began to tell the people (yet very privately) that the most, if not all the Ministers among them Preached a Covenant of workes, either course or fine, and with a what doe you say to this. They begin to spread their Errors and Herefies, laying the foundation of them as nere the truth as possible they can, the easier to deceive, but in the prosecution, to be sure they ran far enough from it, but to begin; First, they quarrell with the Doctrine of Faith in Christ, and say, a Soule is justified with∣out it. CHAP. XL. Of the cunning policy of Satan in that machevillian Principle, divide and overcome, and of the two first dividing Principles, by which many errors were brought in. ANd verily Satane policy here (as in all places where the Lord Christ is acknowledged) was to keepe men from that one right way, by the which hee applies himselfe to the soule, no marvell then if so many Errours arise, like those fained heads of Hidra, as fast as one is cut off two stand up in the roome, and chiefly about the uniting of a soule to Christ by Faith. Their Errors in this point they reported to be the judgement of the Reverend and Judicious Mr. John Cotten; But hee having spoken for himselfe in his answer to Mr. Baily, I forbeare, onely this by the way, take notice of these subtill Projectors, the Erronist I meane, who perceiving this holy man of God Mr. Cotten was, and yet is in great esteeme with the people of God, for the great grace Christ hath bestowed upon him in his deepe discerning the mysteries of godlinesse, as also discerning some little difference btweene him, and the other Elders about this point, commene upon it, and in large at their pleasure, and then in daily venting their deceivable Doctrines, like subtill Logicians, bring in this as their strongest argument in the last place. I'le tell you Friend, Neighbour, Brother, if you will forbeare to speake of it till you hear farther, this is the judgement of M. Cotten, when he, it may be had never heard of it, or at least wise, when they brought this their bastardly brat to him, they put another vizard on the face
of it: but that you may understand their way of broaching their abominable errors, it was in dividing those things the Lord hath united in his worke of conversion continued, carrying on a Soule to Heaven in these foure Particulars. First, in dividing betweene the word and the word, under pre∣tence 1. Dividing betweene the Word, and the Word. of a legall Gospell, perswading the people their Ministers were legall Preachers, teaching them little better then Popery, and unfit for Gospell Churches, denying them to be any Mini∣sters of Christ that Preach any preparation worke, by shewing men what the Law requires. Here's nothing sayes one of them, but Preaching out of the Law and the Prophets, truly sayes an∣other of them I have not heard a pure Gospell Sermon from any of them, but sure they were both troubled with the Lethargy, or read not the Gospell themselves, for they may finde the A∣postles, yea, and Christ himselfe Preached good Gospell sure, out of the Law and the Prophets. Secondly, in separating Christ and his Graces, in manifesting himselfe to be in the Soule, and this they say makes much for the 2. Christ and his Graces. magnifying of Free-grace, and indeed they made it so free, that the soule that receives it shall never taste any of it by their con∣sent, but remaine still a dry branch as before; these legall Phari∣ses, sayes one of them, tell us of a thing they call inherent grace, and of a man being made a new creature, but I am sure the best of them goe on in their legall duties and performances still, sor∣rowing for sinne hearing of Sermons, observing duty Morning and Evening, and many such like matters. Tush man sayes an∣other of them, you shall hear more then this, I was discoursing with one of their Scholasticall Preachers Disciples, a professed con∣vert, and yet when he came to pray, he beg'd for forgivenesse of his sins, I asked him why he used that vaine repetition, since hee did believe he was justified by Christ already, and hee made me an answer not worth repeating, but when I told him God could see no sinne in his people, no more then I could see that which was covered close from my eye sight; hee told mee I spake little lesse then blasphemy, so ignorant are these men, and their learned guides also; who perswade them the more they have of the in-dwelling of the Spirit of Christ, the better they shall be inabled to these legall duties. Nay, quoth the other, I can tell you
more then all this, they make it an evidence of their good estate, even their sanctification, and yet these men would make people believe they are against Popery. By this discourse of theirs, you may see the manner how these Erronious, and Hereticall persons batter off the fruit from the goodly branches of Christs vines & make bare the flourishing trees planted in the house of the Lord, and yet professe themselves to be Scholars of the upper forme, that have learned as far as their Masters can teach them, but let me tell you friends you'l prove but trewants if you fall thus to Robbing of Orchards, and its an offence far beyond petty Larceny to rob Christs Garden, let your pretenees be what they will: can it possible be for the magnifying of Christs Grace that the branches growing upon his root shoud remaine fruitlesse? no assuredly, herein God is glorified that his people bring forth much fruit, yet many of these new Gospel∣lers had another plea, hypocrites have a seeming shew of Saints graces by which they deceive themselves and others; And there∣fore because Felons and Traytors coyne counterfeit Gold, there∣fore true Gold should not passe for current, but the intent of the Author is to prosecute the History, these errours being con∣suted already by the able servants of Christ, whom the Lord in his mercy brought hither for that purpose. CHAP. XLI. Of the two latter dividing Principles under which these Erronists fought. THe third dividing tenent by which these persons prosecuted their errors at this time, was betweene the Word of God, 3. The Word, and the spirit. and the Spirit of God, and here these Sectaries had many prety knacks to delude withall, and especially to please the Femall Sex, they told of rare Revelations of things to come from the spirit (as they say) it was onely devised to weaken the Word of the Lord in the mouth of his Ministers, and withall to put both ignorant and unlettered Men and Women, in a posture of Preaching to a multitude, that they might be praised for their able Tongue. Come along with me sayes one of them, i'le bring
you to a Woman that Preaches batter Gospell then any of your black-coates that have been at the Ninneversity, a Woman of another kinde of spirit, who hath had many Revelations of things to come, and for my part, saith hee, I had rather hear such a one that speakes from the meere motion of the spirit, without any study at all, then any of your learned Scollers, although they may be fuller of Scripture (I) and admit they may speake by the helpe of the spirit, yet the other goes beyond them. Gntle Reader, thinke not these things fained, because I name not the parties, or that here is no witnesse to prove them, should I so do: neither of both is the cause I assure you, but being somewhat acquainted with my own weakenesse, should the Lord withdraw the light of his word, and also I verily believe some of them are truly turned againe to the truth, the which I wish to all, yet by relating the story all men may see what a spirit of giddinesse they were given up to, and some of them to strong delusions, even to most horrid and damnable blasphemies, having itching eares, or rather proud desires to become Teachers of others, when they grosly erred in the first Principles of Religion themselves. There was a man in one of the farthest Townes of the Mattacu∣sets Government, where they had no Ministers for the present, he being much desirous to shew himfelfe some body in talking to as many as hee could get to hear him one the Sabbath day, mis∣sing some of his Auditors, he meets with one of them some few dayes after, they passing over the water together, where were you quoth he on the Sabbath day that you were not at the meet∣ing? we had a notable piece of Prophecy, quoth the man that was missing, who was it that Preached? The other replying not: his Wife being in presence, answered; it was my husband, nay wife, quoth he thou shoulds not have told him, teach him to stay at home another time. By this and divers other such like matters, which might be here inserted, you may see how these Sectaries love the prehe∣minence, and for this end seeke to deprive the Ministers of Christ invigling as many as they can in the head, that they take to much upon them (just like the rebellious Korath, Dathan, and Abiram) scoffing at their Scholler-like way of Preaching, where∣in the grosse dissimulation of these erronious persons hath ap∣peared
exceedingly, as for instance first of a Woman, even the grand Mstis of all the rest, who denied the Resurrection from the dead shee and her consorts mightily rayling against learning, perswading all they could to take heed of being spoyled by it, and in the meane time, shee her selfe would dispute (forsooth) and to shew her skill that way, here is a falacy quoth she in this syliogisme: as also one of the Gortonists, as shallow a pated Scholler as my selfe, far from understanding Latine, much lesse any other Language the Scriptures were writ in, yet when hee would hold out some of the best of his false Doctrines, as name∣ly, that there were no other Devills but wicked men, nor no such thing as sin, Quoth he that place in the fourth Psalme, where men commonly read, stand in awe and sin not, in the originall it is read stand in awe and misse not. But to go on, at this time there were many strange Revelations told both of Men and Women, as true some of them said as the Scripture, so that surely had this Sect gone on awhile, they would have made a new Bible, and their chief Mistris when she was shipt for N. England, what will you say quoth she, and it hath beene revealed to me that we shall be there in six weekes, and one of the femall Gortonists said, she was a Pro∣phtesse, and it was revealed unto her, that shee must prophecy unto the People in the same words the Prophet Ezekiel did, as also a lusty big man to defend this tenent held forth to his Pastor before the whole Congregation, that the spirit of Revelation came to him as he was drinking a pipe of Tobacco. The fourth dividing way to bring in their Heresies, was to 4. Christ, and his Ordinan∣ces. devide betweene Christ and his Ordinances, and here they plaid their game to purpose, even to casting down of all Ordinances as carnall, and that because they were polluted by the Ordinance of man, as some of these Sectaries have said to the Minister of Christ, you have cast off the crosse in Baptisme, but you should do well to cast off Baptisme it selfe; as also for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for to make use of Bread, or the juce of a silly Grape to represent the Body and Bloud of Christ, they accounted it as bad as Negromancy in the Ministers of Christ to peforme it. But seeing there will be occasion to bring in a bed∣roule of these Blasphemies in the yeare (43) and (44) take the lesse here; onely minde that these persons being first bewildred
in the deniall of Infants being Baptized, could neither finde right faith to be Baptized into, nor yet any person rightly constituted to Baptize remaining. Seekers they came to this, but yet here must not be omitted the slights these Erronists had to shoulder out the Officers Christ hath ordained, and set up in his Churches; and verily in this point they sided directly with the Papist and Prelates, although in most of the other they went directly out of the way on the other hand. Ignorance say the Papist is the Mo∣ther of devotion, its better say the Protestant Prelates to have (a blind si John) one that cannot tell how to Preach, provided he will conforme to our Ceremonies, than to have one that will Presch constantly, and not conforme also: these Erronist, shew∣ing themselves to be whelps of the same litter, Cry out against a learned Presbitery, as the onely way to captivate liberty, and herein the transformed Devill came to shew his Hornes for why, his errors would not take where the people were followers of their seeing guids, and if it be well noted, here is the Master-piece of all their knavery, the which comes in after this manner, The Lording Prelacy, Popes, Cardinalls, Bishops, Deanes, &c. Were ordinarily brought up at the University to learning, and have most tyrannically abused it: usurping over the People of Christ, and exercised most inhumane and barbarous cruelty up∣on them; as also the Presbyterian Kirke by these Provinciall Classes, men of learning having robbed the particular Congrega∣tions of their just and lawfull priviledges, which Christ hath pur∣chased for them. Each Congregation of his being invested with full power to Administer all the Ordinances he hath ordained, in and toward their owne Members; and further learned men in some places, feeding the people for their Tith-sake in a Parishi∣oniall way, desire the upholding thereof, lest their fat Benefices should grow leane. Now the Redemption of the people of Christ out of all these bondages, being full of difficulty to attaine, as is abundantly wit∣nessed in the great hardship Gods people have undergon in this Wildernesse-worke; as also much more by that bloudy war so long continved in our Native Country, and the two adjacent Kingdomes. This makes a very faire bottome for those to build upon, who would have the sluce of authority in the Officers
of Christs Churches plucked up, that so their errors might flow in like a floud; And therefore they impannell a Jury of their own Sectaries to passe upon all such as put a higher esteem upon their Pastors and Teachers (in point of discerning the holy things of God) then upon other men, who returne in their Verdit as finding them guilty of the crime above expressed, either as party, or privy abetters unto them, upon this the Vote goes for ad∣vancing such men as will let them out line enough for such as will worke without wages, and give to every man liberty to exercise a large conscience, provided it be his own, and as for authority they would have none used, as being a thing two opposite to li∣berty. My friend cast off as much of thy owne power as thou canst, and beware of Lording it over Gods Heritage, but I pray thee let Christ alone with his, which he hath given to his Pastors and Teachers in administring the holy things of God, peculiar to their Office, and tremble all you Presbyterians, who to please the people prostrate the authority Christ hath put upon the El∣drs of his Churches as Officers, to the resolute liberty of man: the people may and ought to call them to Office, to the which Christ hath united double honour and authority, and appointed them to be had in high esteeme for their worke-sake, being Embassadors of Christ Jesus. This may no man take from them, nor yet they themselves cast off, and yet all this makes nothing for the Papall, Prelaticall, Classicall or Parishionall authority of the Presbtery, for it holds onely in their ruling well, while they rule for Christ, they must and shall have the power hee hath put Foure score Errors derived from these four heads, and spread abroad in N. England▪ upon their Office. From these foure dividing Tenents by the cunning art of these deceivers, were forescore grosse errours broached secretly, sliding in the darke like the Plague, proving very infectious to some of the Churches of CHRIST in their Members. CHAP. LXII. Of sad effects of the pitifull and erronious Doctrines broached by the Sectuaries. THe number of these infectious persons increasing now, have∣ing drawn a great party on their side, and some consider∣able
persons they grow bold, and dare question the sound and whole some truths delivered in publick by the Ministers of Christ. Their Church-meetings are full of Disputes in points of differ∣ence, and their love. Feasts are not free from spots, in their Courts of civill Justice some men utter their Speeches in matters of Religion very ambiguously, and among all sorts of persons a great talke of new light, but verily it proved but old darknesse, such as sometime over-shadowed the City of Munster; But blessed be the Lord Christ, who now declared himselfe to be a helpe at hand for his poore New England Churches, being now in their infancy, whose condition at present was very dolorous, and full of difficulties, insomuch that the better part of this new transported people stood still many of them gazing one upon another, like Sheepe let loose to feed on fresh pasture, being stop∣ped and startled in their course by a Kennell of devouring Wolves. The weaker sort wavered much, and such as were more growne Christians hardly durst discover the truth they held one unto another, the fogs of errour increasing the bright beames of the glorious Gospell of our Lord Christ in the Mouth of his Ministers could not be discerned through this thick mist by ma∣ny, and that sweete refreshing warmth that was formerly felt from the spirits influence, was now turned (in these Erronists) to a hot inflamation of their owne conceited Revelations, ulcer∣ating and bringing little lesse then frenzy or madnesse to the pa∣tient, the Congregation of the people of God began to be for∣saken, and the weaker Sex prevailed so farre, that they set up a Priest of their own Profession and Sex, who was much thronged after, abominably wresting the Scriptures to their own destructi∣on: this Master▪piece of Womens wit, drew many Disciples after her, and to that end boldly insinuated her selfe into the favour of none of the meanest, being also backed with the Sor∣cery of a second, who had much converse with the Devill by her own confession, and did, to the admiration of those that heard her, utter many speeches in the Latine Tongue, as it were in a trance, this Woman was wonted to give drinkes to other Wo∣men to cause them to conceive, how they wrought I know not, but sure there were Monsters borne not long after, as you shall hear in the following History.
Oh yee New England Men and Women, who hath bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? And indeed Satan, to make sure worke with semblance of Preaching the Doctrine of Free-grce by his instruments, makes shew of our-bidding all the Orthodox, and godly Ministers in the Countrey, pretending their Preaching to be but a Covenant of workes, supposing by this meanes to silence them without a Bshop, and lest the civill power should stand up for their aid, they threaten them with the high displeasure of Christ for persecuting his people, which as they said these erronious persons with their new light, were the onely Men and Women that were pure Gospell Preachers. Thus the poore people of Christ, who kept close to his antient truths invironed with many straites, having expended their Estates to voyage far through the perillous Seas, that their eyes might behold their Teachers, and that they might injoy the protection of a godly civill Government, began to deeme themselves in a more dolorous condition then when they were in the Commis∣saries Court, and Prelates Prisons, the hideous waves in which their brittle Barques were sometimes covered, as they passed hither, were nothing so terrible in the apprehension of some as was this floud of errors violently beating against the bankes of Church and civill Government, the wants of this Wildernesse, and pinching penury in misse of Bread, put them to no such paine by gnawing on their empty stomacks, with feare of famish∣ing, as did the misse of the Administration of Christ in his Word and Ordinances, leaving the soule in a languishing condition for want of a continuall supply of Christ in his Graces. CHAP. LXIII. Of the sorrowfull condition of the people of Christ, when they were incountred with these erronists at their first landing. BUt to end this dismall yeare of sixteene hundred thirty six, take here the sorrowfull complaint of a poore Soule in misse of its expectation at landing, who being incountered with some of these Erronists at his first landing, when he saw that good old way of Christ rejected by them, and hee could not skill in that
new light, which was the common theame of every mans Dis∣course, hee berooke him to a narrow Indian path, in which his serious Meditations soone led him, where none but sencelesse Trees and eccohing Rocks make answer to his heart-easeing mone. Oh quoth he where am I become, is this the place where these Reverend Preachers are fled, that Christ was pleased to make use of to rouse up his rich graces in many a drooping soule; here have I met with some that tell mee, I must take a naked Christ. Oh, woe is mee if Christ be naked to mee, wherewith shall I be cloathed, but me thinks I most wonder they tell me of casting of all godly sorrow for sin as unbeseeming a Soule, that is united to Christ by Faith, and there was a little nimbled tongued Woman among them, who said she could bring me ac∣quainted with one of her own Sex that would shew me a way, if I could attaine it, even Revelations, full of such ravishing joy that I should never have cause to be sorry for sinne, so long as I live, and as for her part shee had attained it already: a company of legall Professors, quoth she lie poring on the Law which Christ hath abolished, and when you breake it then you breake your joy, and now no way will serve your turne, but a deepe sorrow. These and divers other expressions intimate unto men, that here I shall finde little increase in the Graces of Christ, through the hearing of his word Preached, and other of his blessed Ordinan∣ces. Oh cunning Devill, the Lord Christ rebuke thee, that under pretence of a free and ample Gospell shuts out the Soule from partaking with the Divine Nature of Christ, in that mysticall Union of his Blessed Spirit creating, and continuing his Graces in the Soule: my deare Christ, it was thy worke that moved me hither to come, hoping to finde thy powerfull presence in the Preaching of the Word, although administred by sorry men, subject to like infirmities with others of Gods people, and also by the glasse of the Law, to have my sinfull corrupt nature dis∣covered daily more and more, and my utter inabillity of any thing that is good, magnifying hereby the free grace of Christ; who of his good will and pleasure worketh in us to will, and to doe working all our works in us, and for us. But here they tell me of a naked Christ, what is the whole life of a Christian upon this Earth? But through the power of
Christ to die to sinne, and live to holinesse and righteousnesse, and for that end to be diligent in the use of meanes: at the ut∣tering of this word he starts up from the greene bed of his com∣plaint, with resolution to hear some one of these able Ministers Preach (whom report had so valued) before his will should make choyce of any one principle, though of crossing the broade Seas back againe, then turning his face to the Sun, he steered his course toward the next Town, and after some small travel ee came to a large plaine, no sooner was hee entred thereon, but hearing the found of a Drum he was directed toward it by a broade baten way, following this rode he demands of the next man he met what the signall of the Drum ment, the reply was made they had as yet no Bell to call men to meeting; and there∣fore made use of a Drum, who is it, quoth hee, Lectures at this Towne. The other replies, I see you are a stranger, new come over, seeing you know not the man, it is one Mr. Shepheard, veri∣ly quoth the other you hit the right, I am new come over indeed, and have been told since I came most of your Ministers are legall Preachers, onely if I mistake not they told me this man Preached a finer covenant of workes then the other, but however, I shall make what hast I can to heare him. Fare you well, then hasting thither hee croudeth through the thickest, where having stayed while the glasse was turned up twice, the man was metamorphos∣ed, and was faine to hang down the head often, least his watry eyes should blab abroad the secret conjunction of his affections, his heart crying loud to the Lords ecchoing answer, to his blessed spirit, that caused the Speech of a poore weake pale complecti∣oned man to take such impression in his soule at present, by applying the word so aptly, as if hee had beene his Privy Coun∣seller, cleering Christs worke of grace in the soule from all those false Doctrines, which the erronious party had afrighted him withall, and now he resolves (the Lord willing) to live and die with the Ministers of New England: whom hee now saw the Lord had not onely made zealous to stand for the truth of his Discipline, but also of the Doctrine, and not to give ground one inch.
CHAP. XLIIII. The Congregationall Churches of Christ are neither favourers of sinfull opinions▪ nor the Lords over any, or many Churches, or mens Consciences. ANd here Christian Reader the Author according to his for∣mer practice, must minde thee of the admirable providence of Christ toward his New England Churches, in preserving them from these erronious spirits, that have hitherto in all places dog'd the sincere servants of Christ, when ever they have set up∣on a through Reformation, as stories doe abundantly testify, which thing the reverend Calvine and divers others, have decla∣red. But seeing the boasting Prelates in these times are ready to say their Lordly power kept these errours under, its plaine otherwise: for Satan saw while people were under their yoake of humane inventions, they were far enough from exalting the Kingdome of Christ; And therefore he reserved these errours, for his last shifts, and further you shall see in the following story that the Lord Christ reserved this honour for those, whose love hee had inlarged to follow him in a dezart wildernesse, even with the sharpe sword of the Word, timely to cut off the heads of this Hidra; but yet there are two sorts of persons in our Native Country, whom the Elders and Brethren here do highly honour in Christ, and prefer before themselves, namely the godly Pre∣byterian party, and the Congregationall sincere servants of Christ, both which the Author could wish, (that with bowells of compassion, sweet simpathising affection of Brethren knit toge∣ther in that transcendent love of Christ, which couples all his distanced flockes together) they would seriously ponder this History, which through the Authors weakenesse wants much of measure, but nothing of the truth of things, so far as a shallow capacity can reach. Of the first sort named, I could wish the Reverend Mr. Ruterford, Mr. Bayle, Mr. Rathbone, Mr. Paget, Mr. Ball, &c. would but informe themselves further by the truth of this History, supposing they cannot chuse but in a good mea∣sure be satisfied already with the pacificatory and meeke answers of as many Reverend and godly Elders of ours.
Now that I would they should take notice of is, that the Churches of Christ in New England, and their Officers have hi∣therto been so far from imbracing the erronious Doctrines of these times, that through the powers of Christ they have vali∣antly defended the truth, and cut down all deceiveable Doctrine; the like hath not been done for many ages heretofore. Reverend and beloved in Christ, could your eyes but behold the efficacy of loving counsell in the Communion of congregationall Churches, and the reverend respect, honour and love, given to all Teach∣ing Elders, charity commands me to thinke you would never stand for Classicall injunctions any more, neither Diocesan, nor Provinciall authority can possible reach so far as this royall Law of love in communion of Churches: verily its more universall then the Papall power, and assuredly the dayes are at hand, where∣in both Jew and Gentile Churches shall exercise this old Mo∣dell of Church Government, and send their Church salutations and admonitions from one end of the World unto another, when the Kingdomes of the Earth are become our Lord Christs; Then shall the exhortation of one Church to another prevaile more to Reformation, then all the thundering Bulls, excomuni∣cating Lordly censures, and shamefull penalties of all the Lord∣ing Churches in the World, and such shall be, and is the efficacy of this intire love one to another, that the withdrawing of any one Church of Christ, according to the Rule of the word from those that walke inordinatly, will be more terrible to the Church or Churches so forsaken, then an Army with Banners: yea, and it may be added, because civill Government is like to turne nurse in more places then one, this royall Law of love shall become the Law of Nations, and none will suffer their subjects to rebell against it; but to our beloved brethren in England on the other hand, the Reverend Mr. Burroughs, Mr. Goodwin &c. This seemeth you have apprehended our Churches and civill Government, to be too strict in dealing with persons for their sinfull opinions, I wish the offenders be none of your intelligen∣cers, who to be sure will make the worst of things, I know you are in charity with us; And therefore a few words will satisfie, which I hope you want not from your good friends our Reve∣rend Elders, who could wish you as much happinesse as our selves
to expell error before it grew to that height to cry downe the sound and wholesome truths: casting durt on our Orthodox and godly Ministery, I wish you open your mouths wide enough to be filled with this blessing, the Lord hath done great, and unex∣pected things for you, and why not this? one and twenty yeares experience hath taught us that Errors and Heresies are not broached, and held out here by tender consciences, such as are weak in the Faith, but by such as think them Scholers of the upper forme, such as would teach the most ablest Christian among us another Gospell, and further we finde our Erronist wanting a common enemy to contend withall, as you have fallen foule of our godly Magistrates and Ministers, and will not suffer us quietly to injoy the Ordinance of Christ, for which wee hither cam, buz∣zing our people in the eare with a thing they call liberty, which when any have tasted a smack of, they can no more indure to hear of a Synod or gathering together of able, and Orthodox Christians, nor yet of communion of Churches, but would be independant to purpose, and as for civill Government they deem Religion to be a thing beyond their Sphere. CHAP. XLV. Of the civill Government in N. England, and their nurture of the people upon their tender knees. THe vernall of the yeare 1637. being now in his prime, and as the season of the yeare grew hotter, so the minds of ma∣ny were hot in the eager pursuite of their selfe conceited opini∣ons, and verily had not authority stept in, it was much to be doubted they would have proceeded from words to blowes, great hold and keepe there was about choice of Magistrates this yeare, the choyce being retarded by a paper call'd a Petition, but indeed a meere device to hinder the election, till the erroni∣ous party were strengthened, their number increasing daily, but the Lord Christ gratiously providing for the peace of his people toward the end of the day the honoured John Winthrope Esquire, was chosen Governour, and Thomas Dudly Esq. Deputy Gover∣nor: the number of free-men added this year was about. 1 25.
Here according to promise the Reader shall have an accoumpt of the civill Government of this little Common-wealth, as their whole aime in their removall from their Native Country, was to injoy the liberties of the Gospell of Christ, so in serving up civill Government, they daily direct their choice to make use of such men as mostly indeavour to keepe the truths of Christ pure and unpsotted, and assuredly they can digest any wrongs or in∣juries done them in their estates, or trade, better then the wrest∣ing of their right in the freedome of the Gospell, out of their hands, and this the Erronist knowing right well (to save their heads whole) perswade men it is not for civill Government to meddle with matters of Religion; and also to helpe out with their damnable Doctrines, they report it in all places, where they be come, that New England Government doth persecute the people and Churches of Christ; which to speake truth they have hitherto beene so far from, that they have indeavoured to expell all such beasts of prey, (who will not be reclaimed) that here might be none left to hurt or destroy in all Gods holy Mountaine, and therefore are ready to put the Churches of Christ in minde of their duty herein; yea, and sometimes going before them in their civill censures that they may not onely professe the truth, but also hate every false way, not that they would compell men to believe by the power of the Sword, but to indeavour all may answer their profession; whether in Courch Covenant or other∣wise, by knowing they beare not the Sword in vaine. Neither doe they exercise civill power to bring all under their obedi∣ence to a uniformity in every poyne of Religion, but to keepe them in the unity of the spirit, and the bond of peace, nor yet have they ever mixed their civill powers with the authority pe∣culiarly given by Christ to his Churches and Officers of them, but from time to time have laboured to uphold their priviledges, and only communion one with another. The chiefe Court or supreame power of this little Common-wealth, consists of a mixt company, part Aristocracy, and part Democracy of Magistrates, that are yearly chosen by the major Vote of the whole body of the Free-men throughout the Country; and Deputies chosen by the severall Townes, they have hitherto had about 12. or 13. Magistrates in the Colony
of the Mattacusets, the other Colonies have not above five or six, they have hitherto beene Volunteers, governing without pay from the people, onely the Governor of the Mattacusets hath some yeares 100 l. allowed him, and some years lesse, many of the Magistrates are already remembred, yet with some of the first came hither Mr. Simon Brodestreet, in this short Meeter is he remembred. NOw Simon yong, step in among, these worthies take thy place: All day to toile in vinyard, while Christ thee upholds with grace; Thee wisdom grave betime he gave, and tongue to utter it, That thou mightst be a blessing free, and for this calling fit. Thy counsell well, advis'd dost tell, with words ordered compleat, Thy memory, doth amplifie, meeting with matters great. Broad liberty, do thou deny, Brodstreet Christ would thee have, For's truth contend, strong reason spend, it from aspersion save. He furnish't thee, with these gifts free, to last he must them make, Still adding more, to thy old store, till he thee to him take. The Lord was pleased to furnish these his people with some able instruments in most of their Townes, that were skill'd in Common-wealth work, out of which they chose their Deputies, whose number was ordinarily between 30. and 40. some of them there will be occasion to speake of among their Military Men, but see here the Wonder-working Providence of Sions Saviour, ap∣pears much in gathering together stones to build up the walls of Jerusalem (that his Sion may be surrounded with Bulworkes and Towres) with a whispering word in the eares of his servants, he crosses the Angles of England from Cornewall to Kent, from Dover to Barwick, not leaving out Scotland and Wales; Wise men are perswaded to the worke without arguing like Elisba, when Elias cast his mantle on him, so these men make no stop, but say suffer me onely to sell my inheritance, and I will away for New England. And now I could wish our Brethren in England would not be angry with us for making such hast. Brethren you know how the case stood with our Ministers, as it was with Gideon, who could thresh out no Corne, but hee must doe it se∣cretly, to hide it from the Midianites, who spread the Land
like Grashoppers, no more could they thresh and cleane up any Wheate for the Lords Garner, but the Prelates would presently be upon their backs, and plow long furrowes there, and you may believe it, if you will (for it is certaine) many, had not this little number gone forth to blow their Trumpets, and breake their Pitchers, making the brightnesse of their Lamps appeare, surely the host of the Midianites had never been put to flight, and if still any of our Brethren shall contend with us, wee answer with Gideon, the Lord hath delivered into your hands the chiefe Princes of Midian, and what were we able to do in comparison of you; yet shall we not cease to follow on the worke of Refor∣mation, although weake and faint, till the Lord be pleased to free his Israel from all their enemies; and verily England hath not wanted the Prayers of the poore people of Christ here. And also some of our chiefe helpes both for Church-worke, Military and common-wealth-worke; yet through the Lords mercy, we still retaine among our Democracy the godly Captaine William Hathorn, whom the Lord hath indued with a quick apprehen∣sion, strong memory, and rhetorick, volubillity of speech, which hath caused the people to make use of him often in publick ser∣vice, especially when they have had to do with any forrein Go∣vernment, Mr. Nathaniel Duncan learned in the Latine and French tongue, a very good accountant. Wherefore he is cal∣led to the place of Auditor Generall for the County. Mr. John Glovar a man strong for the truth, a plaine sincere godly man, and of good abilities. Captaine Daniel Gogkin, who was drawen hither from Virginia, by having his affection strongly set on the truths of Christ, and his pure Ordinances; being indued by the Lord with good understanding Captaine William Tinge, some∣time Treasurour for the County, but being absent for some space of time in England, Mr. Richard Russell was chosen in his roome, Mr. Edward Rawson a young man, yet imployed in Common-wealth affaires a long time, being well beloved of the inhabi∣tants of Newbery, having had a large hand in her Foundation; but of late he being of a ripe capacity, a good yeoman and elo∣quent inditer, hath beene chosen Secretary for the Country, Mr. William Hubbard of Iphshwich, a learned man, being well read in state matters: of a very affable and humble behaviour;
who hath expended much of his Estate to helpe on this worke; although he be slow of speech, yet is hee down right for the bu∣sinesse, Captaine Ʋmphry Atherton, one of a cheerfull spirit, and intire for the County Mr. Edward Jackson, one who cannot indure to se the truths of Christ trampled under foot by the erronious party, Eleazar Lusher one of the right stamp, and pure mettle, a gratious, humble and heavenly minded man Mr. Joseph Hill, a man active for to bring the Lawes of the County in order, Mr. Whipple, one whose godly sincerity is much approved, Mr. Francis Norton, one of a cheerfull spirit, and full of love to the truth, Mr. Robert Paine, a right godly man, and one whose estate hath holpe on well with the worke of this little Common-wealth, Mr. William Torry a good penman and skild in the Latine tongue, usually Clarke of the Deputies, the Survayor Generall of the Armies of the Country, John Johnson, of an undanted spi∣rit, Mr. William Parker, a man of a pregnant understanding, and very usefull in his place. Many more would be named, but for tediousnesse, neither will it please the men more to be named, then not, for all are very willing to acknowledge their in∣ability for the worke, and the best are not without many imper∣fections. The Authors end in naming some few is for none other end, but to make good the title of this Book & to incourage all the servants of Christ for time to come wholely to rely upon him, when they go about any difficult work, which may tend to the glory of his Name. Who could have told these men, being scattered abroad throughout the Island of Great Brittaine, they should meete on a Wildernesse nine hundered Leagues remote, and there keep Court together to study the preservation of Christs poore scattered flockes? nay brethren, when you first tooke book in hand to learne your Letters, you would have been very dull pates, but for this worke; assuredly, how you came by large inheritances, some of you, and estates of hundreds, and thousands, your selves best know, but believe it, the Lord intended it for this very work, The Earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse of it, then let none of the people of Christ mourn that they have spent their wealth in this Wildernesse, if it have holpe on the worke, rather rejoyce that Christ hath betrusted thee to be Steward for the King of Kings, &
that in so noble an achievement the worthiest worke that the me∣mory of our selves, and our fore-fathers can reach unto. And brethren, as for the good parts and gifts the Author hath commended you for, but for the edifying of the body of Christ, and assisting his people in this work you had been empty of all good. And now seeing it is the opinion of many in these dayes of Reformation, that all sorts of Sectaries (that acknowledge a Christ) should be tolerated by civill Government, except Papist, and this Government hath hitherto, and is for future time resol∣ved to practice otherwise (the Lord assisting) having met already with more blasphemous Sectaries, then are Papists; wherefore it will not be amisse if our Countrymen be acquainted with the one and twenty yeares experience of this Wildernesse worke, in point of Government. First, it is their judgment, and that from Scripture taught them, that those, who are chose to place of go∣vernment, must be men truly fearing God, wise and learned in the truths of Christ, (if so) as hitherto it hath been New Englands practice, then surely such will be utterly unfit to tolerate all sorts of Sectaries, as because they have taken up Joshuas resolution, to serve the Lord, & a man cannot serve two Masters, much lesse many Masters; Then surely such as would have all sorts of sinfull opi∣nions upheld by the civill government, must be sure to make choise of the most Atheisticall persons they can finde to governe, such as are right Gallios: for N. E. hath found by experience that every man will most favour his own way of Profession, and labor tooth & naile to maintaine it, and if any have complied with other that have been of a contrary sinfull opinion to their own, it hath been, because they would have their own scape scot free, but assuredly the Lord Christ will allow of no such wayes for the favouring the professors of his truths, nor may any Magistrate doe evill that good may come of it, in favouring dangerous and deceiveable doctrines, that others may favour the true servants of Christ, neither is there any such need, for it is their honours (if the will of God be so) to suffer, nor can the people of N. England (I meane the better part) be perswaded to set up any other to governe, but such as are zealous for the maintainance of the truths of Christ; yet of late there is a buzzing noise, as if it were injury to the Churches for civill power to medle in matters of Religion, but to
be sure there are many that strive for a Toleration, yet the people of Christ, who are the naturall Mothers of this Government, re∣solve never to see their living child so divided, looking at such a government to be no better to them, a living child divided in twaine; and therefore desires their loving Countrymen to beare with them in this point, and if any notwithstanding shall force it to be so, we shall shew our natural affection, and leave all to them, chusing rather to dwell on the backside of this Desert (a place as yet unaccessible) knowing assuredly our God will appeare for our deliverance. Yet let them also know the Souldiers of Christ in N E. are not of such a pusillanimous spirit, but resolve as that valiant Jeptha did to keep in possession, the Towns his God had given them, so we are resolved (the Lord willing) to keepe the go∣vernment our God hath given us, and for witnesse hee hath so done, let this History manifest: for we chose not the place for the Land, but for the government, that our Lord Christ might raigne over us, both in Churches and Common-wealth, and al∣though the Lord have been pleased by an extraordinary blessing upon his peoples industry to make the place fruitfull (as at this day indeed it is) yet all may know the land in it selfe is very ster∣rill, but the upholding of the truths of Christ, is chiefe cause why many have hitherto come: and further if the servants of Christ be not much mistaken, the downfall of Antichrist is at hand, and then the Kingdome of the Earth shall become the Kingdome of our Lord Christ in a more peculiar manner, then now they are, and surely godly civill government shall have a great share in that worke, for they are exhorted to fill her double of the Cup, shee hath given to them; and also know our Magistrates, being con∣scious of ruling for Christ, dare not admit of any bastardly brood to be nurst up upon their tender knees, neither will any Christian of a sound judgement vote for any, but such as earnesty con∣tend for the Faith, although the increase of Trade, and traffique may be a great inducement to some.
VVonder-working PROVIDENCE OF SIONS SAƲIOƲR, IN NEVV ENGLAND. CHAP. I. The beginning of the relation of the Pequot war, and the great straites these wandering Jacobites were in. THe great Jehovah, minding to manifest the multitude of his Mercies to the wendering Jacobites, and make an intro∣duction to his following wonders, causeth the darke clouds of calamities to gather about them, presging some terrible tem∣pest to follow, with eyes full of anguish, they face to the right, upon the damnable Doctrines, as so many dreadfull Engines set by Satan to intrap their poore soules; Then casting forth a left hand looke, the labour and wants accompaning a Desert, and terrible Wildernesse affright them, their memories minding them of their former plenty; It much aggravated the present misery, when with thoughts of retreating, they turne their backs about the experienced incumbrances, and deepe distresses of a dangerous Ocean hinders their thoughts of flight, besides the sterne looke of the Lordly Prelates: which would give them a welcome home in a famishing prison. Then purposing to put on more stronger resolution, facing to the Front, behold a Messen∣ger with sorrowfull tidings from their fellow brethren, that in∣habited
the bankes of the River Canectico, who having audience, informes them of the great insolency, and cruell murthers com∣mitted by a barbarous and bloudy people called Peaquods, upon the bodies of their indeared friends, these savage Indians lying to the South-west of the Mattacusets, were more warlike then their Neighbouring Nations, the Narrowganzet or Niantick In∣dians; although they exceeded them in number, also Mawhig∣gins (who were the best friends of the English, and a chiefe in∣strumentall meanes of their sitting down there) stood much in feare of these Peaquods, which were big, swollen with pride at this time; facing the English Fort built on the mouth of the River in their large Cannowes, with their Bowes and long Shafts, the English being then but weake in number and provision, were unable to manage the war against so numerous a company, be∣ing above thirty to one, yet their desires being beyond their meanes, they made some shot at them, forcing them to hast away faster then they willingly would. These Indians trusting in their great Troopes, having feasted their corps in a ravening manner, and leaving their fragments for their Sqawes, they sound an alarum with a sull mouth, and lumbring voyce, and soone gather together without presse or pay, their quarrell being as antient as Adams time, propagated from that old enmity betweene the Seede of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, who was the grand signor of this war in hand, and would very gladly have given them a large Commission, had not his owne power beene limited, neither could he animate them so much as to take off the gastly looke of that King of terror, yet however at his com∣mand they arme themselves: casting their quver at their backs with Bowes ready bent, they troope up some of them, being ex∣traordinarily armed with Guns, which they purchast from the Dutch (who had assuredly paid deare for this their courteous humour, not long since, had not some English Volunteers rescued them from the Indians hands) the most of them were armed also with a small Hatchet on a long handle, they had a small num∣ber of Mawhawkes, Hammers, which are made of stone, having a long pike on the one side, and a hole in the handle, which they tie about their wrists, they neede not provisions follow their Camp; because they are continually at home, but for their mats
to shelter them from Ruine or Snow, the Woods are as well∣come to them as their Wigwams, sire they can make in all places by chafing two sticks together. Their food is ready drest at all times parching Indian Come in their fire they pound it to meale, and with foure or five spoonfull of it cast into their mouths, and a sup or two of water, which they take up with a leafe of a Tree, this is their common repast, and indeed their chiefe viaticum. Thus furnisht for the war they troope away without any goodly equpage to effect, as they suppose, some great designe, but with∣in some few Miles of the Towne of Hartford, they were dis∣covered by one of the English, who having with him a good Horse, hastens away to give intelligence of their approach, and by the way meeting with foure or five persons, hee advises them to haste away with all speed, for the Peaquods were at hand, the weaker Se among them, being at this time not so credulous as they should have been, began to dispute the case with him, demanding what Peaquods they were, and questioning how they should come there; The horseman deeming it now no time for words, when the battell followed him so hard at the heeles, rod on his way, and soone after the sudden approach of the Indians forced them with feare to Seale to the truth of this evill tidings, and some of them with their dearest bloud; three Woemen-kinde they caught, and carried away, but one of them being more fearfull of their cruell usage, afterward then of the losse of he life at present, being borne away to the thickest of the company, resisted so stoutly with scratching and biting, that the Indian, exasperated therewith, cast her downe on the Earth, and beate out her braines with his Hatchet, the other two maids they led away and returned, their Commission reaching no farther at present, having taken these two prisoners they did not offer to abuse their persons, as was verily deemed they would, questioned them with such broken English, as some of them could speak, to know whether they could make Gunpowder. Which when they understood they could not doe, their prize proved nothing so pretious a Pearle in their eyes as before; for seeing they exceeded not their own Squawes in Art, their owne thoughts informed them they would fall abundantly short in industry, and as for beauty they esteeme black beyond any colour.
Wherefore their Sqawes use that sinfull art of painting their Faces in the hollow of their Eyes and Nose, with a shining black, out of which their tip of their Nose appeares very deformed, and their cheeke bone, being of a lighter swart black, on which they have a blew crosse died very deepe. This is the beauty esteemed by them, but yet their pride was much increased by this hostile Act of theirs, and the English were more and more contemned of them, notwithstanding the Dutch, who traded with these Indians, procured the Maides liberty againe. CHAP. II. Of the couragious resolutions, the Lord indued these his People withall being invironed with many deepe distresses. AFter this Message delivered, these brood of Travilers being almost Non-plus't in their grave and sollid Counsells; deem it now high time to follow their old way, of making their com∣plaint to the supreame judge of all the World, by way of Petition, who they knew right well, stood not as an idle spectator beholding his peoples Ruth, and their Enemies rage; But as an Actor in all actions to bring to naught the desires of the wicked, but period to their power, divert their stroaks from his, to their own heads, bring glory to his Name, and good to his people from their most wicked malignity, having also the ordering of every weapon in its first produce, guiding every shaft that flies, leading each bullet to his place of setling, and Weapon to the wound it makes; yet he most righteous and holy in all his actions to this great Lord Per∣amount, had these poore afflicted people accesse through the in∣tercession of their Lord Christ, whose worke (though very weake to performe) they were now about, wherefore casting themselves down at his feet in the sense of their owne unworthi∣nesse, that desire him to doe his owne worke in them, and for them, that the Mountaines in the way of Zerubbabil may become a plaine, and then laying open the great straites they were in to him, who knew them far better then themselves, they had this answer returned them, which if men dare deny, the Lord from
Heaven hath, and shall further witnesse it; But before it be de∣clared, let all men lay downe their interest they suppose they may have in procuring it, both English and others, that the glory of our Lord Christ may appeare in its splendor, to the danting of every proud heare, and for the perpetuall incouragement of all the Souldiers of Christ, even the meanest in his Armies: for the day of his high Power is come, yea; his appointed time to have mercy upon Sion is at hand, all you whose eyes of pity so see her in the dust, streame down with pear like drops of compassion, a little mixture of the unconceiveble joy for the glorious worke of Christ. Now, now; I now in hand for the exalting of his glorious Kingdome, in preparing his Churches for himselfe, and with his own blessed hands wiping away the teares that trickel downe her cheekes, drying her dankish eyes, and hushing her sorrowfull sobs in his sweete bosome. This rightly believed, and meeting in the soule of any poore Christian, will make the narrow affctions of his body too little to containe the present apprehensions of the Soule; And therefore wanting a vacuum to containe the strength of this new Wine, wonder not if it vent if it selfe with swift thrilling teares from the most tender part of the vessell. And here the Author must needs intreate the charitable Reader to enlarge in the Closset of his own heart, for his folly hee con∣fesses in medling so meanly with such waighty matters, being blinded by eager affection, hee lost the fight of his great inabili∣ty to the worke. When hee first set Pen to Paper, as the Lord surrounded his chosen Israel with dangers deepe to make his miraculous deliverance famous throughout, and to the end of the World, so here behold the Lord Christ, having egged a small handfull of his people forth in a forlorne Wildernesse, stripping them naked from all humane helps, plunging them in a gulph of miseries, that they may swim for their lives through the Ocean of his Mercies, and land themselves safe in the armes of his com∣passion.
CHAP. III. Of the Lords great deliverance of his New England People, from the flouds of Errors that were bursting in among them. AS for the great Mountaine of proud erronious judgement on your right hand, the prayer of Faith shall remove them, and cast them into the depth of the Sea, and for the strengthning of your faith herein; because the Lord will have you depend on him in the use of his meanes, not miracle, hee hath purposely pitcht out for this very worke, some of his most orthodox ser∣vants, and chiefe Champions of his truth, able through his mer∣cy to weld that bright Weapon of his Word prepared by the spirit for this purpose, to bring to the block these Traytours to his truths one by one, and behead them before your eyes, and for this very end they are to gather together as one Man in a Synodicall way, with a decisive power to undoe all the cunning twisted knots of Satans Malignity to the truths of Christ, opening the Scriptures by the power of his spirit, cleering Scrip∣ture by Scripture, that nothing but the pure Word of God may take place, and that you may assuredly believe the Lord hath purposely called his Servants, and Souldiers to this place by his Providence to cut off this cursed spirit of Errours and Heresies, which hath but at first dog'd all Reformed Churches of Christ. There are for your further aid herein many more of these sin∣cere Souldiers floating upon the great Ocean toward you, who will be with you before this Synod is set, that you may declare it in the Eares of all posterity, to be the very Finger of God in catching the proud in their owne craftinesse, who had hatch't their devices, thus to cast all the Ministers of Christ, except some one or two, under this censure of being prejudiced against their persons, and for the little remnant to labour with flattery to blinde their eyes, that at least they might not be against them; Seeing they could not procure them to take their part, (to be sure when the grossenesse of their Errors were made known, they would not) by this meanes having their hopes exalted (in their owne apprehensions at least) to gaine the most of the people on their side.
The Lord casts them downe from the proud Pinacle of their Machiavilian Plot, by bringing in more men of courage uninterest∣ed: yea, unknown to most of their persons, but for their errors, as strong to confute them as any, and more fit to wipe off the fime from the eyes of some of their brethren, which these Er∣ronists by their Syccophancy had clouded. The time for the meeting of this Synod was to be in the seventh month following, commonly called September, the civill government well approving of their desires herein, were very willing to further them all they could, and in the  time it was the worke of these valiant of the Lord, to search out, not for men and Womens persons, but their errors, which they gathered up from all parts, willing all that would or could de∣fend them to use their best meanes, like as John when he was to execute the judgements of the Lord upon Ahabs bloudy house∣hold, would have had his servants defend their Masters Chil∣dren if they could, onely you must understand there was but 70. Sons, and here was 80. Errors, of which you shall further hear when the time comes. CHAP. IV. Of the abundant mercies of Christ in providing liberall supply for his New England People, in regard of their outward man, Food, Rayment and all other necessaries and conveniencies. NOw for the hardships on the left hand, they had as good an answer as in the former; their Christ had not saved their lives from the raging Seas to slay them in the Wildernesse with Famine; your life is much more pretious in the eyes of the Lord then food, and your bodies then rayment: yea, the Lord of Heaven, who hath honoured you so far as to imploy you in this glorious worke of his, knowes you must have these things, and it was not you, deare hearts, that chose this place, but the Lord, as seeing it most fit to doe his worke in, knowing that had you met with a Rich Land filled with all plenty, your heart would
have beene taken off this worke, which he must have done. But to strengthen your Faith in this point also, you shall see hee who commanded the Fruits to spring out of the Earth, when none were, can much more cause this corner of the Earth to be fruit∣full to you, and this you shall attaine by meanes, although hee have caused the Foules of the Aire, and Grasse of the Field to depend upon him in a more immediate manner, yet you hath he taught to Sow, Reape, carry into Barnes, and Spin, and indeed herein the Lord hath answered his people abundantly to the woder of all that see or hear of it; And that whereas at their  comming it was a rare matter for a man to have foure or five Acres of Corne, now many have four or five score, & to prevent men from Sacrificing to their Nets, the Lord hath taught them to labour with more ease: to great admiration also inlarg'd it, for it was with sore labour that on man could Plane, and tend foure Acres of Indians Graine, and now with two Oxen hee can Plant and tend 30. B sides the Lord hath of late altered the very course of the Heavens in the season of the weather, that all kinde of graine growes much better then heretofore; Inso∣much that Marchandizing being stopped at present, they begin question, what to do with their Corne. CHAP. V. Of the wonderfull deliverance wrought by the Lord Christ, for his poore New England Churches, in freing them from the fear of their Malignant adversaries, who forc't, them to this Wildernesse. ANd now to the third and great distresse, which lay behind them by reason of their back friends, the Lording Bi∣shops, and other Malignant adversaries, being daily exasperated against them, and in especiall at this time by one Merton, who named himselfe the Host of Merrimount, who wanted not ma∣lice, could he possible have attained meanes to effect it; But the Lord Christ prevented both him and his Masters, whom with slattery he sought to please with scurrillous deriding the servants of Christ, to bring them into contempt, yet the Lord prevented
all, and delivered this wretched fellow into his peoples hands againe after all this, who dealt as favourably with him as David did with Shimmei. Besides this, the evill usage that many of the beloved servants of Christ had from the hands of those in office at their departure, declared plainely, that there were some, who would willingly have pursued them to bring them under bon∣dage againe, herein their answer was that they should stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, who was now resolved to fight for them against his and their implacable enemies; although more mighty than they: and indeed all meanes of resistance in the hand of man being so small, that it could not possible bee discerned by any morcall eye; yet will the Lord worke by means and not by miracle; when the Lord called forth Joshua to fight with Amaleck, his Moses must be in the Mount at Prayers; see∣ing this answer deeply concernes the dearly beloved of our Lord Christ remaining in England, let them listen to the answer. Also how came it to passe that the Lord put it into your hearts to set upon a Reformation, was it not by prayer attained? You are not excluded, although the Churches of Christ here are for the present in the Mount, and you in the Vally fighting, yet surely they had neede of helpe to hold up their hands, whereas the nerenesse of the danger to you in the enemies overcoming, is a great motive to keepe up yours stedy, yet may you say right∣ly to the Churches of Christ here, as Mordachy to Hester the Queene, if you hold your peace deliverance shall come another way, and thinke not to escape, because you are in New England; Assuredly the Lord is doing great things, and waites for the prayers of his people that he may be gratious unto them, and ve∣ily the poore Churches of Christ heere cannot but take notice of the great workes the Lord hath done for you of late, which are famous throughout the whole World; And should they not take them as an answer of these weake prayers, they feare they should neglect to magnify his mercy toward you, and them: the noble acts of the Lord Christ, for the freedome of his people from that into lerable Prelaticall bondage, are almost miraculously committed to memory by the able servants of Christ, whom hee hath stirred up for that very end, yet must you not shut out the valiant souldiers of Christ (disciplin'd in this unwonted Wilder∣nesse)
from having share with you in the worke, yet no farther but that Christ may be all in all: who hath caused the Midianites to fight against Midian, till the true Israelites had gathered themselves together, hee it is that hath brought the counsells of the wicked to naught, hee it is that hath discovered the secret plotings of the King of Assyria, even in his Bed-chamber; Hee it is that hath declared himself to be with your mighty men of va∣lour, and assuredly all you valiant Souldiers of Christ, both in one England and the other, the Lord hath shewed you as great signes and wonders for the strengthening of your faith, as was the wetting and drying of the flece to Gedeon, onely beware of setting up an Ephod in the latter end; Let the Churches of Christ be set up according to his first institution, or you will make double worke, for all may see by what is done already, there is nothing too hard for him, hee will downe with all againe and againe, till his Kingdom alone be exalted, for the which all the Israel of God fight, wrastle, pray, and here you may see the servants of Christ fighting at 900 leagues distant. Oh you proud Bishops, that would have all the World stoope to your Lordly power, the heathen Romans your predecessors, after they had banished John to the Isle of Pathmos, suffered him quietly to injoy the Revelation of Jesus Christ there; here is a people that have betaken themselves to a newfound World, di∣stanced from you with the widest Ocean the World affords, and yet you grudge them the purity of Christs Ordinances there. No wonder then, nay wonder all the World at the sudden and unexpected downfall of these domineering Lords, who had Princes to protect them, armes to defend them, and almost three whole Kingdomes at their command; and no enemy of theirs in sight onely, there appeares a little cloud about the bignesse of a mans hand out of the Westerne Ocean, I but the Lord Christ is in it, out of Sion the perfection of beauty hath God shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keepe silence, a Fire shall devour afore him, & mighty tempests shall be moved round about him. Now gather together you King-like Bishops, and make use of all the Kingly power you can, for the cloud is suddenly come up, he rode upon Cherub and did flie. And now let the Children of Sion rejoyce in their King, for the Lord hath pleasure in his
people, hee will make the meeke glorious by deliverance; And that the whole Earth may know it is the Lords owne worke, the Arch-prelate and his complices must begin to war with the Scots, and that implacably, the Prelates desire a Parliament thinking to establish iniquity by a Law, but the iniquity of the Ammo∣rites is already full, and all your cunning counsells shall but con∣trive your owne destruction; They remonstrant against all Acts of Parliament that passe without their Vote, and by this means wind out themselves for ever voting more, they devise how they may have such persons committed to prison at favour not their proceeding. But the Lord turned their mischiefe they had conceived upon their own pates, and they themselves were sent to prison by halfe a score at a time; And such was the unsavourynesse of this seem∣ing salt, that it was good for nothing, but to Lord it over others, their tyranny being taken out of their hands, they could not in∣dure to be commanded by any; And therefore unfit for the war which they stirred up, to recover the people againe under their bondage, yet such was the madnesse of some, that they loved their servitude so well as to fight for it; but surely such had never rightly knowne the service of the Lord Christ, which is perfect freedome, from all such tyrannous yoks, and verily just it is with the Lord to cause such to be servants unto Shishak, that they may know the service of the Lord, and the service of the Kingdomes of the Country. But however an Army is raised to defend their Lordly dignity; Let the Saints be joyfull with glo∣ry, let the high Acts of God be in their mouths, and a two edged Sword in their hands, to bind their Kings in chaines, and their Nobles in setters of Iron, the Charets of the Lord are twenty thousand thousands of Angells, the Lord is among them as in Sinai, Kings of Armies did flee apace; and now you that have borne such a wicked spirit of malignity against the people of Christ, can your hearts indure, and your hands wax strong in the day that he shall have to doe with you? Oh you proud Pre∣lates that boast so much of your taking the Kings part, miserable partakers are you; in stead of obeying him, you have caused him to obey you, its writ in such great capitall letters that a child may read it: what was the cause of the first raising war against
the Scots which occasioned the Parliament, when you saw they would not further the war as you would have them, they were soone traytors in your account, and prosecuted against with Ar∣my after army, and was not all this to make the Scots receive your Injunctions, a very fayer bottom to build a bloudy war upon, that the Prelatticall power might Lord it in Scotland, as they of a long time had done in England: it was your Pithagorian Phy∣losophy that caused the King to loose his Life, by perswading him his Kingly power lived in your Lordly dignity, as a thing sub∣ordinate unto it, and he so deeply taken with this conceit, that it cost the lives of many thousands more then ever hee, or his Father would doe for saving or recovering the Palatine Coun∣try. Experience hath taught the savage Indians, among whom we live, that they may and doe daily bring Wolves to be came, but they cannot breake them of their ravening nature, and I would your Royalist would learne of them to know, that as your Lord Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, &c. be right whelps of the Roman litter, so let them be never so well cam'd, they will retaine their nature still, to Lord it over all kinde of Civill Government; But woe and alasse that ever any of our Countrymen should be so blind, that after they are delivered from so great a bondage by such Wonder Working Providence of the Lord Christ; Ever and anon to indeavour to make a Captaine over them, that they may returne againe into Egypt, as appeares by the plots which have beene discovered, and broken in pieces by the right hand of the most high, and yet for all this their's such a hankering after some∣what of the Prelaticall greatnesse; by the English Clergy, and the Scottish Classis, that many of them could afford to raise ar∣other war for it. But brethren I beseech you be more wiser, lest when you are growne hot in your quarrell, the Malignant party come and set you agreed stablish peace in righteousnesse, and let the word be your rule, heare one another with meekenesse, and the Lord will cleare up the whole truth unto you in his due time; And now to declare plainly how far the Lord hath beene pleased to make use of any of his people in these Westerne pares, about this Worke, for to say truth they have done nothing in holes and corners, but their workes are obvious to all the World: if
he sufferings of the Saints be pretious in the eyes of Christ, so as to provoke him in displeasure to cut off the occasioners thereof, then thus his poore unworthy people here have had a great stroake in the downfall of their adversaries to the present posses∣sed truths of Christ, for this wildernesse worke, hath not beene carried on without sighthings that have come before him, and Groanes that have entred his eares, and Teares treasured up in his bottles (againe) if the ardent and strong affections of the people of God, for his glorious comming to advance his King∣dome in the splendor, and purity of his Gospell, as co cry with the holy Prophet, Oh that he would broake the Heavens and come down; be regarded of the Lord Christ, so as to remove with his mighty power the very Mountaines out of the way, and hurle them into the deepe; Then hath these weake wormes instru∣mentally had a share in the great desolation the Lord Christ hath wrought. For this History will plainely declare with what zeale and deepe affection, and unresistable resolutions these Pil∣grim people have endeavoured the gathering together his Saints, for the edifying the Body of Christ, that he may raign both Lord and King for ever. Yet againe, if the prayers of the faithfull people of God availe any thing for the accomplishment of his promises, in the de∣struction of Antichrist, for the subduing of Armies without strik∣ing one stroake; Then assuredly these Jacobites have wrestled with the Lord, not onely (with that good King Jeoshaphat) proclaiming one Fast, but many Fasts, they, their Wives and little ones standing before the Lord; Oh our God wile thou not judge them for we have no might, &c. Lastly, if the Lord himselfe have roared from Sion, (as in the dayes of the Prophet Amos) so from his Churches in New England, by a great and terrible Earth quake (which happened much about the time the Lordly Prelates were preparing their injunctions for Scotland) taking rise from the West, it made its progresse to the Eastward, cau∣sing the Earth to rise up and downe like the waves of the Sea; having the same effect on the Sea also, causing the Ships that lay in the Harbor to quake, the which, at that very time was said to be a signe from the Lord to his Churches, that he was purposed to shake the Kingdomes of Europes Earth, and now by his pro∣vidences
brought to passe, all men may reade as much and more▪ as if he should have said to these his scattered people (yet now againe united in Church Covenant) the Lord is now gathering together his Armies, and that your faith may be strengthened, you shall feele and heare the shakings of the Earth by the might of his power: yea, the Sea also, to shew he will ordaine Armies both by Sea and Land to make Babilon desolate; Things thus concurring as an immediate answer of the Lord to his peoples prayers and endeavours, caused some of this little handfull with resolute courage and boldnesse to returne againe to their native Land, that they might (the Lord accepting and assisting them in their endeavours) be helpfull in advancing the Kingdome of Christ, and casting down every strong house of sinne and Satan. It matters not indeed who be the instruments, if with the eye of faith these that go forth to fight the Lords Battailes, can but see and heare the Lord going out before them against their enemies, with a sound in the tops of the Mulbery Trees. Here are assu∣redly evident signes that the Lord Christ is gone forth for his peoples deliverance, and now Frogs, Flies, Lice or Dust, shall serve to destroy those will yet hold his people in bondage, not∣withstanding the Lord will honour such as hee hath made strong for himselfe; And therefore hee causeth the worthies in Davids time to be recorded, and it is the duty of Gods people to in∣courage one another in the worke of the Lord, then let all whose hearts are upright for the Lord, ponder well his goings in his Sanctuary, that their hands may be strengthened in the work they goe about, onely be strong and of a good courage. CHAP. VI. Of the gratious goodnesse of the Lord Christ, in saving his New-England people, from the hand of the barbarous Indians. LAstly, for the frontispiece of their present distresse, name∣ly the Indian war, they with much meeknesse and great de∣liberation, wisely contrived how they might best helpe their fel∣low brethren; hereupon they resolved to send a solemne Em∣bassage
to old Cannonicus, chiefe Sachem of the narrow Ganset Indians, who being then well stricken in yeares had caused his Ne∣phew Miantinemo to take the Government upon him, who was a very sterne man, and of a great stature, of a cruell nature, cau∣sing all his Nobility and such as were his attendance to tremble at his speech, the people under his Government were very nume∣rous, besides the Niantick Indians, whose Prince was of neare aliance unto him; They were able to set forth, as was then sup∣posed 30000. fighting men, the English sought by all meanes to keepe these at least from confederating with the Pequods, and understanding by intelligence, that the Pequots would send to them for that end, endeavoured to prevent them. Fit and able men being chosen by the English, they hast them to Cannonicus Court, which was about fourescore miles from Boston. The Indian King hearing of their comming, gathered toge∣ther his chiefe Counsellors, and a great number of his Subjects to give them entertainment, resolving as then that the young King should receive their message, yet in his hearing, they arriving, were entertain'd royally, with respect to the Indian manner. Boil'd Chesnuts is their White-bread, which are very sweet, as if they were mixt with Sugar; and because they would be extra∣ordinary in their feasting, they strive for variety after the English manner, boyling Puddings made of beaten corne, putting therein great store of black berryes, somewhat like Currants. They ha∣ving thus nobly feasted them, afterward give them Audience, in a State-house, round, about fifty foot wide, made of long poles stuck in the ground, like your Summer-houses in England, and covered round about, and on the top with Mats, save a small place in the middle of the Roofe, to give light, and let out the smoke. In this place sate their Sachim, with very great attendance; the English comming to deliver their Message, to manifest the greater state, the Indian Sachim lay along upon the ground, on a Mat, and his Nobility sate on the ground, with their legs doubled up, their knees touching their chin: with much sober gravity they attend the Interpreters speech. It was matter of much wonder∣ment to the English, to see how solidly and wisely these savage people did consider of the weighty undertaking of a War; espe∣cially
old Canonicus, who was very discreet in his answers. The young Sachem was indeed of a more lofty spirit, which wrought his ruine, as you may heare, after the decease of the old King. But at this time his answer was, that he did willingly embrace peace with the English, considering right well, that although their number was but small in comparison of his people, and that they were but strangers to the Woods, Swamps, and advantagi∣ous places of this Wildernesse, yet withall he knew the English were advantaged by their weapons of War, and especially their Guns, which were of great terror to his people, and also he had heard they came of a more populous Nation by far than all the Indians were, could they be joyn'd together. Also on the other hand, with mature deliberation, he was well advised of the Pea∣quods cruell disposition and aptnesse to make War, as also their neere neighbourhood to his people, who though they were more numerous, yet were they withall more effeminate, and lesse able to defend themselves from the sudden incursions of the Peaquods, should they fall out with them. Hereupon hee demes it most conducing to his owne, and his peoples safety to direct his course in a middle way, holding amity with both. The Eng∣lish returne home, having gained the old Kings favour so farre, as rather to favour them then the Pequods, who perceiving their Neighbouring English had sent forth aid to the Mattacusets go∣vernment, thought it high time to seeke the winning all the In∣dians they could on their side, and among others they make their addresse to old Cannonicus, who, insteed of taking part with them, labours all he can to hush the War in hand, laying before them the sad effects of War; sometimes proving sad and mourn∣full to the very Victors themselves, but alwayes to the vanquish∣ed, and withall tells them what potent enemies they had to con∣tend with, whose very weapons and Armor were matter of ter∣ror, setting their persons a side; as also that English man was no much hoggery yet, and therefore they might soone appease them, by delivering into their hands those persons that had beene the death of any of them, which were much better than that the whole Nation should perish. For the present the Pequods seemed to be inclinable to the old Sachims counsell, but being returned home againe among their
rude multitude (the chief place of cowardly boasting) they soon change their minde; yet the old Sachim sends the English word he had wrought with them, and in very deed, the English had rather make choice of Peace then Warre, provided it may stand with Truth and Righteousnesse: and therefore send forth a band of Souldiers, who arriving in the Peaquod Country, ad∣dress themselves to have a Treaty with them about delivering up the murtherers; they making shew of willingness so to doe, bade them abide awhile and they would bring them, and in the mean time they were conversant among the Souldiers, and view∣ing their Armie, pointed to divers places where they could hit them with their Arrowes for all their Corslets. But their grea∣test number lying the while at the other side of a great hill, and anon appearing on the top of the hill, in sight of the English: those Indians that were among the English withdrawing to∣ward them; no sooner were they come to their Companions, but all of a suddaine they gave a great shout, and shewed the English a fair pair of heeles, who seeing it, would not availe any thing to follow them (they being farre swifter of foot than the English) made their returne home againe. This bootlesse voyage incouraged the Indians very much, who insulted over them at the fort, boasting of this their deluding them, and withall, they blasphemed the Lord, saying, English-mans God was all one Flye, and that English man was all one Sqawe, and themselves all one Moor-hawks. Thus by their horrible pride they fitted themselves for destruction. The En∣glish hearing this report, were now full assured that the Lord would deliver them into their hands to execute his righteous judgement upon these blasphemous murtherers; and therefore raised fresh Souldiers for the warre, to the number of fourscore, or thereabout, out of the severall towns in the Matachusets, and although they were but in their beginnings, yet the Lord, who fore-intended their work, provided for all their wants, and in∣deed it was much that they had any bisket to carry with them in these times of scarcity, or any vessels to transport their men and ammunition: yet all was provided by the gracious hand of the most high; and the Souldiers, many of them, not onely armed with outward weapons, and armour of defence, but filled with
a spirit of courage and magnanimity to resist, not onely men, but Devils; for surely he was more then ordinaryly present with this Indian army, as the sequell will shew: as also for their further incouragement, the reverend and zealously affected servant of Christ, Mr. John Wilson, went with the army, who had treasu∣red up heaps of the experimentall goodnesse of God towards his people. Having formerly passed through perils by Sea, pe∣rils by Land, perils among false brethren, &c. he followed the warre purposely to sound an alarum before the Lord with his silver trumpet, that his people might be remembred before him: the Souldiers ariving in safety at the towne of Hartford, where they were encouraged by the reverend Ministers there, with some such speech as followes. Fellow-Souldiers, Country-men, and Companions in this wilder∣nesse-worke, who are gathered together this day by the inevitable providence of the great Jehovah, not in a tumultuous manner hurri∣ed on by the floating fancy of every high hot headed braine, whose actions prove abortive, or if any fruit brought forth, it hath beene rape, thefe, and murther, things inconsisting with natures light, then much lesse with a Souldiers valour; but you, my deare hearts, pur∣posely pickt out by the godly grave Fathers of this government, that your prowesse may carry on the work, where there Justice in her righteous course is obstructed, you need not question your authority to execute those whom God, the righteous Judge of all the world, hath condemned for blaspheming his sacred Majesty, and murthering his Servants: every common Souldier among you is now installed a Ma∣gistrate; then shew your selves men of courage: I would not draw low the height of your enemies hatred against you, and so debase your valour. This you may expect, their swelling pride hath laid the foun∣dation of large conceptions against you, and all the people of Christ in this mildernesse, even as wide as Babels bottome. But, my brave Souldiers, it hath mounted already to the clouds, and therefore it is ripe for confusion; also their crueltie is famously knowne, yet all true-bred Souldiers reserve this as a common maxime, cruelty and cowardize are unseparable companions; and in briefe, there is no∣thing wanting on your enemies part, that may deprive you of a compleat victory, onely their nimbleness of foot, and the unaccessible swamps and nut-tree woods, forth of which your small numbers may
intice, and industry compell them. And now to you I put the que∣stion, who would not fight in such a cause with an agile spirit, and un∣daunted boldnesse? yet if you look for further encouragement, I have it for you; riches and honour are the next to a good cause eyed by every Souldier, to maintain your owne, and spoile your enemies of theirs; although gold and silver be wanting to either of you, yet have you that to maintaine which is farre more precious, the lives, liber∣tyes, and new purchased freedomes, priviledges, and immunities of the indeared servants of our Lord Christ Jesus, and of your second selves, even your affectionated bosome mates, together with the thiefe pledges of your love, the comforting contents of harmlesse pra∣tling and smiling babes: and in a word, all the riches of that good∣nesse and mercy that attends the people of God in the injoyment of Christ, in his Ordinances, even in this life; and as for honour, Da∣vid was net to be blamed for enquiring after it, as a due recompence of that true valour the Lord had bestowed on him: aad now the Lord hath prepared this honour for you, oh you couragious Souldiers of his, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and correction among the people, to binde their Kings in chaines, and Nobles in fetters of Iron, that they may execute upon them the judgements that are writ∣ten! this honour shall be to all his Saints, but some of you may sup∣pose deaths stroke may cut you short of this: let every faithfull Soul∣dier of Christ Jesus know, that the cause why some of his indeared Servants are taken away by death in a just warre (as this assuredly is) it is not because they should fall short of the honours accompanying, such noble designes, but rather because earths honours are two scant for them, and therefore the everlasting Crown must be set upon their heads forthwith, then march on with a cheerfull Christian cou∣rage in the strength of the Lord, and the power of his might, who will forthwith inclose your enemies in your hands, make their multi∣tudes fall under your warlike weapons, and your feet shall soon be set on their proud necks. After the Ministers of Christ had, through the grace that was given them, exhorted and encouraged these Souldiers appointed for the work, they being provided with certaine Indian guides, who with the close of the day brought them to a small river, where they could perceive many persons had been dressing of fish; upon the sight thereof, the Indian guides concluded they
were now a feasting it at their fort, which was hard at hand; the English calling a Councill of warre, being directed by the speciallest providence of the most high God, they concluded to storm the fort a little before break of day; at whith time they supposed the Indians being up late in their jolly feasting, would bee in their deepest sleepe; and surely so it was, for they now slept their last: the English keeping themselves as covertly as they could, approached the fort at the time appointed, which was builded of whole Trees set in the ground fast, and standing up an end about twelve foot high, very large, having pitcht their Wigwams within it, the entrance being on two sides, with intricate Meanders to enter. The chiefe Leaders of the English made some little stand before they offered to enter, but yet boldly they rushed on, and found the passages guarded at each place with an Indian Bow-man, ready on the string, they soone let fly, and wounded the for▪ most of the English in the shoulder, yet having dispatch'd the Porters, they found the winding way in without a Guide, where they soone placed themselves round the Wigwams, and according to direction they made their first shot with the muz∣zle of their Muskets downe to the ground, knowing the Indian manner is to lie on the ground to sleep, from which they being in this terrible manner awakened, unlesse is were such as were slaine with the shot. After this some of the English entred the Wigwams, where they received some shot with their Arrowes, yet catching up the fire brands, they began to fire them, and others of the English Soulders with powder, did the same: the day now began to break; the Lord intending to have these murtherers know he wou'd looke out of the cloudy pillar upon them: and now these women and children set up a terrible out-cry; the men were smitten down, and flaine, as they came forth with a great slaughter, the Sqawes crying out, oh much winn it English-man, who moved with pitty toward them, saved their lives: and hereupon some young youth cryed, I squaw, I squaw, thinking to finde the like mercy. There were some of these In∣dians, as is reported, whose bodyes were not to be pierced by their sharp rapiers of swords of a long time, which made some
of the Souldiers think the Devil was in them, for there were some Powwowes among them, which work strange things, with the help of Satan. But this was very remarkable, one of them being wounded to death, and thrust thorow the neck with a halbert; vet after all, lying groaning upon the ground, he caught the halberts speare in his hand, and wound it quite round. After the English were thus possessed of this first victory, they sent their prisoners to the pinnaces, and prosecute the warre in hand, to the next Battalia of the In∣dians, which lay on a hill about two miles distant, and indeed their stoutest Souldiers were at this place, and not yet come to the fort; the English being weary with their night worke, and wanting such refreshing as the present worke required, began to grow faint, yet having obtained one victory, they were very desirous of another: and further, they knew right-well, till this cursed crew were utterly rooted out, they should never be at peace; therefore they marched on toward them. Now assuredly, had the Indians knowne how much weakned our Souldiers were at present, they might have born them downe with their multitude, they being very strong and agile of body, had they come to handy-gripes; but the Lord (who would have his people know their work was his, and he onely must order their Counsels, and war like work for them) did bring them timely supply from the vessels, and also gave them a second victory, wherein they slew many more of their e∣nemies, the residue flying into a very thick swamp, being unac∣cessible, by reason of the boggy holes of water, and thick bushes; the English drawing up their company beleagered the swamp, and the Indians in the mean time skulking up and down, and as they saw opportunity they made shot with their Arrowes at the English, and then suddainly they would fall flat along in the wa∣ter to defend themselves from the retalliation of the Souldiers Muskets. This lasted not long, for our English being but a small number, had parted themselves far asunder, but by the providence of the most high God, some of them spyed an Indian with a kettle at his back going more inwardly into the swamp, by which they perceived there was some place of firm land in the midst thereof, which caused them to make way for the passage
of their Souldiers, which brought this warre to a period: For al∣though many got away, yet were they no such considerable num∣ber as ever to raise warre any more; the slaine or wounded of the English were (through the mercy of Christ) but a few: One of them being shot through the body, neere about the breast, re∣garding it not till of a long time after, which caused the bloud to dry and thicken on eitheir end of the arrow so that it could not be drawne forth his body without great difficulty and much paine, yet did he scape his life, and the wound healed. Thus the Lord was pleased to assist his people in this warre, and deliver them out of the Indians hands, who were very lusty proper men of their hands, most of them, as may appear by one passage which I shall here relate: thus it came to passe, As the Souldiers were uppon their march, close by a great thicket, where no eye could penetrate farre, as it often falls out in such wearisom wayes, where neither men nor beast have beaten out a path; some Souldiers lingering behinde their fellowes, two Indians watching their opportunity, much like a hungry hauke, when they sup∣posed the last man was come up, who kept a double double double distance in his march, they sudden and swiftly snatched him up in their tallens, hoising him upon their shoulders, ran into the swamp with him; the Souldier unwilling to be made a Pope by being borne on mens shoulders, strove with them all he could to free himselfe from their hands; but, like a carefull Comman∣der, one Captaine Davenport, then Lieutenant of this company, being diligent in his place to bring up the reare, coming up with them, followed with speed into the swamp after him, having a very severe cutlace tyed to his wrist, and being well able to make it bite sore when he set it on, resolving to make it fall foul on the Indians bones, he soone overtook them, but was preven∣ted by the buckler they held up from hitting them, which was the man they had taken: It was matter of much wonder to see with what dexterity they hurled the poore Souldier about, as if they had been handling a Lacedaemonian shield, so that the nimble Captaine Davenport could not, of a long time, fasten one stroke upon them; yet, at last, dying their tawny skin into a crimson co∣lour, they cast downe their prey, and hasted thorow the thic∣kets for their lives. The Souldier thus redeemed, had no such
hard usage, but that he is alive, as I suppose, at this very day: The Lord in mercy toward his poore Churches having thus de∣stroyed these bloudy barbarous Indians, he returnes his people in safety to their vessels, where they take account of their priso∣ners: the Squawes and some young youths they brought home with them, and finding the men to be deeply guilty of the crimes they undertooke the warre for, they brought away onely their heads as a token of their victory. By this means the Lord strook a trembling terror into all the Indians round about, even to this very day. CHAP. VII. Of the first Syrod holden in New England, whereby the Lord in his mercy did more plainly discover his ancient truths, and con∣fute those cursed errors that ordinarily dogg the refor∣ming Churches of CHRIST. THe Lord Christ deeming it most expedient for his people to adde some farther help to assist them in cutting downe those cursed errors (that were the next dangerous difficulty they were to meet with) sends in the Reverend and bright shining light Mr. Davenport, and the cheerfull, grave, and gracious Sol∣dier of his, Mr. Allen, as also Mr. Thompson, Mr. Browne, Mr. Fish, with divers other of the faithfull servants of Christ, the much honoured Mr. Eaton and Mr. Hopkins: and now the time being come, the Synod sate at Cambridge, where was present about 25. Reverend and godly Ministers of Christ, besides many other gra∣ciously-eminent servants of his. A Catalogue of the severall Er∣rors scattered about the Countrey was there produced, to the number of 80. and liberty given to any man to dispute pro or con, and none to be charged to be of that opinion he disputed for, un∣lesse he should declare himselfe so to be. The Weapons these Souldiers of Christ warred with, was the Sword of the Spirit, e∣ven the Word of God, together with earnest prayer to the God of all Truth, that he would open his truths unto them. The clea∣ring of the true sense and meaning of any place of Scripture, it was done by Scripture, for they so discerned by the grace of God
that was given them, that the whole Scripture must be attended unto. Foure sorts of persons I could with a good will have paid their passage out, and home againe to England, that they might have been present at this Synod, so that they would have repor∣ted the truth of all the passages thereof to their own Colledges at their return. The first is the Prelates, who both in Theorie and Practice might have made their owne Eyes Judges in the case, Whether would prevaile most, (to the suppressing of Error, and advancing of Unity in the true worship of God) either their commanding power backt with the subordinate sword of Prin∣ces, or the Word of God cleered up by the faithfull labour and indefatigable pains of the sincere servants of the Lord Christ, and mightily declared through the demonstration of his blessed Spi∣rit. This well waighed, may (through the Lords blessing) stop the yet running fancie in the brains of many, that their Lordly power is the onely means of suppressing Error. Secondly, the Godly and Reverend Presbyterian Party, who, had they made their eye-witnesses of this worke, they had assu∣redly saved themselves much labour, which I dare presume they would have spent worthily otherwayes, then in writing so many books to prove the Congregationall or Independant Churches to be the sluce, through which so many flouds of Error flow in: nay, my deare and reverend brethren, might not so much work of yours in writing, and ours in answering, have been a meanes to have stopt the height of this overflowing floud? and through the Lords assisting have setled Peace and Truth in a great mea∣sure throughout the three Nations. Thirdly, those who with their new stratagems have brought in so much old error; for although they had a party here, yet verily they durst not bring their New Light to the Old Word, for fear it would prove but Old Darknesse, (as indeed they doe.) But here might they have seene the Ministers of Christ (who were so experienced in the Scripture, that some of them could tell you the place, both Chapter and Verse, of most sentences of Scripture could be named unto them) with Scriptures light, cleering up the truths of Christ clouded by any of these Errors and Heresies, as had not been done for many Ages before: and verily this great work of Christ must not be lightly over-past, the Author of this
History passeth not for the shrewd censures of men: nor, can it be any matter of disparagement to the reverend and highly ho∣noured in Christ, remaining in England, that their fellow bre∣thren have done so worthily here? it is well knowne to all our English Nation, that the most able-preaching Ministers of Christ were most pursued by the lording Clergy, and those that have spent all their dayes, even from a child, in searching the Scri∣ptures, the Lord Christ preparing them by his blessed spirit for this very work. Besides, their continued practice in studying and preaching the wayes of truth; and lastly, their meeting with the opposition of so many crafty, close couched errors, whose first foundation was laid cheke by joule with the most glorious, heavenly, and blessed truths, to dazle the eyes of the beholders, and strike terrour into the hearts of those should lift up their hands against them, for feare they should misse them, and hit their stroke upon the blessed truth; and also to bring up a slan∣derous and evil report on all the able Orthodox Minstrs of Christ that withstand them, perswading men they withstand the holy, heavenly, and blessed truth, which they have lodged there, which this Synod did with strong & undenyable arguments fetch from Scripture, to overthrow and pluck up by the roots, all those Errors, which you have heard mentioned in the former Book, the which they divided for the more full answering of them. A∣mong all those valiant Champions of the Truth whom you have heard named, to some six, some five, some foure, &c. it had assu∣redly been worth the work to have related the particular man∣ner of putting to the sword every one of them: but besides the length of the discourse, there must have been a more able Pen∣man: but however they were so put to death, that they never have stood up in a living manner among us since, but sometimes like Wizards to peepe and mutter out of ground, fit for such people to resort unto, as will goe from the living to the dead. But blessed be the Lord Christ, who girded his people with strength against this day of battaile, and caused the Heavens to cleere up againe in New-England, after these foggy dayes: The fourth and last sort of persons, whose presence I could most of all the other three former have desired, was those whose disease lay as chiefly in despising all Physitians, and that upon this
ground for one, because some for filthy lucre sake have nourish Diseases rather then cured them. Many pamphlets have come from our Countreymen of late, to this purpose, namely, scurril∣lously to deride all kind of Scholarship, Presbytery, and Synods. Experience hath taught Gods people here, that such are troubled with some sinfull opinion of their owne, that they would not have touched; but had they been at this Synod, they must, per force, have learned better language, or their speech and their knowledge would fall foule one of the other; here might they have beheld the humility of the most learned of these servants of Christ, condemning the high conceitednesse of their ignorance, and then also the framing of Arguments in a Schollar like way, did (the Lord assisting) cleare up the truths of Christ more to the menest capacity in one hour, then could be clouded again in saven yeare by the new notion of any such as boast so much of their unlettered knowledge, diversity of languages, although a correcting hand of God upon the whole world, when they joyned together in that proud Edifice: yet now is it blest of God, to retaine the purity of the Scriptures; if any man should goe about to corrupt them in one language, they should remain pure in another; and assuredly, the Lord intending to have the wayes of the Gospel of Christ to be made more manifest at this time, then formerly, not by tradition of our forefathers, or by mans reason, but by the revealed will of God in the holy Scri∣pture, did accordingly prepare Instruments for this work, earthen vessels, men subject to like infirmities with our selves; sorry men, and carrying about with them a body of sinne and death, men subject to erre: yet these did the Lord Christ cause to be train'd up in Learning, and tutor'd at the Universities, and that very young, some of them, as the revererend Mr. John Cotten at 13. yeares of age. The mighty power of God sanctifyed and ordained them for this work, and made them a defenced city, an iron pillar, a wall of brass against all the opposers of his truth; and now coupled them together in this Synod, to draw in Christs yoke, and warre with the weapons he had furnished them withall, and cause the blessed truths of Christ to shine forth in their splendour and glory, farre more after the dispersing of this smoak, which of a long time hath filled the Temple, and hinde∣red
the entring in of those great number of Converts, which shall flow in at the fall of all antichristian Errors; and verily as the Lord Christ had called forth this little handful to be a model of his glorious work, intended thoughout the whole world, so chiefly in this suppressing of Errours, Sects, and Heresies, by the blessed word of his truth, causing his servants in this Synod, mually to agree; and by his gracious providence, break in pieces a contrived plot of some, who, by mis-reports, insinuating jealousies, and crafty carriage of matters to the wrong mark, with a writing of thrice twenty strong, would have drawne away one of the valiant Souldiers of Christ from this worthy worke, who both then, and since, hath been very helpfull to cast downe many a strong fort erected by the Sectaries; but the Lord Christ would not suffer this blow to be given, intending all people (by way of restitution) for their slanderous reports, cast upon his New England Churches (as being the inlet to Errours) shall honour them with this victorious coquest, given them by Christ herein; yet willing they would, their brethren in England might win the prize by out-stripping them, more abundantly in length, bredth and height, which the same God is able to per∣forme, that hath been thus abundantly good to us. About this time the Churches of Christ began to be diligent in their duty, and the civil government in looking after such as were like to disturb the peace of this new erected govern∣ment; some persons being so hot headed for maintaining of these sinfull opinions, that they feared breach of peace, even among the Members of the superiour Court, but the Lord bles∣sing them with agreement to prevent the wofull effects of civill broyles; those in place of government caused certain persons to be disarmed in the severall Townes, as in the Towne of Boston, to the number of 58. in the Towne of Salem 6. in the Towne of Newbery 3. in the Towne of Roxbury 5. in the Towne of Ipswitch 2. and Charles Towne 2. others there were, that through the help of the faithfull servants of Christ, came to see how they had beene msled, and by the power of Christ in his Word, returned againe with an acknowledge∣ment of their sinne; but others there were, who remained obstinate, to the disturbing of the civill power, and were bani∣shed,
of whom you shall heare farther hereafter. Some of the Churches of Christ being more indulgent, waited long ere they fell upon the work: and here you must tak notice, that the Sy∣nod, Civil Government, and the Churches of Christ, kept their proper place, each moving in their own sphear, and acting by their own light, or rather by the revelation of Jesus Christ, wit∣nessed by his Word and Spirit, yet not refusing the help of eacg other (as some would willingly have it) some of the Churches prosecuting the Rule of Christ against their hereticall Members, were forced to proceed to excommunication of them, who when they saw whereto it would come, they would have pre∣vented it with lying, but the Lord discovered it; and so they were justly separated from the Churches of Christ for lying: which being done, they fell to their old trade againe. CHAP. VIII. Of the planting the fourth Colonie of New Englands godly Govern∣ment, called New-Haven. THe Lord Christ having now in his great mercy taken out of the way these mountains that seemed in the eye of Man to block up his Churches further proceedings, they had now leisure to welcome the living stones that the Lord was pleased to adde unto this building, and with thankfull acknowledgment to give him of his owne for his mercyes multitude, whose was the work in planting, not onely more Churches, but another Colo∣ny also; for the honoured Mr, Eaton being accompanied with many worthy persons of note, whom the Lord had furnished with store of substance for this wildernesse-work, although they would willingly have made their abode under the government of the Mattachusets; yet could they finde no place upon the Sea-coasts for their settling: the Lord intending to enlarge his peo∣ples border, caused them, after much search, to take up a place somewhat more southwardly, neare the shalles of Cape-cod, where they had very flatt water; yet being entred in, they found: commodious harbour for shipping, and a fit place to erect a
Towne, which they built in very little time, with very faire hou∣ses, and compleat streets; but in a little time they overstockt it with Chattell, although many of them did follow merchandi∣zing, and Maritime affairs, but their remotenesse from the Matta∣chusets Bay, where the chiefe traffique lay, hindred them much. Here did these godly and sincere servants of Christ, according to the rule of the Word, gather into Church Estate, and called to the office of a Pastor the reverend, judicious, and godly Mr, John Davenport, of whom the Author is bold to say as fol∣loweth: WHen Men and Devils 'gainst Christs flock conspire, For them prepar'd a deadly trapping net; Then Christ to make all men his work admire, Davenport, he doth thee from thy Country fet To sit in Synod, and his folk assist: The filthy vomit of Hels Dragon, deepe In earths womb drawn, blest they this poyson mist, And blest the meanes doth us from error keep, Thy grave advice and arguments of strength Did much prevaile, the Erronist confound. Well hast thou warr'd, Christ drawes thy dayes in length, That thou in learn'd experience maist abound: What though thou leave a city stor'd with pleasure, Spend thy prime dayes in heathen desart land, Thy joy's in Christ, and not in earthly treasure, Davenport rejoice, Christs Kngdome is at hand; Didst ever deem to see such glorious dayes? Though thou decrease with age and earths content, Thou live'st in Christ, needs then must thy joy raise; His Kingdome's thine, and that can ne'r be spent. This Church and Town soon procur'd some Sisters to take part with her, and among them they erected a godly and peaceable Government, and called their frontier towne New haven, of which the Government is denominated, being inhabited by many men eminent in gifts for the populating thereof, and managing of affaires both by Sea and Land; they have had some shipping
built there, but by the sad losse of Mr. Lambertons ship and goods also, they were much disheartned, but the much honoured Mr. Eaton remaines with them to this very day. THou noble thus, Theophilus, before great Kings to stand, More noble far, for Christ his war thou leav'st thy native land; With thy rich store thou cam'st on shore Christs Churches to assist; What if it wast? thou purchast hast that Pearl that most have mist, Nay rather he hath purchast thee, and whatsoever thou hast, With graces store to govern o're his people, he thee plac't. Our State affaires thy will repaires, assistant thou hast bin Firm league to make, for Gospels sake, four Colonyes within; With Sweads French, Dutch, and Indians much, Gods peoples peace this bred, Then Eaton aye, remember may the Child that's yet unfed. This government of New-haven, although the younger Sister of the foure yet was she as beautifull as any of this broode of travellers, & most minding the end of her coming hither, to keep close to the rule of Christ both in Doctrine and Discipline; and it were to be wished her elder Sister would follow her example, to nurture up all her children accordingly: here is not to be forgot∣ten the honoured Mr Hopkins, who came over about this time a man of zeale and courage for the truths of Christ, assisting this blessed work, both in person and estate; for the which the Au∣thor cannot forget him, being oft in commission for the good of all the united Colonyes. HOpkins thou must, although weak dust, for this great work pre∣pare, Through Ocean large Christ gives thee charge to govern his with care; What earthen man, in thy short span throughout the world to run From East to West at Christs behest, thy worthy work is done: Ʋnworthy thou acknowledge now, not unto thee at all, But to his name be lasting fame, thou to his work doth call.
CHAP. IX. Of the planting the fourteenth Church of Christ under the govern∣men of the Mattachusets Bay, called Dedham. THe latter end of this yeare 'twas the Towne of Dedham be∣gan, an inland Towne, scituate, about ten miles from Bo∣ston, in the County of Suffolk, well watred with many pleasant streames, abounding with Garden fruits fitly to supply the Mar∣kets of the most populous Towne, whose coyne and commodi∣ties allures the Inhabitants of this Towne to make many a long walk; they consist of about a hundred Families, being generally given to husbandry, and, through the blessing of God, are much encreased, ready to swarme and settle on the building of another Towne more to the Inland; they gather into a Church at their first settling, for indeed, as this was their chiefe errand, so was it the first thing they ordinarily minded; to pitch their Taberna∣cles neare the Lords Tent: To this end they called to the office of a Pastor, the reverend, humble, and heavenly-minded, Mr. John Allen, a man of a very courteous behaviour, full of sweet Chri∣stian love towards all, and with much meeknesse of spirit, con∣tending earnestly for the faith and peace of Christs Chur∣ches. ALL you so slte Christs sanctifying grace, As legall workes, what Gospel-work can be But sinne cast out, and spirits work in place, They justifyed that Christ thus reigning see: Allen, thou art by Christs free spirit led M. Allen a great help a∣gainst the Er∣rors of the time. To warre for him in wildernesse awhile; What, doe for Christ, I man thou art in's stead, Sent to beseech, in's Vineyard thou must toyle. John Allen joy, thou sinfull dust art taken To spend thy dayes in exile, so remote, Christs Church to build, of him that's ne'r forsaken, Nor thou, for now his truths thou must promote. He guides thy tongue, thy paper, pen and hands, Thy hearts swift motion, and affections choice;
Needs thou thus lead, must doe what he commands, And cry aloud when he lifts up thy voice: Seven yeares compleat twice told, thy work hath bin, To feed Christs flock, in desart land them keep, Both thou and they each day are kept by him; Safe maist thou watch, being watcht by him ne'r sleeps. This Church of Christ hath in its bosome neere about 70. souls joyned in Covenant together, and being well seasoned with this savoury salt, have continued in much love and unity from their first foundation, hitherto tanslating the close, clouded woods into goodly corn-fields, and adding much comfort to the lone∣some travellers, in their solitary journey to Canectico, by eying the habitation of Gods people in their way, ready to administer refreshing to the weary.
CHAP. X. Of the planting of the fifteenth Church of Christ at the Towne of Waymoth. THe Twone and Church of Christ at Waymoth had come in among the other Townes before this, as being an elder Sister, but onely for her somewhat more then ordinary instabi∣lity; it is battered with the brinish billows on the East; Rocks and Swamps to the Southwest, makes it delightfull to the nimble tripping Deere, as the plowable places of Medow land is to the Inhabitants. This Towne was first founded by some persons that were not so forward to promote the Ordinances of Christ, as many others have been: they desired the reverend Minister of Christ Mr. Gennors, to be helpfull in preaching the Word un∣to them; who after some little space of time, not liking the place, repaired to the Eastern English: but the people of this place, after his departure, being gathered into a Church, they called to office the reverend and godly Mr Newman; but many of them unwilling to continue in this Towne, as supposing they had found a fitter place for habitation, removed into the next Government, carrying with them their Pastor; by which means, the people that were left behinde, were now destitute, and ha∣ving some godly Christians among them, who much desired the sincere milk of the Word that they might grow thereby: upon diligent use of meanes they found out a young man able gifted for the work, brought up with the reverend and judicious Mr. Chancie, called Mr. Thomas Thatcher. Yet againe, after some few yeares, for want of sufficient maintenance, with mutuall consent they parted with him, and are forced to borrow help of their Neighbours, wherein all of them to the Author is bold to say as followeth: OH people, reason swayes mans actions here, You sanctifyed, o're these long seas doth look, With heavenly things your earthly toyle to cheere; Will lose the end for which this toyle you tooke.
Christ comes in's Word, let their bright feet abide Your Towne, among whose grace and gifts excell In preaching Christ, it's he your hearts hath try'd, They want no store that all for him doe sell. Gennors, dost love thy Christ? I hope he's deare Belov'd of thee, he honour'd would thee have To feed his flock, while thou remainest here; With's Word of truth thy soule and others save. With little flock doth Newman pack away; The righteous lips sure might a many feed; Remov'st for gaine? it's most where most men stay, Men part for land why land least helps at need. Thatcher, what mean'st to leavs thy little flock? Sure their increase might thee much profit bring: What, leave Christs Church? it's founded on a rock; If rock not left, their ebb may suddain spring; Pastor and People, have you both forgot What parting Paul and Christs deare people had? Their loves melt teares, it's ve'mently so hot, His heart-strings break to see his folk so sad. This yeare came over, besides the former, for the furthering of this blessed work of Christ, Mr. William Tompson, Mr. Edm: Browne, and Mr. David Frisk, who were called to office in se∣verall Churches, as you shall after hear. And now to end this yeare, that abounded in the wonder-working Providence of Christ, for his Churches, in the exaltation of his truths, that all may take notice the Lord cast in by the by, as it were, a very fruitfull crop, insomuch that from this day forward, their in∣crease was every yeare more and more, till the Country came to feed its owne Inhabitants; and the people who formerly were somewhat pincht with hunger, eat bread to the full, having not onely for their necessity but also for their conveniency and de∣light.
CHAP. XI. Of the increase of the people of Christ. Printing brought over, and the sixteenth Church of Christ planted at Rouly. FOr the yeare 1638. John Winthrope Esq. was chosen Gover∣nour, and Tho: Dudly Esq. Deputy Governour; the number of Freemen added were about 130. The peace of this little Com∣mon-wealth being now in great measure settled, by the Lords mercy, in overthrowing the Indians, and banishing of certaine turbulent spirits. The Churches of Christ were much edified in their holy faith by their indefatigable pains of their Ministers, in their weekly Lectures extraordinary as well as by their Sabboth-Assemblies, and continuall visiting of their people from house to house, endeavouring to heale the hurts these false de∣ceivers had made, with double diligence showring downe the sweet dews of the blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, to the conver∣ting of many a poor soul. and indeed, now were the glorious days of New England; the Churches of Christ increase dayly, and his eminent Embassadours resort unto them from our native Coun∣try, which as then lay under the tyranny of the Monarchall Arch-prelates, which caused the servants of Christ to wander from their home. This yeare the reverend and judicious M. Jos. Glover undertook this long voyage, being able both in person and estate for the work he provided, for further compleating the Colonies in Church and Common-wealth-work, a Printer, which hath been very usefull in many respects; the Lord seeing it meet that this reverend and holy servant of his should fall short of the shores of New England: but yet at this time he brought over the zealous affcted and judicious servant of his, Master Ezekiel Rogers, who with a holy and humble people, made his progress to the North-Eastward, and erected a Towne about 6. miles from Ipswich, called Rowly, wanting room, they pureha∣sed some addition of the Town of Newbery; yet had they a large length of land, onely for the neere conveniency to the Towne of Ipswich, by the which meanes they partake of the con∣tinued
Lectures of either Towne: these people being very indu∣strious every way, soone built many houses, to the number of about threescore families, and were the first people that set upon making of Cloth in this Western World; for which end they built a sulling-mill, and caused their little-ones to be very diligent in spinning cotten wooll, many of them having been clothiers in England, till their zeale to promote the Gospel of Christ cau∣sed them to wander; and therefore they were no lesse industri∣ous, in gathering into Church-society, there being scrace a man among them, but such as were meet to be living stones in this building, according to the judgement of man; they called to the office of a Pastor this holy man of God, Mr. Ezekiel Rogers, o whom this may be said: Christ for this work Rogers doth riches give, Rich graces fit his people for to feed, Wealth to supply his wants whilst here he live, Free thou receiv'st to serve his peoples need. England may mourne they thee no longer keep, English rejoice, Christ doth such worthyes raise, His Gospel preach, unfold his mysteries deep; Weak dust made strong sets forth his makers praise: With fervent zeale, and courage thou hast fought 'Gainst that transformed Dragon and his bands, Snatcht forth the burning thou poore soules hast caught, And freed thy flock from wolves devouring hands. Ezekiel mourn not, thou art severed farre, From thy deare Country, to a desart land; Christ call'd hath thee unto this worthy warre; By him o'rcome, he holds thy Crowne in's hand. For the further assisting of this tender flock of Chrst, the re∣verend Mr. John Miller did abide among them for some space of time, preaching the Word of God unto them also, till it pleased the Lord to call him to be Pastor of the Church of Christ at Yarmouth, in Plimoth patten, where he remaineth at this very day.
With courage bold Miller through Seas doth venter, To toyl it out in this great Western wast, Thy stature low one object high doth center; Higher then Heaven thy faith on Christ is plac't: Allarum thou with silver trumpet sound, And tll the World Christs Armyes are at hand, With Scripture truths thou Errors dost confound, And overthrow all Antichristian bands: It matters not for th'worlds high reputation; The World must fall and Christ alone must stand; Thy Crown's prepar'd in him, then keep thy station, Joy that Christs Kingdome is so neare at hand. CHAP. XII. Of the great Earthquake in New England, and of the wofull end of some erronious persons, with the first foundation of Harverd Colledge. THis yeare, the first day of the Fourth Month, about two of the clock in the after-noone, the Lord caus'd a great and terrible Earth quake, which was generall throughout all the English Plantations; the motion of the Earth was such, that it caused divers men (that had never knowne an Earth quake be∣fore) being at worke in the Fields, to cast downe their working-tooles, and run with gastly terrified lookes, to the next com∣pany they could meet withall; it came from the Westerne and uninhabited parts of this Wildernesse, and went the direct course: this brood of Travellers came, the Ministers of Christ many of them could say at that very time (not from any other Revelation, but what the word holds forth) that if the Churches of New England were Gods house, then suddenly there would follow great alterations in the Kingdomes of Europe. This yeare the civill government proceeded to censure the re∣sidue of thofe sinfull erroneous persons, who raised much com∣motion
in this little Common-wealth; who being banished, resorted to a place more Southward, some of them sitting down at a place called Providence, others betooke them to an Island about 16. miles distant from the former, called Rode Island, where having Elbow roome enough, none of the Ministers of Christ, nor any other to interrupt their false and deceivable Do∣ctrines, they hamper'd themselves fouly with their owne line, and soone shewed the depthlesse ditches that blinde guides lead into; many among them being much to be pittyed, who were drawne from the truth by the bewitching tongues of some of them being, very ignorant and easily perverted: and al∣though the people were not many in all, yet were they very di∣verse in their opinions, and glad where they could gaine most Disciples to heare them; some were for every day to be a Sab∣bath, and therefore kept not any Sabbath-day at all; others were some for one thing, some for another; and therefore had their severall meetings, making many a goodly piece of Preachment; among whom there were some of the female sexe (who deeming the Apostle Paul to be too strict in not permitting a roome to preach in the publique Congregation) taught, notwithstan∣ding they having their call to this office, from an ardent desire of being famous, especially the grand Mistresse of them all, who ordinarily prated every Sabbath day, till others, who thirsted af∣ter honour in the same way with her selfe, drew away her Au∣ditors, and then she withdrew her self, her husband, and her fa∣mily also, to a more remote place; and assuredly, although the Lord be secret in all the dispensation of his providences, whether in judgement or mercy, yet much may be learn'd from all, as sometimes pointing with the finger to the lesson; as here these persons withdrawing from the Churches of Christ (wherein he walketh, and is to be found in his blessed Ordinances) to a first and second place, where they came to a very sad end; for thus it came to passe in the latter place, The Indians in those parts for∣warned them of making their abode there; yet this could be no warning to them, but still they continued, being amongst a mul∣titude of Indians, boasted they were become all one Indian: and indeed, this woman, who had the chiefe rule of all the roast, be∣ing very bold in her strange Revelations and mis-applications,
tells them, though all nations and people were cut off round a∣bout them, yet should not they; till on a day certaine Indians coming to her house, discoursing with them, they wished to tye up her doggs, for they much bit the man, not mistrusting the Indians guile, did so; the which no sooner done, but they cruelly murthered her, taking one of their daughters away with them, & another of them seeking to escape is caught, as she was getting over a hadge, and they drew her back againe by the haire of the head to the stump of a tree, and there cut off her head with a hatchet; the other that dwelt by them betook them to boat, and fled, to tell this sad newes; the rest of their companions, who were rather hardened in their sinfull way, and blasphemous opinions, than brought to any sight of their damnable Errours, as you shall after hear; yet was not this the first loud speaking hand of God against them; but before this the Lord had poyn∣ted directly to their sinne by a very fearfull Monster, that ano∣ther of these women brought forth, they striving to bury it in oblivion, but the Lord brought it to light, setting forth the view of their monstrous Errors in this prodigious birth. This yeare, although the estates of these pilgrim people were much wasted, yet seeing the benefit that would accrew to the Churches of Christ and Civil Government, by the Lords blessing, upon lear∣ning, they began to erect a Colledge, the Lord by his provident hand giving his approbation to the work, in sending over a faithfull and godly servant of his, the reverend Mr John Harverd, who joyning with the people of Christ at Charles Towne, sud∣dainly after departed this life, and gave near a thousand pound toward this work; wherefore the Government thought it meet to call it Harverd Colledge in remembrance of him. Ip Harverd had with riches here been taken, He need not then through troublous Seas have past, But Christs bright glory hath thine eyes so waken, Nought can content, thy soule of him must tast: Ohtast and tell how sweet his Saints among, Christ ravisht hath thy heart with heavenly joyes To preach and pray with teares, affection strong, From hearts delight in him who thee imployes.
Scarce hast thou had Christs Churches here in eye, But thou art call'd to eye him face to face; Earths scant contents death drawes thee from, for why? Full joy thou wouldst that's onely in heavens place. CHAP. XIII. Of the coming over of the honoured Mr. Pelham, and the planting of the seaventeenth Church of Christ at the Towne of Hampton. THis yeare 1639. John Winthrope Esq was chosen Gover∣nour, and Thomas Dudly Esq. Deputy Governour, the number of freemen added were about 83. This yeare came over the much honoured Mr. Herbert Pelham, a man of a courteous behaviour, humble, and heavenly minded. HArbertus, hye on valiant, Why lingerst thou so long? Christs work hath need of hasty speed, his enemies are strong: In wildernesse Christ doth thee blesse with vertues, wife, and seed, To govern thou, at length didst bow to serve Christs peoples need; To thine own soyle thou back dost toyle, then cease not lab ring there, But still advance Christs Ordinance, and shrink no where for fear. Much about this time began the Town of Hampton, in the Country of Northfolk, to have her foundation stone laid, scituate neare the Sea-coast, not farre from the famous River of Meri∣meck, the great store of salt marsh did intice this people to set downe their habitations there, for as yet Cowes and Cattell of that kinde were not come to the great downfall in their price, of which they have about 450. head; and for the form of this Towne, it is like a Flower-de-luce, two streets of houses wheeling off from the maine body thereof, the land is fertile, but filled with swamps, and some store of rocks, the people are about 60. Families; being gathered together into Church covenant, they called to office the reverend, grave, and gracious Mr. Doulton,
having also for some little space of time the more ancient Mr. Batchelor (of whom you have heard in the former Book) to preach unto them also; here take a short remembrance of the other. DOulton doth teach perspicuously and sound, With Wholsome truths of Christ thy flock dost feed, Thy honour with thy labour doth abound, Age crownes thy head in righteousnesse, proceed To batter downe, root up, and quite destroy All Heresies and Errors, that draw back Ʋnto perdition, and Christs folk annoy; To warre for him thou weapons dost not lack: Long dayes to see, that long'd for day to come Of Babels fall, and Israels quiet peace: Thou yet maist live of dayes so great a sum To see this work, let not thy warfare cease. CHAP. XIV. Of the planting the eighteenth Church of Christ at the Towne of Salsbury. FOr further perfecting this Wildernesse-work; not far from the Towne of Hampton was erected another Towne, called Salsbury, being brought forth as Twins, sometime contending for eldership: This being seated upon the broade swift torrent of Merrimeck, a very goodly River to behold, were it not block up with some suddaine falls through the rocks; over against this Towne lyeth the Towne of Newberry, on the Southern side of the River a constant Ferry being kept between; for although the River be about half a mile broad, yet, by reason of an Island that lies in the midst thereof, it is the better passed in troublesom weather: the people of this Towns have of late, placed their dwellings so much distanced the one from the other, that they are like to divide into two Churches; the scituation of this Towne is very pleasant, were the Rivers Navigable farre up, the branches thereof abound in faire and goodly medowes with
good store of stately Timber upon the uplands in many pla∣ces, this Towne is full as fruitfull in her Land, Chattell, and In∣habitants, as her Sister Hampton; the people joyned in Church▪ relation or brotherhood, nere about the time the other did, and have desired and obtained the reverend and graciously godly, M. Thomas Woster to be their Pastor. WIth mickle labour and distressed wants, Woster, thou hast in desart's depth remain'd Thy chiefest dayes, Christs Gospel there to plant, And water well, such toyle shall yeild great gaine. Oh happy day! may Woster say, that I Was singled out for this great work in hand; Christ by distresse doth Gold for's Temple try: Thrice blest are they may in his Presence stand, But more, thou art by him reserved yet, To see on earth Christ's Kingdom's exaltation: More yet, thou art by him prepared fit To help it on, among our English Nation.
CHAP. XV. Of further supply for the Church of Christ at Waterton. And a sad acceidnt fell out in Boston Towne. THe Lord intending to strengthen his poore Churches here, and after the overthrow of these damnable Errors, to trample Satan under their feet; he manifesteth his mindefulness of them, in sending over fresh suplpyes againe and againe: al∣though weak and sory men in themselves, yet strong in the Lord, and the power of his might, the last that this yeare is to be na∣med, is the reverend, judicious, and godly-affected, Mr, John Knowles, who was desired of the Church of Christ at Waterton, to be a two-fold cord unto them, in the office of a teaching Elder, with the reverend Mr. Phillips, of whom you have heard in the former Book. WIth courage bold and arguments of strength, Knowles doth apply Gods word his stock unto, Christ furnisht hath (to shew his bountyes length) Thee with rich gifts, that thou his work mayst do: New England is too scant, for thy desire Inkindled is, Christs truths abroad to spread, Virginia may his grace to them admire, That thee through Seas for their instruction led; Thy labours Knowles are great, far greater hee, Not onely thee, but all his valiant made, Forth sinfull dust, his Saints and Warriers be; He thee upheld, thy strength shall never fade. John come thou forth, behold what Christ hath wrought In these thy dayes, great works are yet behinde, Then toyle it out till all to passe be brought, Christ crowne will thee, thou then his glory minde. To end this yeare 1639. the Lord was pleased to a send a very sharp winter, and more especially in strong storms of weekly snows, with very bitter blasts: And here the Reader may take notice of the sad hand of the Lord against two persons, who
were taken in a storme of snow, as they were passing from Bo∣ston to Roxbury, it being much about a mile distant, and a very plaine way, One of Roxbury sending to Boston his servant maid for a Barber Chirurgion, to draw his tooth, they lost their way in their passage between, and were not found till many dayes after, and then the maid was fonnd in one place, and the man in another, both of them frozen to death; in which sad accident, this was taken into consideration by divers people, that this Barber was more then ordinary laborious to draw men to those sinfull Errors, that were formerly so frequent, and now newly overthrowne by the blessing of the Lord, upon the endeavour of his faithfull servants with the word of truth) he having a fit op∣portunity, by reason of his trade, so soone as any were set downe in his chaire, he would commonly be cutting of their haire and the truth together; notwithstanding some report better of the man, the example is for the living, the dead is judged of the Lord alone. CHAP. XVI. The great supply of godly Ministers for the good of his People in New England. FOr to govern and rule this little Common wealth, was this year chosen the valiant Champion, for the advance of Christs truh, Thomas Dudly Esq. and Richard Bellingham Esq. Deputy. Governour; the freemen added to the former were about 192. this yeare the reverend Mr. Burr (a holy, heavenly-minded man, and able gifted to preach the Word of God) was exercised therein for some space of time, in the Church of Christ at Dor∣chester, where they were about calling him to the office of a teaching Elder; but in a very littie time after his coming over he departed this life, yet minde him you may in the following Meetre WEll didst thou minde thy Work, Which caus'd thee vonter (Through Ocean large) thy Christ in's Word to preach,
Exhorting all their faith on him to center, Soules ravisht are by him in thy sweet speech, Thy speech bewrayes thy heart, for heaven doth look, Christ to enjoy, Burr from the earth is taken, Thy words remaine, though thou hast us forsook, In dust sleep sound till Christ thy body waken. There are divers others of the faithfull Ministers of Christ that came over for to further this his work; somewhat before this time, as the godly and reverend Mr. Rayner, who was called to office in the Church of Christ at Plimoth, and there remaines preaching the Word instantly, with great paines and care over that flock, as also the reverend and faithfull servant of Christ Jesus, Mr. William Hook, who was for some space of time at the Church in Taunton, but now remaines called to office in the Church of Christ at Newhaven, a man, who hath received of Christ many gracious gifts, fit for so high a calling, with very a∣miable and gracious speech labouring in the Lord; and here also the Reader may minde how the Lord was pleased to reach out his large hand of bounty toward his N. England people, in sup∣plying them abundantly with Teachers, able and powerfull to break the bread of life unto them, so long as their desires conti∣nued hot and zealous; but after here grew a fulnesse in some, even to slight, if not loath the honey comb; many returned for England, and the Lord was pleased to take away others by death, although very few, considering the number; but let N. England beware of an after-clap, & provoke the Lord no longer. But see∣ing this yeare proved the last of the yeares of transportation of Gods people, only for enjoyment of exercising the Ordinances of Christ, and enlargement of his Kingdome (there being hopes of great good opportunity that way at home) it will be expediene onely to name some others in the Southwest parts, among the lesser Colonyes, and so passe on to the story: And first, not to forget the reverend Mr. Eaton, a man of love and peace, and yet godly zealous, he came over with those who planted the Colony of Newhaven, spending his labours in the Lord with them in Plimoth Plantation: also here is to be minded the reverend Mr. Chancie, a very able Preacher, both learned and judicious; as also
the reverend, able, and pious M. Huet, who came over this year, or rather, as I suppose, the yeare before, who did spend his time and labour with a people that came over with him; at length the greatest part of them they settled downe in the Government of Canecticoe, where they planted the Towne of Windsor, and Church of Christ there, where this gracious servant of Christ con∣tinued in his labours, till the Lord laid him in his bed of rest: somewhat before this time came over the reverend Mr. Smith, being another of that name, beside the former, he laboured in the Word and Doctrine with a people at Withersfield in those parts also; Mr. Henry Whitefield, another Minister of the Gospel of Christ, of reverend respect, who being returned for England, the latter of his labours, the Lord assisting, will sufficiently testifie his sincerity, for the truth and labours of love in the Lord: here may also be named the reverend Mr. Peck, Mr. Saxton, and Mr. Lenten, the residue will be spoken of in the ensuing story to those that yet remaine. Of these persons named the Author doth tender this following Meetre. WHen reasons Scepter first 'gan sway your hearts, Through troublous Seas, this Western world to enter Among Christs Souldiers, here to act your parts; Did not Christs love on you cause him to center? All those strait lines of your inflam'd desire Ʋnto his truths, 'cause him in them you finde; From wildernesse, not from his truths retire; But unto death this wonderous work you'l minde, No place can claime peculiar interest in Christs worship, for all nations are his own; The day's at hand down falls that man of sin, And Christs pure Gospel through the world is blown; Harvest is come, bid case and sleep adieu, What, trifle time when Christ takes in his Crop? A Harvest large of Gentil and of Jew (You) fil'd of Christ, let his sweet Doctrine drop.
CHAP. XVII. Of the planting of Long-Island. And of the planting the nineteenth Church in the Mattachusets government, called Sudbury. THis yeare came over divers godly and sincere servants of Christ, as I suppose, among whom came over the reverend godly M. Peirson: This people finding no place in any of the former erected Colonies to settle in, to their present content, re∣paired to an Island, severed from the continent of Newhaven, with about 16. miles off the salt Sea, and called Long-Island, be∣ing about 120. miles in length, and yet but narrow: here this people erected a Town, and called it South Hampton, there are many Indians on the greatest part of this Island, who at first set∣tling of the English there, did much annoy their Cattel with the multitude of Doggs they kept, which ordinarily are young wolves brought up came, continuing of a very ravening nature. This people gathered into a Church, and called to office Mr. Peirson, who continued with them about 7, or 8. yeares, and then he, with the greatest number of the people, removed farther into the Island; the other part that remained invited Mr. Foor∣dum, and a people that were with him, to come and joyne with them, who accordingly did, being wandered as far as the Dutch plantation, and there unsettled, although he came into the Coun∣try before them. This yeare the Town and Church of Christ at Sudbury began to have the first foundation stones laid, taking up her station in the Inland Country, as her elder Sister Concord had formerly done, lying farther up the same River, being furnished with great plenty of fresh marsh, but it lying very low is much indamma∣ged with land-flouds, insomuch that when the summer proves wet, they lose part of their hay; yet are they so sufficiently pro∣vided, that they take in Cattell of other Townes to winter: these people not neglecting the chief work, for the which they entred this wildernesse, namely, to worship the Lord in the purity of his Ordinances, and according to the rule of his Word, entred into covenant with him, and one with another professedly to walk together in Church-fellowship; and according to the
same rule they called to the office of a Pastor the reverend, god∣ly, and able Minister of the Word, Mr. Edmond Brown, whose labours in the Doctrine of Christ Jesus hath hitherto abounded, wading through this wildernesse-work with much cheerfulnesse of spirit, of whom as followeth: BOth night and day Brown ceaseth not to watch Christs little flock, in pastures fresh them feed, The worrying wolves shall not thy weak lambs catch; Well dost thou minde in wildernesse their breed; Edmond, thy age is not so great but thou Maist yet behold the Beast brought to her fall, Earth's tottering Kingdome shew her legs gin bow, Thou' mongst Christs Saints with prayers maist her mawle; What signes wouldst have faith's courage for to rouse? See Christ triumphant hath his armies led, In wildernesse prepar'd his lovely Spouse, Caus'd Kings and Kingdomes his high hand to dread: Thou seest his Churches daily are encreasing, And thou thy selfe amongst his worthyes warring, Hold up thy hands, the battel's now increasing, Christ's Kingdom's ay, it's past all mortall's marring. This Towne is very well watered, and hath store of plow-land, but by reason of the oaken roots, they have little broke up, con∣sidering, the many Acres the place affords; but this kinde of land requires great strength to break up, yet brings very good crops, and lasts long without mending; the people are industri∣ous, and have encreased in their estates, some of them, yet the great distance it lyes from the Mart Towns maketh it burden∣some to the Inhabitants, to bring their corne so far by land; some Gentlemen have here laid out part of their estates in procuring farmes, by reason of the store of medow: this Church hath hi∣therto been blessed with blessings of the right hand, even godly peace and unity: they are not above 50. or 60. families, and a∣bout 80. souls in Church fellowship, their Neat-heard about 300.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the planting of the twentieth Church of Christ at a Towne called Braintree. ABout this time there was a Town and Church planted at Mount Wollestone, and named Braintree, it was occa∣sioned by some old planters and certain Farmers belonging to the great Town of Beston; they had formerly one Mr. Whelo∣wright to preach unto them, (till this Government could no longer contain them) they many of them in the mean time be∣longing to the Church of Christ at Boston, but after his depar∣ture they gathered into a Church themselves; having some inlargement of Land, they began to be well peopled, calling  office among them, the reverend and godly Mr. William Tompson, and Mr. Henry Flint, the one to the office of a Pastor, the other of a Teacher; the people are purged by their indu∣try from the sowre leven of those sinful opinions that began  spread, and if any remain among them it is very covert,  the manner of these Erronists that remain in any place, is  countenance all sorts of sinful opinions, as occasions serves, th in Church and Commonwealth, underpretence of Li∣ty of Conscience, (as well their own opinion as others)  this Symbol they may be known in Court and Country. his Town hath great store of Land in tillage, and is at pre∣t in a very thriving condition for outward things, although  of Boston retain their Farms from being of their Town,  do they lye within their bounds, and how it comes to pass ow not; their Officers have somewhat short allowance, y are well stored with cattel and corn, and as a people re∣es, so should they give: And Reader, I cannot but mind  of the admirable providence of Christ for his people in , where they have been in a low condition, by their libe∣rty they have been raised to much in a very little time: again, in withdrawing their hands have had their plenty d: The reverend Mr. Tompson is a man abounding in zeal the propagation of the Gospel, and of an ardent affecti∣ in so much that he is apt to forget himself in things that
concern his own good, both him, and the like gracious M. Flint is here remembred. WIth twofold cord doth Flint and Tompson draw In Christ's yoke, his fallow ground to break, Wounding mens hearts with his most righteous Law, Cordials apply to weary souls and weak. Tompson thou hast Christ's folk incouraged To war, their warfare putting them in mind, That Christ their King will make his sons the drond, The day's at hand when they shall mastery find. Flint be a second to this Champion stout, In Christ's your strength, while you for him do war, When first doth faint, a second helps him out, Till Christ renew with greater strength by far. From East to West your labours lasted have, The more you toil, the more your strength encreaseth, Your works will bide, when you are laid in grave. His truth advance, whose Kingdom never coaseth. CHAP. XIX. Of the first promation of learning in New-England, and the ex∣traordinary providences that the Lord was pleased to send for furthering of the same. TOward the latter end of this Summer came over the learned, reverend, and judicious Mr. Henry Dunster, be∣fore whose coming the Lord was pleased to provide a Patron for erecting a Colledg, as you have formerly heard, his pro∣vident hand being now no less powerful in pointing out with his unerring finger, a president abundantly fitted this his ser∣vant, and sent him over for to mannage the work; and as in all the other passages of this history, the Wonder-working Providence of Sns Saviour hath appeared, so more especial∣ly in this work, the Fountains of learning being in a grea measure stopped in our Native Country at this time, so tha the sweet waters of Shilo's streams must ordinarily pass into
the Churches through the stinking channel of prelatical pride, beside all the filth that the fountains themselves were daily incumbred withall, insomuch that the Lord turned aside of∣ten from them, and refused the breathings of his blessed Spi∣rit among them, which caused Satan (in these latter daies of his transformation into an Angel of light) to make it a means to perswade people from the use of learning altogether, that so in the next generation they might be destitute of such helps, as the Lord hath been pleased hitherto to make use of, as chief means for the conversion of his people, and building them up in the holy faith, as also for breaking downe the Kingdom of Antichrist; and verily had not the Lord been pleased to furnish N. E. with means for the attainment of learning, the work would have been carried on very heavily, and the hearts of godly parents would have vanish'd away with heaviness for their poor children, whom they must have left in a desolare wilderness, destitute of the meanes of grace. It being a work (in the apprehension of all, whose capaci∣ty could reach to the great sums of money, the edifice of a mean olledg would cost) past the reach of a poor Pilgrim people, who had expended the greatest part of their estates on a long voyage, travelling into Forraign Countryes, being unprofitable to any that have undertaken it, although it were but with their necessary attendance, whereas this people were forced to travel with wifes, children, and servants; be∣sides they considered the troble charge of building in this new populated desart, in regard of al kind of workmanship, know∣ing likewise, that young Students could make but a poor progress in learning, by looking on the bare walls of their chambers, and that Diogenes would have the better of them by far, in making use of a Tun to lodg in, not being ignorant also, that many people in this age are out of conceit with learning, and that although they were not among a people who counted ignorance the mother of devotion, yet were the greater part of the people wholly devoted to the Plow, (but to speak uprightly, hunger is sharp, and the head will retain little learning, if the heart be not refreshed
in some competent measure with food, although the gross va∣pors of a glutted stomack are the bane of a bright under∣standing, and brings barrenness to the brain) but how to have both go on together, as yet they know not; amidst all these difficulties, it was thought meet learning should plead for it self, and (as many other men of good rank and quality in this barren desart) plod out a way to live: Hereupon all those who had tasted the sweet wine of Wisdoms drawing, and fed on the dainties of knowledg, began to set their wits a work, and verily as the whole progress of this work had a farther dependency then on the present eyed means, so at this time chiefly the end being firmly fixed on a sure foundation, name∣ly, the glory of God, and good of all his elect people, the world throughout, in vindicating the truths of Christ, and promoting his glorious Kingdom, who is now taking the hea∣then for his inheritance, and the utmost ends of the earth for his possession, means they know there are, many thousands uneyed of mortal man, which every daies Providence brings forth; upon these resolutions, to work they go, and with thankful acknowledgment, readily take up all lawful means as they come to hand, for place they fix their eye upon New-Town, which to tell their Posterity whence they came, is now named Cambridg, and withal to make the whole world un∣derstand, that spiritual learning was the thing they chiefly desired, to sanctifie the other, and make the whole lump ho∣ly, and that learning being set upon its right object, might not contend for error instead of truth; they chose this place, being then under the Orthodox, and soul-flourishing Ministe∣ry of Mr. Thomas Shepheard, of whom it may be said, with∣out any wrong to others, the Lord by his Ministery hath sa∣ved many a hundred soul: The scituation of this Colledg is very pleasant, at the end of a spacious plain, more like a bow∣ling green, then a Wilderness, neer a fair navigable river, envi∣roned with many Neighbouring Towns of note, being so neer, that their houses joyn with her Suburbs, the building thought by some to be too gorgeous for a Wilderness, and yet too mean in others apprehensions for a Colledg, it is at pre∣sent in larging by purchase of the neighbour houses, it hath
the conveniencies of a fair Hall, comfortable Studies, and a good Library, given by the liberal hand of some Magistrates and Ministers, with others: The chief gift towards the found∣ing of this Colledg, was by Mr. John Harnes, a reverend Mini∣ster, the Country being very weak in their publike Treasury, expended about 500. l. towards it, and for the maintenance thereof, gave the yearly revenue of a Ferry passage between Boston, and Charles Town, the which amounts to about 40. or 50. l. per annum. The Commissioners of the four united Co∣lonies also taking into consideration, (of what common con∣cernment this work would be, not only to the whole planta∣tions in general, but also to all our English Nation) they en∣deavoured to stir up all the people in the several Colonies to make a yearly contribution toward it, which by some is ob∣served, but by the most very much neglected; the Govern∣ment hath endeavoured to grant them all the priviledges fit for a Colledg, and accordingly the Governour and Magi∣strates, together with the President of the Colledg, for the time being, have a continual care of ordering all matters for the good of the whole: This Colledg hath brought forth, and nurst up very hopeful plants, to the supplying some Churches here, as the grrcious and godly Mr. Wilson, son to the grave and zealous servant of Christ Mr. John Wilson, this young man is Pastor to the Church of Christ at Dorchester; as also Mr. Buckly, son to the reverend M. Buckly of Concord;  also a second son of his, whom our Native Country hath now at present help in the Ministery, and the other is over a people of Christ in one of these Colonies, and if I mistake not, England hath I hope not only this young man of N. E. nur∣ng up in learning, but many more, as M. Sam. and Natha∣l Mathers, Mr. Wells, Mr. Downing, Mr. Brnard, Mr. Al∣, Mr. Bruster, Mr. VVilliam Ames, Mr. Iones: Another of the first fruits of this Colledg is imployed in these Western parts at Mvis, one of the summer Islands; beside these named, me help hath been had from hence in the study of Physick,  also the godly Mr. Sam. Danforth, who hath not only stu∣ed Divinity, but also Astronomy, he put forth many Alma∣ks, and is now called to the office of a teaching Elder in
the Church of Christ at Roxbury, who was one of the fellows of this Colledg; the number of Students is much encreased of late, so that the present year 1651. on the twelfth of the sixth moneth, ten of them took the degree of Batchelors of Art, among whom the Sea-born son of Mr. Iohn Cotton was one, some Gentlemen have sent their sons hither from Eng∣land, who are to be commended for their care of them, as the judicious and godly Doctor Ames, and divers others: This hath been a place certainly more free from temptations to lewdness, then ordinarily England hath been, yet if men shall presume upon this to send their most exorbitant children, in∣tending them more especially for Gods service, the Justice of God doth sometimes meet with them, and the means doth more harden them in their way, for of late the godly Gover∣nors of this Colledg have been forced to expell some, for fear of corrupting the Fountain, wherefore the Author would ye should mind this following verse. You that have seen these wondrous works by Sions Savier don, Expect not miracle, left means thereby you over-run; The noble Acts Jehovah wrought, his Israel to redeem, Surely this second work of his shall far more glorious seem; Not only Egypt, but all Lands, where Antichrist doth raign, Shall from Jehovahs heavy hand ten times ten plagues sustain Bright shining shall this Gospel come, Oh glorious King of Saints Thy blessed breath confounds thy foes, all mortal power faints, The ratling bones together run with self-same breath that blows Of Israels sons long dead and dry, each joynt there sinew grows, Fair flesh doth cover them, & veins (lifes feuntain) takes there plat Smooth seamless coats doth cloath their flesh, and all their stru∣cture grace. The breath of Life is added, they no Antinomians are, But loving him who gives them life, more zealous are by far To keep his Law, then formerly when righteousnesse they sought, In keeping that they could not keep, which then their dowuf brought. Their ceremonies vanisht are, on Christ's all their desires, Their zeal all Nations doth provoke, inkindled are loves fires:
VVith hast on horseback, bringing hometheir sons & daughters, they Rejoyce to see this glorious sight, like Resurrections day; Ʋp and be doing, you young plants, Christ calls his work unto Polluted lips, touch'd with heav'ns fire, about this work shall go. Prostrate in prayer parents, and you young ones on Christ call, Suppose of you he will make use, whereby that boast shall fall: So be it Lord thy servants say, who are at thy disposing, VVith outward word work inward grace, by heavenly truths dis∣closing. Awake stand up from death to life, in Christ your studies enter, The Scriptures search, bright light bring forth, upon this hardship venter. Sound doctrine shall your lips preach out, all errors to confound And rid Christ's Temple from this smoke, his glory shall abound; Precipitant doth Dgon fall, his triple head off out, The Beast that all the world admires, by you to death is put: Put hand to mouth, with vehement blast your silver Trumpets sound, Christ calls to mind his peoples wrongs, their foes hee'l now con∣fond: Bestrong in God, and his great might, his wondrous works do tell, You raised are unwonted ways observe his workings well. As Jordans streams congeal'd in heaps, and Jerico's high walls With Rams horns blast, and Midians Host, with pitcher breaking falls; Like works your faith, for to confirm in these great works to come, That nothing now too hard may seem, Jehovah would have don. The rage of Seas, and hunger sharp, wants of a desart Land, Your noble hearts have overcom, what shall this work withstand? Not persecutors pride and rage, strong multitudes do fall, By little handfuls of least dust, your Christ confounds them all, Not Stan and his subtil train with seeming shew reforming, Another Gospel to bring forth, brings damned errors swarming: Your selves have seen his paint waesht off, his hidden poysons found, Christ you provides with Antidotes, to keep his people sound: There's nought remains but conquist now, through Christ's conti∣nued power, His hardest works have honors most attend them every hour. VVhat greater honor then on earth, Christ's Legat for to bo, Attended with his glorious Saints in Church fraternity.
Christ to behold adorning now his Bride in bright array, And you his friends him to attend upon his Nuptial day, VVith crowned heads, as Conquerors triumphant by his side; In's presence is your lasting joy, and pleasures ever bide. Mr. Henry Dunstar is now President of this Colledg, fitted from the Lord for the work, and by those that have skill that way, reported to be an able Proficient, in both Hebrew, Greek, and Latine languages, an Orthodox Preacher of the truths of Christ, very powerful through his blessing to move the affection; and besides he having a good inspection into the well-ordering of things for the Students maintenance (whose commons hath been very short hitherto) by his frugal provi∣dence hath continued them longer at their Studies then o∣therwise they could have done; and verily it's great pity such ripe heads as many of them be, should want means to further them in learning: But seeing the Lord hath been pleased to raise up so worthy an instrument for their good, he shall not want for incouragement to go on with the work, so far as a rustical rime will reach. COuld man presage prodigious works at hand, Provide he would for's good and ill provent, But God both time and means hath at's command, Dunster in time to his N. E. hath sent. VVhen England 'gan to keep at home their guides, N. E. began to pay their borrowed back, Jndustrious Dunster, providence provides, Our friends supply, and yet our selves no lack: VVith restless labour thou dost delve and dung, Surculus set in garden duly tended, That in Christs Orchard they with fruit full hung, May bless the Lord, thy toil gone, them expended, Thy constant course proves retrograde in this, From West to East thy toil returns again, Thy husbandry by Christ so honored is, That all the world partaketh of thy pains.
CHAP. XX. Of the planting of the one and twentieth Church of Christ at a Town called Glocester, and of the Church and Town of Dover, and of the hardships that befel a certain people, who thirsted aftor large liberty in a warm Country. FOr the Government of this little Commonwealth, this year was chosen for Governour Richard Belingham, E∣squire, and John Endiout Esquire for Governors; the number of Freemen added this year, were about 503. There was another Town and Church of Christ erected in the Mattachuset Government, upon the Northern-Cape of the Bay, called Cape Ann, a place of fishing, being peopled with Fishermen, till the reverend Mr. Richard Blindman came from a place in Plimouth Patten, called Green-Harbor, with some few people of his acquaintance, and setled down with them, named the Town Glocester, and gathered into a Church, be∣ing but a small number, about fifty persons, they called to of∣fice this godly reverend man, whose gifts and abilities to han∣dle the word, is not inferiour to many others, labouring much against the errors of the times, of a sweet, humble, hea∣venly carriage: This Town lying out toward the point of the Cap, the access thereunto by Land becomes uneasie, which was the chief cause it was no more populated: Their fishing de would be very beneficial, had they men of estates to mannage it; yet are they not without other means of main∣tenance, having good timber for shipping, and a very suffici∣ent builder, but that these times of combustion the Seas throughout hath hindered much that work, yet have there en Vessels built here at this Town of late: Their reverend Elder is here remembred. THou hast ky prime and middle age here spent, The best is not too good for him that gave it, When thou did'st first this Wilderness frequent, For Sious sake it was, that Christ might save it.
Blinman be blith in him, who thee hath taken To feed his Flock, a few poor scattered sheep, Why should they be of thee at all forsaken, Thy honor's high, that any thou may'st keep. Wait patiently thy Masters coming, thou Hast hitherto his peoples portions dealt, It matters not for high preferment; now Thy crown's to come, with joyes immortal felt. About this time the people inhabiting the Town of Do∣ver, although they lay out of any of these Colonies men∣tioned, (yet hearing and seeing with what sweet harmony, both in Churches and civil Government, the Mattachusets peopled patten was carried on prosperonsly) desired greatly to submit unto the same, by putting themselves under their protection; and for that end they petitioned their General Cort to admit of them, and administer Justice as occasion ser∣ved, by the hands of their godly Magistrates, which accord∣ingly was granted, and they have been partakers of the bene∣fit hitherto, having also the benefit of some one Minister to preach unto them, till it pleased God to fit stones by the continual hewing of his word for his Temple-work, and they gather a Church according to the rule of the word, and call∣ed to office of a Pastor one M. Maude, both godly, both god∣ly and diligent in the work: This Town is scituate upon Pus∣cataque river, lying to the Northeast of Boston, which river although it be not nigh so broad as Merrinaeck river, yet i it navigable, being very deep, and her banks in many place fil'd with stately timber, which hath caused one or two Saw Mills to be continued; there they have a good quantity o Meddow Land, and good ground for India corn. To end th year 1641. the Lord was pleased to send a very sharp Winte in so much that the Harbor where Ships ordinarily Anchor, wa frozen over of such a thickness, that it became passeable, bot for horse, carts, and oxen, for the space of five weeks. An here the Reader must be minded of the wonder-working pro¦vidence of Christ for his poor Churches, in altering the ve season for their comfort, to the wonder of English and Ind¦ans,
the Winter and Summer proving more moderate, both for heat and cold, unmasking many by this means, it being a frequent thing with some, that after the novelties of a new lad began to be stale with them, and the sweet nourish∣ment of the soul by the presence of Christ in the preaching of his Word, began to dry up through the hot heady conceit of some new conceived opinion: Then they wanted a warmer country, and every Northwest wind that blew, they crept in∣to some odd chimney-corner or other, to discourse of the di∣versity of Climates in the Southerne parts, but chiefly of a thing very sweet to the pallate of the flesh, called liberty, which they supposed might be very easily attain'd, could they but once come into a place where all men were chosen to the office of a Magistrate, and all were preachers of the Word, and no hearers, then it would be all Summer and no Winter: This consultation was to be put in practise speedily, as all headstrong motions are, but the issue proved very sad, both to these and others also; for thus it befell, when the time of the year was come that a sea-voyage might be under∣taken, they having made sale of a better accommodation then any they could afterward attain unto, prepare for the voyage with their wifes and children, intending to land them in one of the Summer Islands, called the Isle of Providence, and ha∣ving wind and seas favouring them, as they supposed, or to speak more proper, the provident hand of the most high God directing it, they were brought so neer the shore for conve∣nient landing, that they might have heaved a Bisket cake on land; their Pilate wondring he could not see the English co∣lours on the Fort, he began to mistrust the Island was taken, and more especially, because they saw not the people appear upon the shores as they usually did when any Vessel was a coming in, but now and then they saw some people a far off wasting to them to come in, till they were even come to an Anchor, and then by the hoising up and down the heads of those on shore, they were fully confirmed in it, that the Island was taken, as indeed it was by the Spaniards, who as soone as they tackt about to be gone, made shot at them, and being in great fear they made all the fail they could, but before they could get out of shot, the Master of the Vessel was slain, the
main sail shot through, and the Barque also; the people some of them returned back again for New-England, being sore a∣bashed at this providence that befel them, that they would never seek to be governed by liberty again to this very day; yet others there are were so strongly bent for the heat of li∣berty, that they indured much pinching penury upon an un∣inhabited Island, til at length meeting some others like-mind∣ed with themselves, they made a voyage to another Island, the chiefest part of their Charter of Freedom was this, That no man upon pain of death should speak against anothers Reli∣gion where they continued, till some of them were famished, and others even forced to feed on Rats, and any other thing they could find to sustain nature, till the provident hand of God brought a Ship to the place, which took them off the I∣sland, and saved their lives: But upon this the Winters dis∣course ceased, and projects for a warmer Country were husht and done. CHAP. XXI. Of the suddain and unexpected falt of Cattel, and the great bles∣sing of God in giving plenty of provision. FOr this year 1642. Iohn Winthrope Esquire was chosen Go∣vernour, and John Endicut Esquire Deputy Governor: The number of Freemen added were about 1232. This Spring Cowes and Cattle of that kind (having continued at an ex∣cessive price so long as any came over with estates to purchase them) fell of a suddain in one week from 22 l. the Cow, to 6.7. or 8. l. the cow at most, insomuch that it made all men admire how it came to pass, it being the common practise of those that had any store of Cattel, to sell every year a Cow or two, which cloath'd their backs, fil'd their bellies with more varieties then the Country of it self afforded, and put gold and silver in their purses beside. Here the Reader it desired to take notice of the wonderful providence of the most high God toward these his new-planted Churches, such as was never heard of, since that Iacobs sons ceased to be a
people, that in ten or twelve years planting, there should be such wonderful alteration, a Nation to be born in a day, a Commonwealth orderly brought forth from a few Fugi∣tives, all the Forraign plantations that are of forty, fifty, or a hundred years standing, cannot really report the like, al∣though they have had the greatest incouragements earth could afford, Kings to countenance them, staple commodities to provoke all manner of Merchants to resort unto them, silver, gold, precious stones, or whatever might incice the eye or ear to incline the motion of man toward them, his remove, rocky, barren, bushy, wild-woody wilderness, a receptacle for Lions, Wolves, Bears, Foxes, Rockoones, Bags, Bevers, Otters, and all kind of wild creatures, a place that never afforded the Natives better then the flesh of a few wild creatures and parch't Indian corn incht out with Chesnuts and bitter Acorns, now through the mercy of Christ becom a second England for fertilness in so short a space, that it is indeed the wonder of the world; but bring already forgotten of the very persons that tast of it at present, although some there be that keep in memory his mercies multitude, and declare it to their childrens children. First to begin with the encrease of food, you have heard in what extream penury these people were in at first, planting for want of food, gold, silver, rayment, or whatsoever was precious in their eyes they parted with (when ships came in) for this their beast that died, some would stick before they were cold, and sell their poor pined flesh for food, at 6.d. per pound, Indian Beans at 16.s. per bushel, when Ships came in it grieved some Master to see the urging of them by people of good rank and quality to sell bread unto them. But now take notice how the right hand of the most high hath altered all, and men of the meaner rank are urging them to buy bread of them, and now good white and wheaten bread is no dainty, but even ordinary man hath his choice, if gay cloathing, and a liquerish tooth after sack, sugar and plums lick not away his bread too fast, all which are but ordinary among those that were not able to bring their owne persons ever at their first coming; there are not many Towns in the Country, but the poorest person in them hath a house and land of his own,
and bread of his own growing, if not some cattel: beside, flesh is now no rare food, beef, pork, and mutton being frequent in many houses, so that this poor Wilderness hath not onely equalized England in food, but goes beyond it in some places for the great plenty of wine and sugar, which is ordinarily spent, apples, pears, and quince tarts instead of their former Pumpkin Pies, Poultry they have plenty, and great rarity, and in their feasts have not forgotten the English fashion of stir∣ing up their appetites with variety of cooking their food; and notwithstanding all this great and almost miraculous work of the Lord, in providing for his people in this barren desart, yet are there here (as in other places) some that use these good creatures of God to excess, and others to hoard up in a wretched and miserable manner, pinch themselves and their children with food, and will not tast of the good crea∣tures God hath given for that end, but cut Church and Com∣monwealth as short also: Let not such think to escape the Lords hand with as little a stroke, as the like do in other pla∣ces. Secondly, For rayment, our cloth hath not been cut short, as but of late years the traders that way have encreased to such a number, that their shops have continued full all the year long, all one England; besides the Lord hath been plea∣sed to encrease sheep extraordinarily of late, hemp and flax here is great plenty, hides here are more for the number of persons then in England; and for cloth, here is and would be materials enough to make it; but the Farmers deem it better for their profit to put away their cattel and corn for cloath∣ing, then to set upon making of cloth; if the Merchants trade be not kept on foot, they fear greatly their corne and cattel will lye in their hands; assuredly the plenty of cloath∣ing hath caused much excess of late in those persons, who have clambered with excess in wages for their work, but see∣ing it will be the theam of our next discourse, after the birds are setled, it may be here omitted. Further, the Lord hath been pleased to turn all the wig∣wams, huts, and hovels the English dwelt in at their first com∣ing, into orderly, fair, and well-built houses, well furnished
many of them, together with Orehards filled with goodly fruit trees, and gardens with variety of flowers: There are supposed to be in the Mattachusets Government at this day, neer a thousand acres of land planted for Orchards and Gar∣dens, besides their fields are filled with garden fruit, there be∣ing, as is supposed in this Colony, about fifteen thousand a∣cres in tillage, and of cartel about twelve thousand neat, and about three thousand sheep: Thus hath the Lord in couraged his people with the encrease of the general, although many particulars are outed, hundreds of pounds, and some thou∣sands, yet are there many hundreds of labouring men, who had not enough to bring them over, yet now worth scores, and some hundreds of pounds; to be sure the Lord takes no∣tice of all his talents, and will call to accompt in time: This brief survey of things will be of good use when time serves, in mean time you shall understand, CHAP. XXII. Of the manner of planting Towns and Churches in N. E. and in particular of the Church and Town at Wooburn, being the three and twentieth Church of Christ in the Matta∣chusets Government. THere was a Town and Church erected called Wooburn, this present year, but because all the action of this wan∣dering people meet with great variety of censures, the Author will in this Town and Church see down the manner how this people have populated their Towns, and gathered their Chur∣ches, that the reverend Mr. Rathbone may be better informed, then when he wrote his book concerning the Churches of N. E. and all others that are experienced in the holy Scriptures, may lay the actions of N. E. to the Rule, and try them by the balance of the Sanctuary, for assuredly they greatly de∣sire they may be brought to the light, for great is the truth, and will prevail, yet have they their errings as well as others, but yet their imperfections may not blemish the truths of Christ, let them be glorified, and these his people will wil∣lingly
take shame to themselves, wherein they have miscar∣ried: But to begin, this Town, as all others had its bounds fixed by the General Court, to the contenese of four miles squa, (beginning at the end of Charles Town bounds) the grant is to seven men or good and honest report, upon con∣dition, that within two year they erect houses for habitation thereon, and so go on to make a Town thereof, upon the Act of Court; these seven men have power to give and grant out lands unto any persons who are willing to take up their dwellings within the said precinct, & to be admitted to al com∣mon priviledges of the said Town, giving them such an am∣ple portion, both of Medow and Upland, as their present and future stock of cattel and hands were like to improve, with eye had to others that might after come to populate the said Town; this they did without any respect of persons, yet such as were exorbitant, and of a turbulent spirit, unfit for a civil society they would reject, till they come to mend their man∣ners, such came not to enjoy any freehold: These seven men ordered and disposed of the streets of the Town, as might be best for improvement of the Land, and yet civil and religious society maintained; to which end those that had land neerest the place for Sabbath assembly, had a lesser quantity at home, and more farther off to improve for corn, of all kinds; they refused not men for their poverty, but according to their a∣bility were helpful to the poorest sort, in building their houses, and distributed to them land accordingly; the poorest had six or seven acres of Medow, and twenty five of Upland, or thereabouts: Thus was this Town populated, to the num∣ber of sixty families, or thereabout, and after this manner are the Towns of New England peopled, the scituation of this Town is in the highest part of the yet peopled land, neere upon the head-springs of many considerable rivers, or their branches, as the first rise of Ipswitch river, and the rise of Sha∣shin river, one of the most considerable branches of Merri∣meck, as also the first rise of Mistick river and ponds, it is very full of pleasant springs, and great variety of very good water, which the Summers heat causeth to be more cooler, and the Winters cold maketh more warmer; their Medows
are not large, but lye in divers places to particular dwellings, the like doth their Springs; their Land is very fruitful in ma∣ny places, although they have no great quantity of plain land in any one place, yet doth their Rocks and Swamps yeeld ve∣ry good food for cattel; as also they have Mast and Tar for shipping, but the distance of place by land causeth them as yet to be unprofitable, they have great store of iron o're, their meeting-house stands in a small Plain, where four streets meet, the people are very labotious, if not exceeding some of them. Now to declare how this people proceeded in religious mat∣ters, and so consequently all the Churches of Christ planted in New-England, when they came once to hopes of being such a competent number of people, as might be able to maintain a Minister, they then surely seated themselves, and not before, it being as unnatural for a right N. E. man to live without an able Ministery, as for a Smith to work his iron without a fire; therefore this people that went about placing down a Town, began the foundation-stone, with earnest seeking of the Lords assistance, by humbling of their souls before him in daies of prayer, and imploring his aid in so weighty a work, then they address themselves to attend counsel of the most Orthodox and ablest Christians, and more especially of such as the Lord had already placed in the Ministery, not rashly running together themselves into a Church, before they had hopes of attaining an Officer to preach the Word, and admi∣nister the Seals unto them, chosing rather to continue in fel∣lowship with some other Church for their Christian watch over them, till the Lord would be pleased to provide: They after some search meet with a young man named Mr. Thomas Carter, then belonging to the Church of Christ at VVater-Town, a reverend godly man, apt to teach the sound and wholesome truths of Christ; having attained their desires, in hopes of his coming unto them, were they once joyned in Church-estate, he exercising his gifts of preaching and prayer among them in the mean time, and more especially in a day of fasting and prayer. Thus these godly people interest their affections one with the other, both Minister and people: Af∣ter
this they make ready for the work, and the 24. of the 6. moneth 1642. they assemble together in the morning about eight of the clock; After the reverend Mr. Syms had conti∣nued in preaching and prayer about the space of four or five houres, the persons that were to joyn in Covenant, openly and professedly before the Congregation, and messengers of divers Neighbour Churches, among whom the reverend El∣der of Boston, Mr. Cotton, Mr. VVilson, Mr. Allen of Charles-Town, Mr. Shepheard of Cambridg, Mr. Dunster of VVater-Town, Mr. Knowles of Deadham, Mr. Allen of Roxbury, Mr. E∣liot of Dorchester, Mr. Mather: As also it is the duty of the Magistrates (in regard of the good and peace of the civil Go∣vernment) to be present, at least some one of them (not on∣ly to prevent the disturbance might follow in the Common∣wealth by any, who under pretence of Church-Covenant, might bring in again those cursed opinions that caused such commotion in this and the other Colony, to the great dam∣mage of the people) but also to countenance the people of God in so pious a work, that under them they may live a qui∣et and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; for this cause was present the honored Mr. Increase Nowel, the persons stood forth, and first confessed what the Lord had done for their poor souls, by the work of his Spirit in the preaching of his Word, and Providences, one by one; (and that all might know their faith in Christ was bottomed upon him, as he is revealed in his Word, and that from their own knowledg) they also declare the same, according to that measure of un∣derstanding the Lord had given them; the Elders, or any o∣ther messengers there present question with them, for the bet∣ter understanding of them in any points they doubt of, which being done, and all satisfied, they in the name of the Churches to which they do belong, hold out the right hand of fellow∣ship unto them, they declaring their Covenant, in words ex∣pressed in writing to this purpose.
The Church-Covenant. WE that do assemble our selves this day before God and and his people, in an unfeigned desire, to be accepted of him as a Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the Rule of the New-Testament, do acknowledg our selves to be the most unworthy of all others, that we should attain such thigh grace, and the most unable of our selves to the per∣formance of any thing that is good, abhorring our selves for all our former defilements in the worship of God, and other wayes, and resting only upon the Lord Jesus Christ for attone∣ment, and upon the power of his grace for the guidance of our whole after course, do here in the name of Christ Je∣sus, as in the presence of the Lord, from the bottom of our hearts agree together through his grace to give up our selves, first unto the Lord Jesus as our only King, Priest and Prophet, wholly to be subject unto him in all thing, and therewith one unto another, as in a Church-Body to walk together in all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and in all such mutual love and of∣fices thereof, as toward one another in the Lord; and all this, both according to the present light that the Lord hath given us, as also according to all further light, which he shall be pleased at any time to reach out unto us out of the Word by the goodness of his grace, renouncing also in the same Cove∣nant all errors and Schismes, and whatsoever by-wayes that are contrary to the blessed rules revealed in the Gospel, and in particular the inordinate love and seeking after the things of the world; every Church hath not the same for words, for they are not for a form of words. The 22. of the 9. moneth following Mr. Thomas Carter was ordained Pastor, in presence of the like Assembly. Hfter he had exercised in preaching and prayer the greater part of the day, two persons in the name of the Church laid their hands upon his head, and said, We ordain thee Thomas Carter to be Pastor unto this Church of Christ; then one of the Elders
Priest, being desired of the Church, continued in prayer un∣to the Lord for his more especial assistance of this his servant in his work, being a charge of such weighty importance, as is the glory of God and salvation of souls, that the very thought would make a man to tremble in the sense of his own inability to the work: The people having provided a dwelling house, built at the charge of the Town in general, welcomed him unto them with joy, that the Lord was pleased to give them such a blessing, that their eyes may see their Teachers: Af∣ter this there were divers added to the Church daily; after this manner the person desirous to joyn with the Church, cometh to the Pastor, and makes him acquainted therewith, declaring how the Lord hath been pleased to work his con∣version, who discerning hopes of the Prsons faith in Christ, although weak, yet if any appear, he is propounded to the Church in general for their approbation, touching his godly life and conversation, and then by the Pastor and some bre∣thren heard again, who make report to the Church of their charitable approving of the person; but before they come to joyn with the Church, all persons within the Towne have publike notice of it, then publikely he declares the manner of his conversion, and how the Lord hath been pleased by the hearing of his Word preached, and the work of his Spirit in the inward parts of his soul, to bring him out of that ∣tural darkness, which all men are by nature in and under, as also the measure of knowledg the Lord hath been pleased to indue him withal. And because some men cannot speak pub∣likely to edisication through bashfulness, the less is required of such, and women speak not publikely at all, for all that is desired, is to prevent the polluting the blessed Ordinances of Christ by such as walk scandalously, and that men and women do not eat and drink their own condemnation, in not discern∣ing the Lords body. After this manner were many added to this Church of Christ, and those 7. that joyned in Church-fel∣lowship at first, are now encreased to 74. persons, or therabout; of which, according to their own confession, as is supposed, the greater part having been converted by the preaching of the Word in N. E. by which may appear the powerful effica∣cy
of the word of Christ in the mouth of his Ministers, and that this way of Christ in joyning together in Church-Cove∣nant, is not only for building up of souls in Christ, but also for converting of sinness, & bringing them out of the natural condition to be ingrafted into Christ, for if this one Church have so many, then assuredly there must be a great number comparatively throughout all the Churches in the Country. After this manner have the Churches of Christ had their begin∣ning and progress hitherto, the Lord continue & encrease them the world throughout: The Pastor of this Church hath much encreased with the encreasings of Christ Jesus, of whose la∣bours in the Lord as followeth. CArtor, Christ hath his wayes thee taught, and them, Hast not with-held his Word, but unto all, With's word of power dost cause stout souls to bow, And meek as Lambs before thy Christ to fall: The antient truths, plain paths they fit thee best, Thy humble heare all haughty acts puts by, The lowly heart, Christ learns his lovely hest, Thy meekness shews thy Christ to thee is nigh; Yet must thou shew Christ makes his bold to be, As Lions, that none may his truths tread down, Pastoral power he hath invested thee With, it maintain, least he on thee do frown: Thy youth thou hast in this New-England spent, Full sixteen years to water, plant, and prune, Trees taken up, and for that end here sent, Thy end's with Christ, with's Saints his praises tune. This year the General Court made an order about prepa∣ring houses for Salt-peter, that there might be powder made in the Country, but as yet it hath not gone on.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the uniting of the four English Colonies in N, E. and the bat∣tel fought between the Narragansets, and Mawhiggins. THe yeare 1653. the honored John Winthrop Esquire was chosen Governor again, and John Endicut Esquire Depu∣ty Governour; the free men added were about 87. this year, the four Colonies, the Mattachusets, Plimoth, Canectico, and New-haven, taking into consideration the many Nations of Dutch, Zewes, and French, that were on either side of them; as also how apt they were to lay claim to lands they never had any right unto, but only a paper possession of their own framing; and further, that the inhumane and barbarous In∣dians would be continually quarrelling and contending, could they see any hopes of prevailing, together with the conte∣stion begun in our Native country, and withal, that although providence had cast them into four several Colonies, yet Re∣ligion had already united them, coming over all for one and the same end. Hereupon by Commissioners sent from the se∣veral colonies, they concluded a firm confederation to assist each other in all just and lawful war, bearing an equal pro∣portion in the charge, according to the number of persons inhabiting each colony; but herein the Mattachuset had the worst end of the staff, in bearing as much, or more charge, then all the other three, and yet no greater number of Commissi∣oners to negotiate and judg in transacting of affairs concern∣ing peace and war, then the least of the other, and any one of the other as lkely to involve them in a chargeable war with the naked Natives, that have neither plunder, nor cash to bear the charge of it, nay hitherto the most hath risen from the lesser colonies, yet are the Mattachusets far from desert∣ing them, esteeming them highly, so long as their Govern∣ments maintain the same purity in Religion with themselves, for indeed this is that they have spent their whole travel for, and therefore if Plimoth, or any of the other shall draw back herein, the chiefest end of their confederacy would be lost; for should it come to pass (that in venturing their persons
and estates so far for purity in the Ordinances and Discipline of Christ) they should lose the purity in doctrine, all their cost and labour were lost: This confederacy being finished, there came in certain Indian Sachims, and submitted to the English Government, as Pomham, and Soecanah to the Mattachusets; also Miantonemo and Ʋncas; but between these two latter Princes arose a very hot quarrel, the English seeking by all means to quench it, but could not, it being, as is supposed, fomented by a small company of vacabond English, who were then for their crimes banished from their own complices at Rhode Island, the Ringleader of them, be∣ing one Samuel Gorton, by whose mean they were drawn into damnable errors,: These Gortonists, as is said, lent Miantone∣nemo a Corslet for safeguard of his own person in the follow∣ing fight, and he promised each of them a Mawchiggin pa∣poose, which was the people. Ʋneas was Prince of For, al∣though Miantonemo were the more potent Prince by far, and a very anstere man, yet did he chuse rather to take Ʋncasses life away by treachery if he could; and to that end hired a young man of the Pegod Nation to murther him, as is suppo∣sed, for in an evening, when it was very neer dark, this Sachim passing without any of his Retinue, from one wigwam to a∣nother, was suddainly shot through the arm with an arrow, seeing not whence it came; but yet recovering the Palace he was passing unto, without receiving any more shot, he had the arrow drawn forth, and the wound cured in a short time after; the young man, who was suspected to have done the fact, having great store of Wampumpeage, about this time being questioned how he came by it, could give no good ac∣compt, which encreased the suspition the more, that he had received it as hire from Miantonemo for this fact; and here∣upon the young man fled unto him, which caused Ʋneas to complain to the English, who having the hearing of the case at a General Co holden at Boston, at the same time Mian∣tonemo coming thither with his attendance, and sending one of his Councellors to follow the matter in hand, the young man was examined in presence of Miantonemo, being, as is supposed, tutored by him, he told this tale, that while he was
in Ʋncasses Court, on a day travelling alone by a thick swamp, Ʋncas call'd him out of the swamp, charging him to be true to him, in declaring to the English what he required to him, which was, that he should say he had been hired of Miantonemo to kill him, and to make his matter good, quoth the young man, he then cut his arm on the top, and under∣neath with the flint of his Gun, to make men think he had beene shot through with an arrow: This tale made the English more to suspect Miantonemo then before; and there∣fore desired to examine the young man alone, which he was very unwilling they should do; but upon further examina∣tion alone, they did verily believe this young man had done the fact, yet for present they let him depart with Miantone∣mo, advising him to send him home to Ʋncas, but by the way, he instead of returning him home, cut off his head, and forth∣with gathered an army of about a thousand men to fight with Ʋncas, who feared not to meet him in the field with half the number; the battel being come within shot one of another, with a great hubbub they let their long shafts fly one at another, and after came to a close with other wea∣pons, till the Narrowgansets multitude being forely distres∣sed by the Mawhiggins valour, they began to cry out Wem-meck, which is to say, enough: Ʋncas like a stout command∣er, with others of his bloud-royal that were about him, sought to perfect his victory, by possessing himself with the person of their Prince, which he effected, by putting his Life-guard to flight, and taking hold on the Sachim himself, carried him vi∣ctoriously away to the Town of Hartford, neer the which he kept his residence at this time, and then made the English ac∣quainted there with his noble design, and desired to have the advise of the united colonies what to do with his prisoner; the Narrowgansets sought to ransom him home, being much abashed, that so mean a Prince as Ʋncas was should scape scotfree with such a victory; but the honered Commission∣ers have had proof of Miantonemo's treachery, both toward this Prince that had him in possession, and toward the English in falsisying his promise with them; they advised Ʋncas to put him to death, but withall, that he should forbear to exercise
my barbarous cruelty toward him, as their manner is, and by this means the English prevented another war, both with English and Indians, which was very neer joyning in battel. Not many years after, the Indian Sachim upon this advise, caused Miantonemo to be led forth, as if he would remove him to a more safer place of custody, and by the way caused him to be executed; the Indians, his kindred and subjects, were much grieved at his death, yet took it quietly at pre∣sent, but the lesser Princes, his Neighbours, rather rejoyced, he having tyrannized over them, and enforced them to sub∣ject to his will, right or wrong. CHAP. XXIV. Of the proceeding of certain persons called Gortonists, against the united Colonies, and more especially against the Matra∣chusets, and of the hlasphemous doctrines broached by Gorton, deluding a company of poor ig∣nor ant people therewith. FOr not long before, those persons that we spake of, who incouraged Miantonemo to this war, and with the help of him enforced Pomham and Socananocho to set their hands to a writing which these Gortonists had framad, to take their land from them; but the poor Sachems, when they saw they were thus gull'd of their land, would take no pay for it, but complained to the Mattachusets Government, to whom they had subjected themselves and their lands: As also at this time certain English inhabiting those parts, with the Indians good leave and liking, desired to have the benefit of the Matta∣chusets Government, as Dover formerly had done, to whom this Government conescended, in hope they might encrease to such a competent number of godly Christians, as that there might be a Church of Christ planted, the place being capable to entertain them in a comfortable measure for outward ac∣commodation, but hitherto it hath been hindred by these Gortonists, and one of Plimoth, who forbad our people to plant there: These person thus submitting, came at this time
also to complain of certain wrongs done them by these Gor∣toxists, who had thus in croached, and began to build on the Indians land; upon these complaints, the Governor and the honored Mr. Dudly issue forth their Warrant, to summon them to appear, they being then about five or six persons, without any means for instructing them in the wayes of God, and without any civil Government to keep them in civility or humanity, which made them to cast off most proudly and disdainfully any giving accompt to man of their actions, no not to the chiefest in authority, but returned back most insolent, scornful, scurrilous speeches. After this, the Government of the Mattachusets sent two messengers on purpose to per∣swade them to come and have their cause heard, assuring them like justice in their cause with any other; but Samuel Gorton being the ring-leader of the rout, was so full gorged with dreadful and damnable errors, (the which he had newly in∣snared these poor souls with) that soon after the departure of the messenger, he layes aside all civil justice, and instead of returning answer to the matter in hand, he vomits up a whole paper full of beastly stuff, one while scoffing and deriding the ignorance of all beside himself, that think Abraham, J∣saac, &c. could be saved by Christ Jesus, who was after born of the Virgin Mary, another while mocking at the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, in an opprobrious manner, deriding at the Elements Christ was pleased to institute them in, and calling them Negromancers that administer them at all; and in a word, all the Ordinances of the Gospel abomi∣nable Idolatry he called, and likened them to Molock, and the Star of the Idol Rempham; his paper was thrust full of such filthiness, that no Christian ear could hear them without indignation against them, and all was done by him in a very scornful and deriding manner, upbraiding all that use them; in the mean time magnifying his own glorious light, that could see himself to be personally Christ, God-Man, and so all others that would believe as he did: This paper he got to be subscribed, with about twelve or thirteen hands, his num∣ber of Disciples being encreased, for assuredly the man had a very glosing tongue, but yet very deceitful, for when he had
but a few with him, then he cried out against all such as would rule over their own species, affirming, that the Scripture term∣eth such to be Gods of the world, or divels; but after his re∣turn from England, having received some incouragement from such as could not look into the depth of his deceits, being done at so large a distance, he getting into favour again with those, who had formerly whipt him out of their company, turns divel himself; the godly Governors of the Mattachu∣sets seeing this blasphemous Bull of his, resolved to send for∣ty persons well-appointed with weapons of war for appre∣hending of him, who accordingly, with some waiting, did ap∣prehend him and the rest of his company, except two or three which ran away without any hurt to any person, although he gave out very big words, threatning them with bloud and death so soon as they set foot on the ground, and yet this bra∣zenface'd deceiver published in print the great fear their wo∣men were put unto by the souldiers, whereas they came a∣mong them day by day, and had it not been that they intend∣ed peaceably to take them, they would never have waited so long upon their worships as they did, but being apprehended, and standing to that they had written (yet would they wil∣lingly have covered it with some shifts if they could) the greatest punishment they had, was to be confin'd to certain Towns for a few moneths, and afterward banished; but to be sure there be them in N. E. that have Christ Jesus and his blessed Ordinances in such esteem, that the Lord assisting, they had rather lose their lives, then suffer them to be thus blasphemed if they can help it; and whereas some have fa∣voured them, and endeavoured to bring under blame such as have been zealous against their abominable doctrines, the good God be favourable unto them, and prevent them from coming under the like blame with Ahab, yet they remain in their old way, and there's somewhat to be considered in it to be sure, that in these daies, when all look for the fall of Anti∣christ, such detestable doctrines should be upheld, and persons suffered, that exceed the Beast himself for blasphemy, and this to be done by those that would be counted Reformers, and such as seek the utter subversion of Antichrist.
To end this year, or rather at the beginning of it, the Lord caused another Earthquake, much less then the former, it was on the fifth of the first moneth called March in the morn∣ing. CHAP. XXV. Of the planting the twenty fourth Church of Christ at the Town of Readding, and the twenty fifth Church of Christ in the Mattachusets Government, called Wenham. THis year was chosen to the place of Governor John En∣dicut Esquire, and Iohn Winthrope Esquire Deputy Go∣vernor; the number of freemen added about 145. this year. The Town of Readding had her foundation stone laid a∣bout this time, this and the Town of Wooburn were like the twins in the womb of Tamar, Readding thrusting forth the hand first, but Wooburn came first to the birth, this Town is well watered, and scituate about a great pond, besides it hath two mills, the one a Saw-mill, the other a -mill, which stand on two several streams; it hath not been o fruitful for children as her Sister hath, her habitation is fallen in the very center of the country, they are well stocked with cattel, for the number of people they have they gathered into a church, and ordained a Pastor from among themselves at the same time, a young man of good abilities to preach the Word, and of a very humble behaviour, named Mr. Green, he having fi∣nished his course, departed this life not long after, whose la∣bours are with the Lord; after him succeeded in the place one Mr. Hoph, a young man, one of the first fruits of N. E. a man studious to promote the truths of Christ, they are both re∣membred in this following verse. ON earths bed thou at noon hast laid thy head, You that for Christ (as Green) here toy I have taken, When nature fails, then rest it in earths dead, Till Christ by's word with glory thee awaken.
Young Hoph thou must be second to this man, In field incounter, with Christ's foes shalt thou Stand up, and take his bright sword in thy hand, Error cut down, and make stout stomacks bow; Green's gone before, thy warfare's now begun, And last it may to see Romes Babel fall; Byweakest means Christ mighty works hath done, Keep footing fast, till Christ thee hence do call. The next Town and church of Christ planted in this colo∣ny, was between Salem and Ipswitch, Salem the eldest of all the Sisters was very helpful to this her little Sister, nourish∣ing her up in her own bosom, till she came of age, being be∣neficial to her besides, in giving her a good portion of Land; this Town is called Wenham, and is very well watered, as most in land Towns are, the people live altogether upon hus∣bandry, New England having train'd up great store to this occupation, they are encreased in cattel, and most of them live very well, yet are they no great company; they were some good space of time there before they gathered into a Church-body, the godly and reverend Mr. John Fisk went thither with them, at first setting down as a planter a∣mong them, yet withal he became helpful in preaching the Word unto them, when they were but a few in number, they afterward call'd him to the office of a Pastor, with whom he now remains, labouring in the Word and Do∣ctrine, with great industry of whom, it may be thus said: TO wade through toyl of Wilderness, thou hast Dubled thy work, thy wages troble are, Christ hath thee call'd, and in his vineyard plac't, He'l bear thee up above all saiting far. Sions strong Mount must now again be built, Thy faith, oh Fisk, the Lord hath holpen much; With dreadful sigh the Plars power hath spilt, All pride he'l stain by his almighty touch.
His truths unstain'd by liberty keep thou, To please the most, authority must fall, What Christ hath given, if safely keep with you, Till he to thee for thine accompt do call. CHAP. XXVI. Of the military affairs, the forts of Bostoa, and Charles, the Castle erected anew by the six neerest Towns, with the man∣ner of putting the Country in a posture of war, to be ready upon all occasions. THese souldiers of Christ Jesus, having made a fair retreat from their Native country hither, and now being come to a convenient station, resolved to stand it out (the Lord as∣sisting) against all such as should come to rob them of their priviledges, which the Lord Christ had purchased for them at a very high rate, and now out of the riches of his grace was minded to give them, yet would he have them follow him into this Wilderness for it: although the chiefest work of these select bands of Christ, was to mind their spiritual war∣fare, yet they knew right well the Temple was surrounded with walls and bulworks, and the people of God in re-edify∣ing the same, did prepare to resist their enemies with weapons of war, even while they continued building: This people no less diligent to make use of such means as the Lord afforded them, ordered and decreed, That all the souldiers belonging to the 26. bands in the Mattachusets Government, should be exercised and drill'd eight daies in a yeare, and whosoever should absent himself, except it were upon unavoidable occa∣sion, should pay 5. s. for every daies neglect, there are none exempt, unless it be a few timerous persons that are apt to plead infirmity, if the Church chuse them not for Deacous, or they cannot get to serve some Magistrate or Minister; but as∣suredly the generalicy of this people are very forward for feats of war, and many have spent their time and estates to further this work; the Town of Boston hath afforded many a∣ctive, Charles Town hath not been inferiour, unless it be in
number: This year the Court appointed certain persons to spend their skill in putting the people possessing this deso∣late desart in a ready posture of drawing their forces toge∣ther, upon any suddain accident that might befall them, to mannage, guide, order, and direct all things, as may be best for the good of the whole, they being a poor and mean peo∣ple, laboured to avoid high titles, yet order they knew was necessary, therefore ordained they only one General Officer in time of war, under the name of Major General, the Go∣vernor and Magistrates for the time being are the standing Councel for peace or war, and either they or the General Court may appoint any to the office of a General; the first Major-General was the much honored Tho. Dudly Esquire, whose faithfulness and great zeal and love to the truths of Christ, caused the people to chuse him to this office, although he were far stricken in years; the Government is divided into four Counties, which to shew, they would their posterity should mind whence they came, they have named, Suffolk, Middlesex, Essex, and Northfolk, each containing a Regi∣ment, over whom, the chief Commander is only a Serjeant-Major; the first chosen to this office over the Regiment of Suffolk, was Major Edw. Gibbons, who hath now the office of Major-General also, he is a man of a resolute spirit, bord as a Lion, being wholly tutor'd up in N.E. Discipline, very ge∣nerous, and forward to promote all military matters; his Forts are well contrived, and batteries strong, and in good repair, his great Artillery well mounted, and cleanly kept, half Canon, Culverins and Sakers, as also field-pieces of brass ve∣ry ready for service, his own company led by Capt. Lievtenant Sarag, are very compleat in their arms, and many of them disciplin'd in the military garden, beside their ordinary train∣ings; the Captains under him, are Caps. Humphry Atherton, of the Band of Dochester; a very lively couragious man, with his stout and valiant Lievtenant Clapes, strong for the truth; of the Band of Roxbury, Capt. Prichard, and Ensign Iohnson; of the Band of Waymoth, Capt. Perkins, and his proper and active Lievtenant Torry; of the Band of Hingham, Capt. Be∣an Allen; of the Band of Deadbam, Capt. Eliazer, Lusher,
one of a nimble and active spirit, strongly affected to the ways of truth; of the Band of Braintree, Capt. william Tinge, these belong to the Regiment of Suffolk; the first Serjeant-Major chosen to order the Regiment of Essex, was Major Rebert Sedgwick, stout and active in all feats of war, nurst up in Londons Artillery garden, and furthered with fifteen years ex∣perience in N. E. exact theory, besides the help o a very good head-piece, being a frequent instructer of the most martial troops of our Artillery men; and although Charles Town, (which is the place of his own companies residence) do not advantage such o're-topping batteries as Boston doth, yet hath he erected his to very good purpose, insomuch that all ship∣ping that comes in, either to Boston or Charles-Town, must needs face it all the time of their coming in; the cost he hath been at, in helping on the Discipline of his Regiment hath profited much; his own company are led by the faith∣ful Capt. Lievtenant Francis Norton, (a man of a bold and cheerful spirit) being well disciplin'd, and an able man; the companies under his service have not all Captains at present, VVater-Town Band was led by Capt. Ienings, who is supposed to be now in England, his Lievtenant remains Hugh Mason; the band of Cambridg led by Capt. George Cook, now Colonel Cook in the wars of ireland, but now led by Capt. Daniel Gookin, a very forward man to advance Marshal dis∣cipline, and withal the truths of Christ; the Band of Concord led by Capt. Simon Willard, being a Kentish soul∣dier, as is Capt. Goggin; the Band of Sudbury lately led by Capt. Pelham, who is in England at present, his Lievtenant re∣mains, Edw. Goodinow; the band of Wooburn led by another Kentish Captain; the Band of Reading led by Lievtenant VValker; the Band of Malden, being as yet a young Town, who have not chosen their Officers, are led by Mr. Joseph Hill: These belong to the Regiment of Middlesex, the two Counties of Essex and Northfolk are for present joyned in one Regiment, their first Major, who now commandeth this Regiment, is the proper and valiant Major Daniel Denison, a good souldier, and of a quick capacity, not inferiour to any other of these chief Officers, his own company are well in∣structed
in feats of warlike activity, his Capt. Lievtenane de∣parted this life some few years since, a godly and faithful man, which is indeed the fountain of true validity; named Mr. VVhitingam; the Band of Salem led by the bold and wor∣thy Capt. VVilliam Hautborn, a man of an undaunted cou∣rage, with his Lievtenant Lothrope; the Band of Lyn led by the honored and much respected Capt. Robert Bridges, who is also a Magistrate, being endued with able parts, and for∣ward to improve them for the glory of God and his peoples good; the Band of Nuberry led by Capt. Gerish, with his an∣tient and experienced Lievtenant Greendife; the Band of Row∣ly led by Capt. Brigham; the Bands of Glocester, VVenham and Andover, have not yet made choice of Superiour Officers, be∣ing in their minority; these are the Bands of the Regiment of Essex, to the which are joyned the three Bands of the County of Northfolk, Salsbury, Hampton, and Havorhil: there are none chosen to office in any of these Bands, but such as are freemen, supposed to be men indued with faith in Christ Jesus, wherefore let all that truly love the Lord Christ say with Deborah, My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people, their Officers are chosen by the major Vote of the souldiers, being in∣stalled into their place by the Major of their Regiment: There are of late a very gallant horse-troop listed, it being a fre∣quent thing with the Officers of the foot companies, to turn Troopers, (when their own Regiment is not in exercise) for incouragement of others, the Regiments are exercised once a year by turnes; they are also very observant to keep their armes in good order; each souldier is to keep constantly by him powder, bullet, and match, besides every Town is in∣joyned to have a common stock in like manner, as also the country have their ammunition exactly looked unto, by Sur∣veyor General Johnson, one very well qualified for the work, ready at all times to put the General Court in mind of keep∣ing their store renued by fresh supply, and to say right, some particular persons may be penurious in laying out their e∣states upon ammunition, but the general of Officers and soul∣diers are very generous that way; the reverend Doctor VVil∣son
gave bountifully for the furthering this Wilderness-work, the which was expended upon great Artillery, his gift being a thousand pound, beside many persons that came over, the Lord was pleased to indow with a large portion of the things of this life, who were not backward liberally to dispose of it, to procure means of defence, ann to that end there was a ca∣stle built on an Island, upon the passage into the Mattachu-Bay, wholly built at first by the country in general, but by rea∣son the country affords no Lime, but what is burnt of Oyster-she is, it fell to decay in a few years after, which made many of the Towns that lay out of the defence thereof to desert it, although their safety (under God) was much involved in the constant repair and well-mannaging thereof; hereupon the next six Towns take upon them to rebuild it at their proper cost and charges, the rest of the country upon the finishing there∣of gave them a small matter toward it; upon this there was a Captain ordained, and put in possession thereof by the coun∣try, having a yearly Stipend allowed him for himself and his souldiers, which he is to keep in a constant readiness upon the Island, being about eight acres of ground; the Castle is built on the North-East of the Island, upon a rising hill, very ad∣vantageous to make many shot at such ships as shall offer to enter the Harbor without their good leave and liking, the Commander of it is one Captain Davenport, a man approved for his faithfulness, courage and skill, the Master Canoneer is an active Ingineer; also this Castle hath cost about four thou∣sand pounds, yet are not this poor pilgrim people weary of maintaining it in good repair, it is of very good use to awe a∣ny insolent persons, that putting confidence in their ship and sails, shall offer any injury to the people, or contemn the Government, they have certain signals of alarums, which sud∣dainly spread through the whole country; were there but one Town more erected in this Government, which were one and thirty, it would joyn all the Towns in the same neighbourly together, excepting Spring-field. Thus are these people with great diligence provided for these daies of war, hoping the day is at hand wherein the Lord will give Antichrist the don-christ the double of all her doings, and therefore they have
nursed up in their Artillery garden some who have since been used, as instruments to begin the work; but that which gives the greatest hope concerning this particular, is this, that these times afford more souldiers depending on the Lord Christ through faith for deliverance and true valour, then any age since Antichrist began to fall, without which, all these prepa∣rations were but as so many traps and snares to catch a people in, and to the which these Commanders and souldiers are dai∣ly exhorted, and therefore let all people know that desire the downfal of New-England, they are not to war against a peo∣ple only exercised in feats of war, but men who are experien∣ced in the deliverances of the Lord from the mouth of the Li∣on, and the paw of the Bear; and now woe be to you, when the same God that directed the stone to the forehead of the Philistine, guides every bullet that is shot at you, it matters not for the whole rabble of Antichrist on your side, the God of Armies is for us a refuge high. Shela.
VVonder working Providence OF Sions SAVIOUR in New-England. BOOK III. CONTAINING The passages of Gods providence to∣ward this wandering Race of Jaaco∣bites in these latter seven years, from the year 1645. till toward the latter end of 51. CHAP. I. Of planting the twenty sixth Church of Christ at the Town of Haverhil, and of preparation for a second war with the Indians. THis year that antient, honored and trusty souldier of the truth, Thom. Dudly Esquire was chosen Gover∣nor, and the honored John Winthrop Esquire was cho∣sen Deputy Governor, John Endicut Esquire to the office of Major-General. You have heard in the former book
of the fortifying of the Castle, and placing a Captain therein, which was not finished till this year; the number of freemen added was 56. The Town of Haverhil was built much about this time, lying higher up then Salisbury, upon the fair and large river of Merrimeck: the people are wholly bent to im∣prove their labour in tilling the earth, and keeping of cattel, whose yearly encrease incourages them to spend their days in those remote parts, the constant penetrating farther into this Wilderness, hath caused the wild and uncouth woods to be fil'd with frequented wayes, and the large rivers to be o∣ver-laid with Bridges passeable, both for horse and foot; this Town is of a large extent, supposed to be ten miles in length, there being an over-weaning desire in most men after Medow land, which hath caused many towns to grasp more into their ands then they could afterward possibly hold; the people are laborious in the gaining the goods of this life, yet are they not unmindful also of the chief end of their coming hither, namely, to be made partakers of the blessed Ordinances of Christ, that their souls might be refreshed with the continual income of his rich grace, to which end they gathered into a Church-body, and called to office the reverend M. VVard, son to the former named M. VVard of Ipswitch, WIth mind resolv'd run out thy race at length, Yound Ward begin whereas thy father left, Left hath he not, but breaths for further strength, Nor thou, nor he, are yet of hope bereft: Fruit of thy labours thou shalt see so much, The righteous shall hear of it, and rejoyce When Babel falls by Christ's almighty touch, All' folk shall praise him with a cheerful voice. They prosper shall that Sions building mind, Then Ward cease not with toyl her stones to lay, For great is he thee to this work assign'd, Whose pleasure is, heavens Crown shall be thy pay. This year, although divers Indian Sachems not long before
had desired to subject themselves and lands unto this Go∣vernment, yet the sons of old Canonicus having not inherited their fathers prudence, with his subjects and land, fell to hot contention with their own neighbours and native inhabitants, although they were forbidden by the united Colonies, and prosecuted so, that they would not stick to wage war with the English also, which the Commissioners perceiving, they raised an Army of horse and foot out of the Colonies, and appoint∣ed as Commander in chief over them Major-General Edward Gibbons; the reverend Mr. Tompso, one of the Elders of the Church at Braintree was to accompany them, and to preach the Word of God unto them, during the time of the war; but the Indians hearing of this preparation against them, sent a certain number of their chief Nobility to treat with the Com∣missioners of the united Colonies about a peace, who then sitting at Boston gave them audience, the Indians coming into their presence, could speak no more English, but peace, peace; the English were very desirous of an opportunity to shew them mercy, and yet would they should not despise them, in gaining it upon such easie terms, as might cause them to move war again, and therefore allotted them to pay some part of the charge of the war intended, and therefore appointed them to give four of their sons for hostages till they had wholly paid it; the Indians gladly accepted of the terms, and ac∣cordingly brought their children. Here the Reader should be minded of the admirable acts of the Lord Christ in awing these multitudes of Heathens, for they were the most popu∣lous of any that are in these parts; but it is reserved for ano∣ther place in this history, the Indians being slow in their per∣formance, had their hostages returned home before the Wa∣pom was paid, yet their two Princes Posicus and Mexanimo, did upon the sending certain armed men to demand the re∣mainder, send the sum demanded.
CHAP. II. Of the planting of the twenty seventh Church of Christ at the Town called Springfield, and of the earnest seeking the the Lord by all the Churches of N. E. for his gra∣cious assistance in the work of Reformation. ABout this time one Mr. Pinchin, sometime a Magistrate, having out of desire to better his estate, by trading with the Indians, setled himself very remote (from all the Chur∣ches of Christ in the Mattachusets Government) upon the ri∣ver of Canectico, yet under their Government, he having some godly persons resorting unto him, they there erected a Town and Church of Christ, calling it Springfield, it lying up∣on this large navigable river, hath the benefit of transporting their goods by water, and also fitly seated for a Bever trade with the Indians, till the Merchants encreased so many, that it became little worth, by reason of their out-buying one ano∣ther, which hath caused them to live upon husbandry; this Town is mostly built along the river side, and upon some little rivelets of the same: There hath of late been more then one or two in this Town greatly suspected of witchcraft, yet have they used much diligence, both for the finding them out, and for the Lords assisting them against their witchery, yet have they, as is supposed, bewitched not a few persons, among whom two of the reverend Elders children: These people inhabiting this Town, having gathered into a Church-body, called to the office of a Pastor the reverend M. Moxon, who remaineth with them at this very day, of whom as followeth. AS thou with strong and able parts art made, Thy person stout with toyl and labour shall, With help of Christ through difficulties wade, Then spend for him, spare not thy self at all. When errors crowd close to thy self, and friends Take up truths sword, trifle not time for why Christ call'd his people hither, for these ends, To tell the world that Babels fall is nigh;
And that his Churches through the world shall spread, Maugre the might of wicked men and devils, Then Moxon thou need'st not at all to dread, But be aveng'd on Satan for his evils, Thy Lord Christ will under thy feet him tread. This year the great troubles in our native country encrease∣ing, and that hearing prophane Esau had mustered up all the Bands he could make to come against his brother Iacob, these wandering race of Jacobites deemed it now high time to im∣plore the Lord for his especial aid in this time of their deepest distress, and the rather being incouraged hereunto from for∣mer deliverances and wonderful mercies received, the which they now presented before the Lord with the several bran∣ches, and inlarged bounties thereof to refresh their frozen af∣fections, and move a melting heart in their barren brests, that began to dry up with a lazy lethargy, and therefore thrusting themselves on to the work by the loving invitation of that godly Government the Lord in his mercy had peaceably pla∣ced among them, each Church in their own proper place meeting together in daies of solemn seeking of the Lords pleasing countenance in Christ (the Lord in his mercy helping them) after a serious acknowledgment of their own unwor∣thiness, by reason of their sinful provocations of the Lord to anger against them aggravated, in that they were committed immediately upon the receipt of a multitude of marvellous mercies, they acknowledg unto the Lord in the audience of the great Congregation the manner of his wonderful provi∣dence extended toward them, that as Iacob professes, I came over this Jordan with my staff, and now have I gotten two Bands; so they came over this boysterous billow-boyling O∣cean, a few poor scattered stones newly raked out of the heaps of rubbish, and thou Lord Christ hast now so far exalted them, as to lay them sure in thy Sion, a building, to be the wonder of the world, orderly are they placed in five and forty several Churches, and that in a Wilderness, where civility scarce ever took place, much less any Religion, and now to the Lord ear∣nestly they cry to be delivered from the cruel hands of those
that would destroy both young and old, the bird and her young together, and as Iacobs fear was, the seed of Christs Church in the posterity of Israel should be cut off, and there∣fore pleaded the promise of the Lord in the multiplying of his seed; so these people at this very time, pleaded not only the Lords promise to Israel, but to his only Son Christ Jesus; Lord, hast thou not said, Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost ends of the earth for thy possession; and now Lord, are not these the Churches of Christ which thou hast planced for his possession; and that as Rachel and Leah built the house of Israel, so now shall these and the like Sister-churches spread the whole earth, the Lord Christ raigning as King and Lord for ever over them; Then why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagin a vain thing, see∣ing the rime of the Lords arising to have mercy upon Sion is come, ea his appointed time is at hand; and he who walks in the midst of his golden Candlesticks, whose eys are as a flaming fire, will not suffer his Churches to be trodden under feet of that Anti∣christian Lordly prelacy any longer, nor yet defiled with any transformed Saint-seeming Angels of light with their painted doctrines. Thus did this poor people plead with the Lord, not only for themselves, but for their dearly beloved brethren in England, I and all that are Christs chosen people the world throughout; and although they were not unmindful from day to day of them, yet this year 1645. the Lord was pleased to stir up their affections in more then an ordinary manner, what success their prayers have had, let all (that love and long to behold the beauty of Christ shining on and in his beloved Bride) declare the loving kindness of the Lord toward his Churches, and let all the Churches of Christ, though never so  more the one from the other, yet joyned together in one hith and one Christ, be frequent in prayer one for another, ongregate together at the Throne of the Lord, be present in pirit, though absent in body; these Mew-England Churches  neer one hundred miles distant one from another, and yet communicate, counsel, care, love, joy, grieve with, and for ne another, dismiss some, and commend others (as occasi∣n serves) to the Christian care and watchfulness, from one
Church to another, and why may not this be practised the world throughout, even from Jerusalem, and round about to Illyricum? CHAP. III. Of the opposition the Government of the Mattachusets Colony met withal, by certain persons, under the name of Petitioners. IN place of Governor was chosen for this year Iohn Win∣throp Esquire, and for Deputy Governor Thomas Dudly E∣squire, the number of freemen were about 72. At the Court of Election there was a Petition drawn, and presented to the Court by a Doctor of Physick, with seven hands to it, the per∣sons were of a Linfiwolsie disposition, some for Prefacy, some for Presbytery, and some for Plbsbytery, but all joyned to∣gether in the thing they would, which was to stir up the people to dislike of the present Government, one while envving against the constitution of the Government as not popular enough, a∣nother while against the Laws or orders of this little Common∣wealth as two strict, and then to provoke, at least the p∣ous, they tell them of great expence of the publike Treasury, and intolerable taxations; the matter they petitioned for, was a bottom to build their quarrel upon, under the name of a Presbyterian Government, and this they supposed would suit well with their Bill of complaint, which they intended for England, not that they cared for a Presbyterian Church, for had they so done, they might have found out one in the coun∣try before they petitioned, but because they supposed that the Parliament in England would establish that way only and therefore bore themselves bold upon it, that although their seditious and scandalous words and practises should in∣cur a penalty (as none could deem any other, unless it be such as are all for liberty, and nothing for Government) yet they might bear men in hand, it was for petitioning for a Presby∣terian Church-Government, according to this teor; th Court being some what flow in censuring them, they prepare a plot, wrapping in some few persons more with them, lay
ing very gross matters to the charge of this Government in their Bill of complaint, but being suspected by the honoured Magistrates of this Government, their plot was found out, and writing publikely read unto them, for all which they had a small penalty laid upon them, hardly countervail the charge they put the country unto; but assuredly it was the Lords gracious goodness to quell their malice against his people, and indeed the proud Bishops sped no better, or not so well, e∣specially some of them, nor have any other hitherto prospe∣red, who have maigned these poor Churches of Christ, yet be∣cause the Gortonist painted over a far worser cause, that those honorable personages in England, who had the hearing there∣of could not discern the Government, thought meet to send over this year the honored M. VVinslow to manifest and declare the naked truth of things, having full power and commission from this Government to deal for them in all matters where∣in they may be concerned; and verily the chief Gortonian might have returned from England hither, to have triumphed in his blasphemies over the Churches of Christ; and all the uni∣ted colonies, had not the divel shewed his horns in that book he printed, wherein he takes upon him a monstrous interpre∣tation of the words of our Lord Christ in John, Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blond, &c. had the book been well per∣used before their coming over, surely they had never return'd with so large a commission as they boast of, for the Parlia∣ment have punished divers persons for their blasphemies, and very like these should not have scaped scotfree. CHAP. IV. Of the second Synod holden at Cambridg in N. E. and the images of the Son that appeared. THis year the General Court of the Mattachusets Go∣vernment taking into consideration the many  in point of doctrine that were daily broached by some of our English Nation, although the churches of Christ, and the peo∣ple under this Government were free, at least in open pro∣fession;
yet to declare to all the world, and render an ac∣compt of their faith and profession wherein they walk, it was thought meet, that the churches of Christ should meet toge∣ther in a Synod, by their Elders and Messengers to hold forth the doctrine and discipline of Jesus Christ, according to the rule of the New Testament, with the grounds of Scriptur from which they hold the same; and further to make trial of them by the said rules and none other: accordingly at the time appointed they assembled together, their disputation was plain and easie to be understood of the meanest capacity, clear∣ing up those points that were most dubious, they having a∣greed on all matters, with a full concurrence of the assembly, did appoint them to be put in print, that they might be the better scanned and tried of every particular person in the se∣veral congregations or churches, many churches approving thereof for the generality, others there be that have not yet fully viewed the same, the books are extant, and shew that the churches of Christ in N. E. are not ashamed to make con∣fession of their faith to all the world, and are yet ready to re∣ceive any further light shall be made known unto them from the Word of God, and none other, nor do they receive this because a Synod hath said it, but because the Lord hath spo∣ken it by his Spirit, and witnessed by the same Spirit to their souls that he hath so done; some sorts of persons have been much opposite to this Synod, first those that are so inured with the broad beaten path of liberty, that they fear to be confined in the straight and narrow path of truth; the second are such as have their wills wedded to some singular rare con∣ceited opinion, for which they have been admired of many, and now they fear their gain will be gone, if this spirit be cast out; the third and last sort are more honest then the two former, and only scared with their big words, who tell them of the Popish and Prelatical Synods, what a deal of trash and cannon Laws they have brought in, and that if they will full to receiving books once, they shall have more and more thrust upon them: As also if any shall say its only to declare the doctrine and discipline the churches of N. E. hold, its e∣nough, quoth they, that our faith concerning these things is
contained in the Bible, and this is all the accompt we need to give to any; but for all these scare-crows, N.E. hath through the blessing of the Lord received much peace and truth from the former Synod, we wish our countrymen and our selves may receive the like, and much more from this, which ended not with this year. This year, about the later end thereof, appeared two Pare∣lii, or Images of the Sun, and some other strange apparitions of light about her, like a Rainbow, with the heels upward, which unwonted sights have been interpreted by the provi∣dent passages since shewed, among those who have had an outside of profession and name, to be singular for understand∣ing the mind of God, who would overthrow all the Ordi∣nances of Christ, under the name of New-light, and that there can be no restoration of Religion, till new Apostles come: This desperate opinion doth so fitly resemble these wonder∣ful apparitions, that seemed to be another Sun, yet indeed had no light in them, but vanished away no man knew how; so these opinionists would make men believe they had found out another Sea from their phantastical revelations. CHAP. V. Of the great pains and care taken by those in Authority, for the compiling of Lawes for this little Commonwealth. THis year the General Court appointed a Committee of divers persons to draw up a Body of Laws for the well-ordering of this little Commonwealth; and to the end that thy might be most agreeable with the rule of Scripture, in every County there was appointed two Magistrates, two Mi∣nisters, and two able persons from among the people, who having provided such a competent number as was meet, toge∣ther with the former that were enacted newly amend∣ed, they presented them to the General Court, where they were again perused and amended; and then another Committee chosen to bring them into form, and present them to the Court again, who the year following passed an Act
of confirmation upon them, and so committed them to the Press, and in the year 1648. they were printed, and now are to be seen of all men, to the end that none may plead igno∣rance, and that all who intend to transport themselves hither, may know this is no place of licentious liberty, nor will this people suffer any to trample down this Vineyard of the Lord, but with diligent execution will cut off from the city of the Lord the wicked doers, and if any man can shew wherein any of them derogate from the Word of God, very willingly will they accept thereof, and amend their imperfections (the Lord assisting) but let not any ill affected persons find fault with them, because they suit not with their own humour, or be∣cause they meddle with matters of Religion, for it is no wrong to any man, that a people who have spent their estates, many of them, and ventured their lives for to keep faith and a pure conscience, to use all means that the Word of God al∣lows for maintenance and continuance of the same, especial∣ly they having taken up a desolate Wilderness to be their ha∣bitation, and not deluded any by keeping their profession in huggermug, but print and proclaim to all the way and course they intend, God willing, to walk in, if any will yet notwith∣standing seek to justle them out of their own right, let them not wonder if they meet with all the opposition a people put to their greatest straits can make; as in all their undertaking, their chiefest aim hath been to promote the Ordinances of Christ, so also in contriving their Laws, Liberties, and Privi∣ledges, they have not been wanting, which hath caused many to maligne their civil Government, and more especially for punishing any by a Law, that walk conrrary to the rule of the Gospel, which they profess, but to them it seems unrea∣sonable, and savours too much of hypocrisie, that any people should pray unto the Lord for the speedy accomplishment of his Word in the overthrow of Antichrist, and in the mean time become a Patron to sinful opinions and damnable errors that oppose the truths of Christ, admit it be but in the bare per∣mission of them.
CHAP. VI. Of the Lords wonder-working Providence, in fitting this people with all kind of Manufactures, and the bringing of them into the order of a Commonwealth. ON the day of Election for Governor and Magistrates, (which are new chosen every year) the honored John Winthrope Esquire was chosen Governor, and the like honor∣ed Thomas Dudly Esquire Deputy Governor, John Endicut Esquire was chosen Major-General, which is an Officer the Freemen make a yearly choice of, all other Military Officers stand for  of life, unless any be put out for misdemean∣our; the member of freemen added this year were about 85. the Land affording very good on, stone, divers persons of good ack and quality in England, were stirred up by the provident hand of the Lord to venture their estatee upon an hon work, which they began at Braintree, and profited the owners little, but rather wasted their stock, which caused some of them to tell away the Kmainder, the chief reason be∣ing the high price of labour, which ordinarily was as much more as in England, and in many things treble; the way of going on with such a work here, was not suddinly to be dis∣terned, although the Steward had a very able eye, yet experi∣ence nath out-stript learning here, and the most quick-sighted in the Theory of things, have been forced to pay prety mundly to Lady Experience for filling their heads with a sit∣tle of her active after-wit; much hope there is now, that the owners may pick up their crums again, if they be but made partakers of the gain, in putting off England commodities at N. E. price, it will take off one third of the great price they gave for labour, and the price of their iron; it is supposed a∣nother third is taken of the abundance of wood had for lit∣tle, will surely take off the residue, besides land at easie rates, and common land free for their use; it were to be desired that those Gentlemen who have undertaken the work, would consider the place where their works are, namely in N. E. where the Lord Christ hath chosen to plant his Churches in,
to hide his people under the covert of his wings, till the ty∣ranny of Antichrist be over-passed, and any that have disbur∣sed pence for the furthering of his work, shall be repayed with thousands: Besides, the Gentlemen that govern this Colony are very desirous to be helpful in what they may, and had ra∣ther take any burthens upon themselves and the Inhabitants, that in justice they ought, then that those Gentlemen should be any wayes damnified: The Lord is pleased also to com∣pleat this Commonwealth abundantly beyond all expectati∣on in all sorts of needful occupations, it being for a log time the great fear of many, and those that were endued with grace from above also, that this would be no place of conti∣nued habitation, for want of a staple-commodity, but the Lord, whose promises are large to his Sion, hath blest his peo∣ples provision, and satisfied her poor with bread, in a very lit∣tle space, every thing in the country proved a staple-commo∣dity, wheat, rye, oats, peas, barley, beef, pork, fish, butter, cheese, timber, mast, tar, sope, plank-board frames of houss, clabboard, and pipestaves, iron and lead is like to be also; and those who were formerly forced to fetch most of the bread they eat, and beer they drink a hundred leagues by Sea, are through the blessing of the Lord so encreased, that they have not only fed their Elder Sisters, Virginia, Barbados, and many of the Summer Islands that were prefer'd before her for fruitfulness, but also the Grandmother of us all, even the fir∣til Isle of Great Britain, beside Portugal hath had many a mouthful of bread and fish from us, in exchange of their Ma∣deara liquor, and also Spain; nor could it be imagined, that this Wilderness should turn a mart for Merchants in so short a space, Holland, France, Spain, and Portugal coming hither for trade, shipping, going on gallantly, till the Seas became so troublesome, and England restrain'd our trade, forbidding it with Barbados, &c. and Portugal stopt and took our ships; many a fair ship had her framing and finishing here, besides lesser vessels, barques, and ketches, many a Master, beside com∣moa Seamen, had their first learning in this Colony, Boston, Charles-Town, Salem, and Ipswitch; our Maritan Towns be∣gan to encrease roundly, especially Boston, the which of a
poor country village, in twice seven years is become like un∣to a small City, and is in election to be Mayor Town suddain∣ly, chiefly increased by trade by Sea, yet of late the Lord hath given a check to our traffique, but the reason may be rendred hereafter; nor hath this Colony alone been actors in this trade of venturing by Sea, but New-haven also, who were many of them well experienced in traffique, and had good e∣states to mannage it, Canectiso did not linger behind, but put forth to Sea with the other; all other trades have here fallen into their ranks and places, to their great advantage; especi∣ally Coopers and Shomakers, who had either of them a Cor∣poration granted, inriching themselves by their trades very much, Coopers having their plenty of stuff at a cheap rate, and by reason of trade, with forraign parts abandance of work, as for Tanners and Shomakers, it being naturalized into these occupations, to have a higher reach in mannaging their ma∣nifactures, then other men in N. E. are, having not chang'd their nature in this, between them both they have kept men to their stander hitherto, almost doubling the price of their commodities, according to the rate they were sold for in Eng∣land, and yet the plenty of Leather is beyond what they had, their counting the number of the people, but the transporta∣tion of Boots and Shoes into forraign parts hath vented all however: as for Tailors, they vave not come behind the form∣er, their advantage being in the nurture of new-fashions, all one with England; Carpenters, Joyners, Glaziers, Painters, fol∣low their trades only; Gun-smiths, Lock-smiths, Black-smiths, Naylers, Cutlers, have left the husbandmen to follow the Plow and Cart, and they their trades, Weavers, Brewers, Ba∣kers, Costermongers, Feltmakers, Braziers, Pewterers, and Finkers, Ropemakers, Masons, Lime, Brick, and Tilemakers, Cardmakers to work, and not to play, Turners, Pumpmakers, and Wheelers, Glovers, Fellmungers, and Furriers, are or∣derly turn'd to their trades, besides divers sorts of Shopkeep∣ers, and some who have a mystery beyond others, as have the Vintners. Thus hath the Lord been pleased to turn one of the most hideous, boundless, and unknown Wildernesses in the world
in an instant, as 'twere (in comparison of other work) to a well-ordered Commonwealth, and all to serve his Churches, of which the Author intends to speak of three more, which came to be gathered in the compass of these years. CHAP. VII. Of the three last Churches that were gathered in the compass of these years, namely Haverhil, Malen, and another Church gathered in the Town of Boston. THis year 1648. John Winthrope Esquire was chosen Go∣vernor, and Thomas Dudly Esquire Deputy Governor, and John Endicut Esquire Major General, all three as they were the former year, the number of freemen added were a∣bout 94. about this time there was a Town founded about one or two mile distant from the place where the goodly ri∣ver of Merrimeck receives her branches into her own body, hard upon the river of Shawshin, which is one of her three chief heads; the honored Mr. Simon Broad street taking up his last setling there, hath been a grrat means to further the work, it being a place well fitted for the husbandmans hand, were it not that the remoteness of the place from Towns of trade, bringeth some inconveniencies upon the planteas, who are in∣forced to carry their corn far to market; this Town is called Andover, and hath good store of land improved for the big∣ness of it, they soon gathered into a Church, having the reve∣rend Mr. Whodbridg to instruct them in the wayes of Christ, till he returned to England, and since have called to office the reverend Mr. Deynes, for whose further incouragement the promises of the Lord for protecting, providing, increaseing, and continuing, even the very least of his Churches going on, according to his precepts, are abundantly manifested in his Word. THon Sister young, Christ is to thee a wall Of flaming fire, to hurt thee none may come In stipp'ry paths, and dark wayes shall they fall, His Angels might shall chase thei countless sum.
Thy Shepheard with full cups and table spread, Before thy foes in Wilderness thee feeds, Increasing thy young lambs in bosom bred, Of Churches by his wonder-working deeds: To countless number must Christ's Churches reach, The day's at hand, both Jew and Gentle shall Come crowding in his Churches, Christ to preach, And last for aye, none can cause them to fall. About this time the Town of Malden had his first founda∣tion stones laid by certain persons, who issued out of Charles-Town, and indeed had her whole structure within the bounds of this more elder Town, being severed by the broad ipread∣ing river of Mistick the one from the other, whose trouble∣some passage caused the people on the North side of the ri∣ver to plead for Town-priviledges within themselves, which accordingly was granted them; the soyl is very firtile, but they are much straitned in their bounds, yet their neerness to the hief Market Towns, makes it the more comfortable for ha∣bitation, the people gathered into a Church some distance of ime before they could attain to any Church-Officer to admi∣ister the Seals unto them, yet in the mean time at their Sab∣th assemblies they had a godly Christian named M. Sarjant, who did preach the Word unto them, and afterwards they ere supplied at times with some young Students from the olledg, till the year 160. one Mr. Marmaduke Mathews, oming out of Plimouth Patten, was for some space of time ith a people at the Town of Hull, which is a small Port∣own peopled by fishermen, and lies at the entrance of the ays mouth, where this Mr. Mathews continued preaching, he lost the approbation of some able understanding men, ong both Magistrates and Ministers, by weak and unsafe pressions in his teaching, yet notwithstanding he was cal∣ to the office of a Pastor by the brethren of this Church of rist at Maldon, although some Neighbour-churches were satisfied therewith, for it is the manner of all the Churches Christ here hitherto, to have the approbation of their Si∣-churches, and the civil Government also in the proceed∣ings
of this nature, by the which means Communion of Chur∣ches is continued, peace preserved; and the truths of Christ sincerely acknowledged, yet the Author will not miss to mind him in the following Meeter. MAthews! thou must build gold and silver on That precious stone, Christ cannot trash indure, Unstable straw and stubble must be gone, When Christ by fire doth purge his building pure. In seemly and in modest terms do thou Christs precious truths unto thy folk unfold, And mix not error with the truth, lest thou Soon leave out sense to make the truth to hold: Compleating of Christs Churches is at hand, Mathews stand up, and blow a crrtain sound, Warriours are wanting Babel to withstand, Christs truths maintain, 'twill bring thee honors crown'd The last Church that compleated the number of 30. was ga¦thered at Boston, by reason of the popularity thereof, bein too many to meet in one assembly; the North-east part of th Town being separated from the other with a narrow strea cut through a neck of land by industry, whereby that part i become an Island, it was thought meet, that the people in habiting the same should gather into a Church-body, an build a Meeting-house for their assembly, the which they hav already done, but not as yet called any one to office; for sin the people of Christ in some other places, both in Englan and elswhere, have through the goodness of God obtaine like liberty with our selves, the Ministers of Christ have ha their labours taken up in other places as well as her which hath caused this Church as yet to be destitu the beginning of this year was sad to the people of N.  by reason of the death of their honoured Governo John Winthrope Esquire, whose indefatigable paines in th Wilderness-work is not to be forgotten, nor indeed  it be, his Funeral was very sadly and solemnly performe by a very great concourse of the greater part of this Colo
whose mournful looks and watry eyes did plainly demonstrate the tender affection and great esteem he was in with the people. CHAP. VIII. Of the death of divers personages, who were in great este em with the people of New-England, famous for their godliness, and ominent parts, both for Magistracy and Ministe∣ry, and of the correcting hand of the Lord upon his N. E. people. A His year, after the death of this godly Governour, was chosen to succeed in the place 10. Endicut Esq. and Tho. Dudly Esq. to be Deputy Governor, to the place of Major-Ge∣neral Edw. Gibbons; and seeing that the Lord is pleased to call this people to mourning, the Author will proceed to relate what further occasion this people have had to lament their miscarriages, that have caused the rod to be stretched out to∣ward them, for of a truth they are no Antinomians: The next loss was the death of that famous Preacher of the Lord M. Hook∣er, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Hartford, and M. Philips, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Watertown, and the holy heavenly, sweet-affecting and soul-ravishing Minister M. Tho. Shepheard, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridg, whose departure was very heavily taken by all the people of Christ round about him, and now N.E. that had such heaps apon heaps of the riches of Christs tender compassionate mercies, being turn'd off from his dandling knees, began to read their approa∣ching rod in the bend of hi brows & frowns of his former fa∣vourable countenance toward them; their plenty of all things, which shold have cheared their hearts & quickned their spirits in elevating both soul and body to a thankful frame, through the work of his blessed Spirit; on the contrary, it brought a fulness on many, even to loath the very honey-comb, inso∣much that good wholesome truths would not down, yet had the Lord those that were precious unto him, who were not wanting to help one another out of this distemper,
and with more warmer affections exhort one another, Come let us go up unto the house of the Lord, and he will teach us his wayes: Also the Lord was pleased to awaken us with an Army of caterpillers, that had he not suddainly rebuked them, they had surely destroyed the husband mans hope, where they fell upon trees, they left them like winter-wasting cold, bare and naked; and although they fell on fields very rarely, yet in some places they made as clear a riddance, as the har∣vest mans hand, and uncovered the gay green Medow ground, but indeed the Lord did by some plats shew us what he could have done with the whole, and in many places cast them into the high wayes, that the Cart-wheels in their passage were painted green with running over the great swarms of them; in some fields they devoured the leaves of their pease, and left the straw with the full crop, so tender was the Lord in his cor∣rection; this minded all these Jacobites of the end of their coming over, but chiefly the husbandman, whose over eager pursuit of the fruits of the earth, made some of them many times run out so far in this Wilderness, even out of the sweet sound of the silver Trumpets blown by the laborious Mini∣sters of Christ, forsaking the assembly of the Lords people, to celebrate their Sabbaths in the chimney-corner, horse, kine, sheep, goats, and swine, being their most indeared compani∣ons to travel with them to the end of their pilgrimage, or o∣therwise to gather together some of their neerest neighbours, and make a preachment one unto another, till they had learn'd so much, that they could away with none other teach∣ing: As also the Lord was pleased to command the wind and Seas to give us a jog on the elbow, by sinking the very chief of our shipping in the deep, and splitting them in shivers a∣gainst the shores; a very goodly Ship called the Seaforce was east away, and many N. E. people put to hard shifts for their lives, and some drowned, as the godly and dearly beloved servant of Christ, Mr. Tho, Coitmire, a very able Seaman, and also a good Scholar, one who had spent both his labour and estate for the helping on of this Wilderness-work: as also another ship set forth by the Merchants of New-haven, of which the godly Mr, Lamberton went Master, neither ship,
persons, nor goods ever heard of; another ship also built and set forth by the inhabitants of Cambridg, split and cast away neer the same place where the Seaforce was loft; as also ano∣ther Barque mostly set forth by Dorchester men, sank in the Sea, and never heard of the manner how; with divers others which might be here inserted; this seemed the sorer affliction to these N. E people, because many godly men lost their lives, and abundantly the more remarkable, because the Lord was pleased to forbid any such things to befal his people in their passage hither; herein these people read, as in great capital letters, their suddain forgetfulness of the Lords former recei∣ved mercy in his wonderful preservation, bringing over so many scores of ships, and thousands of persons, without mis∣carriage of any, to the wonderment of the whole world that shall hear of it, ut more especially were the Merchants and traders themselves sensible of the hand of the Lord out a∣gainst them, who were in some of the ships, and had their lixes given them for a prey; as also Vintners, and other men of trade, whose gain is increased by Merchants men, being so taken up with the income of a large profit, that they would willingly have had the Common wealth tolerate divers kinds of sinful opinions to intice men to come and sit down with us, that their purses might be filled with coyn, the civil Go∣vernment with contention, and the Churches of our Lord Christ with errors, the Lord was pleased after all this, to let in the King of Terror among his new-planted Churches. FOr this year 1650. Tho. Dudly Esquire was chosen Gover∣nor, and John Eudicut Esquire Deputy Governor, Major-General Edward Gibbous continned in his office still; the num∣ber of freemen added were about 55. Thir year was the first noted year wherein any store of people died, the ayt and place being very healthy naturally, made this correction of the Lord seem the greater, for the most that died were chil∣dren, and that of an unwonted disease here, though fre∣quent in other places, the Lord now smiting many families with death in them, although there were not any families wherein more then one died, or very rare if it were other∣wise,
yet were these pilgrim people minded of the suddain forgetfulness of those worthies that died not long before, but more especially the little regard had to provide means to train their children up in the knowledg of learning, and im∣prove such means as the Lord hath appointed to leave their posterity an able Minister; as also to stir them up to prepare for the great work of the Lord Jesus in the overthrow of An∣tichrist, and calling of the Jews, which in all likelyhood is very suddainly to be performed; as also in stirring up all the young ones that remain, to consider for what nd the Lord hath spared their lives, when he cut off others by death, name∣ly, to prosecute the work that he hath given them to do in the power of his might, with the greater zeal and cou∣rage. THis year the honored and much desired servant of Christ, John Endicut Esquire was chosen to be Governour of the English, inhabiting the Colony of the Mattachusets, and the antient honored and long continued Champion for the truth, as it is in Jesus, Tho. Dudly Esquire was chosen Deputy Go∣vernour, by the major Vote of these wandering Jacobites, with heart and good will the honored Major-General Ed∣ward Gibbous continued in place this year, the Government shewed their desire to be assisting to the State of England, in making orders for establishing their Edict for these Western parts of the world among out N. E. people; the Lord in his infinite wisdom saw meet to continue his correcting hand a∣mong his N. E. Churches, somewhat more then ordinary in a sore disease, of which many (in comparison of what used to do) and yet not so many as ordinarily use to do in other plantations of this Western world; and whereas the former year young children died most, this year those of grown years died also, and although so small a sickness might not be ta∣ken notice of in other places, yet the rareness of it in so heal∣thy a country as is this, cannot but speak loud in the ears of Gods people, who desire to hear the rod, and who hath ap∣pointed it, and perceive plainly many of them, that the Lord will have us to know, that if his own people tread in the
same steps of riot and excess in the plenty he hath given them, with the men of this world, he will lay the same sicknesses and diseases upon them; and further they perceive, according to the ordinary dispensation of his providences toward them, he hath some further great work to do with his N. E. people, that he is beginning again to a waken, rouze up, and quicken them with the rod of his power: For thus they begin to rea∣son with themselves, when the Lord was pleased to expose them, their wifes, and little ones to the troubles of a tempe∣stuous Sea in so long a voyage, and the wants of a barren Wil∣derness in great penury of food, he brought forth by his mighty power, and stretched-our arm, the glorious fabrick of his New-E. Churches; and therefore now again they look for some further extraordinary great work of his, if he shall once again be pleased to refine them in this furnace of his, and would the Lord Christ would confirm our brethren in England in like faith by our example, yea, and far beyond many de∣grees, as the Wonder-working providence of Sions Saviour toward them hath more abundantly exceeded, and that as this in three seven years is comprised, though very weakly in this little book, there's in one seven year would require vo∣lumes, and as this is wonderful, there is almost miraculous, and wonderful to the whole world, as if the Lord Christ did intend to make his power known more abundantly, then ever the sons of men saw Kings and Kingdoms strengthened, with affinity and consanguinity, the valiant of the world, men skil'd in feats of war, as Goliah from a child, fierce and pampered horses, whose necks are covered with strong neighing, and cunning Engeniers, men skilful to destroy with all the terrible engins of war, together with swarms of souldiers flocking together to swallow up the poor remnant of Gods people, all these hath the Lord caused to fall before your eyes, and our ears have heard the noyse of this great fall; and beloved countrymen, and our dear brethren in Christ, step into the closet of your own hearts with us, and see if there will not be some things in this following verse that may suit your con∣dition as well as ours, that having sown in tears, we may reap with joy the glorious harvest of our Lord Christ, which is
hard at hand, for assuredly the Lord is tyed neither to us, nor you, but may, if it please him, cast off both, and raise up new instruments for his following work, but if he be pleased to give us melting hearts for our former miscarriages, and renew us with a more zealous courage and earnest contending for the faith, it is very like he hath more glorious works by far for us yet to do. CHAP. IX. Of the wonder-working providences of Christ, wrought for his people among our English Nation, both in our Native coun∣try, and also in N. E. which should stir us up to mourn for all our miscarriages much the more. FRom silent night true Register of moans, From saddest soul consum'd in deepest sin, The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in plant∣ing his N. E. Churches, and with the right hand of his power preser∣ving, protecting, favouring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses. From heart quite rent with sighs and heavy groans, My wailing muse her woful work begins, And to the world brings tunes of sad lament, Sounding nought els but sorrows sad relent. Sorry to see my sorrows cause augmented, And yet less sorrowful were my sorrows more, The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in plant∣ing his N. E. Churches, and with the right hand of his power preser∣ving, protecting, favouring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses. Grief that with grief, is nor with grief prevented, Yet grief it is must ease my grieved sore; So grief and sorrow, care but how to grieve, For grief and sorrow must my cares relieve. The wound fresh bleeding must be stauch'd with tears, Tears cannot come unless some grief proceed, The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in plant∣ing his N. E. Churches, and with the right hand of his power preser∣ving, protecting, favouring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses. Grief comes but slack, which doth increase my fears, Fear, left for want of help I still shall bleed; Do what I can to lengthen my lifes breath, If Christ be wanting, I shall bleed to death. Thou deepest searcher of each secret thought, Infuse in me thy all-affecting grace,
The consideration of the wonderful providence of Christ in plant∣ing his N. E. Churches, and with the right hand of his power preser∣ving, protecting, favouring, and feeding them upon his tender knees: Together with the ill requital of his all-infinite and undeserved mercies bestowed upon us, bath caused many a soul to lament for the dishonor done to his Name, and sear of his casting of this little handful of his, and the insulting of the enemy, whose forrow is set forth in these four first staffs of verses. So shall my work to good effect be brought, While I peruse my ugly sins a space, Whose staining filth so spotted hath my soul, That nought can wash, but tears of inward dole. How soon my soul hast thou the Lord forgot, The Rod of God toward us in our Maritine affairs manifested, not only to our own shipping, but strangers; as the Mary Rose blown up in Charles River, and sunk in a moment, with about thirteen men slain therein: As also one Capt. Chadwicks Pinnace, and about four men slain therein, beside what hath been formerly said touching our own shipping. Who thee and thine through troublous Seas hath lead, On earth thy parts should praise him, suddain rot, Why dost neglect his glorious Kingdom spread. Thy eyes have seen the Mountains mov'd with's hand, And sunk in Seas to make his Sion stand. No wonder then thy works with Eastern wind The Rod of God toward us in our Maritine affairs manifested, not only to our own shipping, but strangers; as the Mary Rose blown up in Charles River, and sunk in a moment, with about thirteen men slain therein: As also one Capt. Chadwicks Pinnace, and about four men slain therein, beside what hath been formerly said touching our own shipping. On Seas are broke, and thy best Seamen slain, Sith, thou thy gain, and not Christs work dost mind, Lord stay thy hand, I see my works are vain. Our ships they shall thy Gospel forth convey, And not bring home strange errors here to stay. Instead of home-oppression, they shall now Thy Saints abroad relieve, by Sea them send; No riot shall our Merchantmen allow, Time in exchange walks, not in Taverns spend: Godly grief and good purpose comes from thee, Lord Christ command, and then to work go we.
Oh thou my soul how weak's thy faith become, With scatter'd seed of man and beast, thou hast Seen thy great God increase thy little sum, Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expres∣sed; and also in the suddain taking away many mens estates by fire, and chiefly by a most terrible fire which happened in Charles-Town, in the depth of Winter, 1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to ano∣ther, to the consuming of the fairest houses in the Town: Ʋnder the pre∣ance of being unequally rated, many men murmure exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and excess in apparrel i frequent in these daies, when the Lord calls his people to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that which is far worse, spiritual pride, to shew our selves to be somebody, often step ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines. Towns close compact in desart land hath plac't: In Wilderness thy table richly spread, Thy poor therein hath satisfi'd with bread. While firtil lands with hunger have been pined, Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expres∣sed; and also in the suddain taking away many mens estates by fire, and chiefly by a most terrible fire which happened in Charles-Town, in the depth of Winter, 1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to ano∣ther, to the consuming of the fairest houses in the Town: Ʋnder the pre∣ance of being unequally rated, many men murmure exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and excess in apparrel i frequent in these daies, when the Lord calls his people to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that which is far worse, spiritual pride, to shew our selves to be somebody, often step ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines. Thy harvest hath with heaps on heaps come in; Oh mourn, that thou no more thy God should'st mind, His gentle rod to teach thee doth begin; Then wonder not that swarms of Locust fly, And that earths fruits for want of moysture die. A countless crew of Caterpillers craul, To rob the earth of her green mantle quite; Wolves only wont on lesser beasts to fall, Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expres∣sed; and also in the suddain taking away many mens estates by fire, and chiefly by a most terrible fire which happened in Charles-Town, in the depth of Winter, 1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to ano∣ther, to the consuming of the fairest houses in the Town: Ʋnder the pre∣ance of being unequally rated, many men murmure exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and excess in apparrel i frequent in these daies, when the Lord calls his people to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that which is far worse, spiritual pride, to shew our selves to be somebody, often step ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines. On great ones prey by day, and eke by night: Thy houses are consum'd with much good store, By fearful fires, which blustering winds blow o're. Lord stay thy hand, and stop my earthly mind, Thy Word, not world, shall be our sole delight, Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expres∣sed; and also in the suddain taking away many mens estates by fire, and chiefly by a most terrible fire which happened in Charles-Town, in the depth of Winter, 1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to ano∣ther, to the consuming of the fairest houses in the Town: Ʋnder the pre∣ance of being unequally rated, many men murmure exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and excess in apparrel i frequent in these daies, when the Lord calls his people to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that which is far worse, spiritual pride, to shew our selves to be somebody, often step ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines. Not Medow ground, but Christs rich pearl wee'l find, Thy Saints imbrace, and not large lands down plight. Murmure no more will we at yearly pay, To help uphold our Government each way; Not strive who least, but who the most shall give, Rejoyce will we, our hearts inlarged are, Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expres∣sed; and also in the suddain taking away many mens estates by fire, and chiefly by a most terrible fire which happened in Charles-Town, in the depth of Winter, 1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to ano∣ther, to the consuming of the fairest houses in the Town: Ʋnder the pre∣ance of being unequally rated, many men murmure exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and excess in apparrel i frequent in these daies, when the Lord calls his people to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that which is far worse, spiritual pride, to shew our selves to be somebody, often step ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines. Those wait on th' Altar, shall on Altar live, Nor shall our riches their good doctrine mar; Or pride of parts in thought of clear discerning, No longer shall disgrace their godly learning. Our meaner sort that metamorphos'd are, With womens hair, in gold and garments gay,
Of the Lords hand against our Land affairs, as is heretofore expres∣sed; and also in the suddain taking away many mens estates by fire, and chiefly by a most terrible fire which happened in Charles-Town, in the depth of Winter, 1650. by a violent wind blown from one house to ano∣ther, to the consuming of the fairest houses in the Town: Ʋnder the pre∣ance of being unequally rated, many men murmure exceedingly, and withdraw their shoulders from the support of Government, to the great discouragement of those that govern, 1651. Pride and excess in apparrel i frequent in these daies, when the Lord calls his people to humiliation and humble acknowledgment of his great deliverances; and that which is far worse, spiritual pride, to shew our selves to be somebody, often step ut of our ranks, and delight in new fangled doctrines. Whose wages large our Commonwealths work mar, Their pride they shall with moderation lay: Cast off their cloaths, that men may know their rank, Axd women that with outward deckings prank, The worlds imbrace our longing lust for gain, An over-eager desire after the world hath so seized on the spi∣rits of many, that the chief end of our coming hither is forgotten; and notwithstanding all the powerful means used, we stand at a stay, as if the Lord had no farther work for his people to do, but every bird to feather his own nest. No longer shall us into corners draw, Nor our large herds us from Gods house detain From fellowship of Saints, who learn thy Law: Thy righteous Judgments Lord do make me tremble, Nor word, nor rod, but deep in this dissemble. Two Masters, Lord, we will professed serve; How can we Christ united be to thee, An over-eager desire after the world hath so seized on the spi∣rits of many, that the chief end of our coming hither is forgotten; and notwithstanding all the powerful means used, we stand at a stay, as if the Lord had no farther work for his people to do, but every bird to feather his own nest. When from thy Law learn'd we so greatly swarve, With watry tears unclued we will be. From creature-comforts, Christ thou art our stay, Work will and deed in us we humbly pray. Oh thou, my soul, and every part in me Lament, the Lord his worthies from the earth Takes to himself, and makes our earth to be E A mourning place left destituke of mirth;
Are these the daies wherein that Beast shall fall, Lord leave us means, though thou be all in all. What courage was in Winthrope, it was thine; Shopheards sweet Sermons from thy blessing came, The Lords taking away by death many of his most eminent servants from us, shewes, that either the Lord will raise up another people to him∣self to do his work, or raise us up by his Rod to a more eager pursuit of his work, even the planting of his Churches the world throughout. The Lord converts and calls forth of their graves men to fight his battels a∣gainst the enemies of his truth. Our heavenly Hooker thy grace did refine, And godly Burr receiv'd from thee his frame: Philips didst thou indue with Scripture light, And Huet had his arguings strong and right. Grave Higginson his heavenly truths from thee, The Lords taking away by death many of his most eminent servants from us, shewes, that either the Lord will raise up another people to him∣self to do his work, or raise us up by his Rod to a more eager pursuit of his work, even the planting of his Churches the world throughout. The Lord converts and calls forth of their graves men to fight his battels a∣gainst the enemies of his truth. Maveruck was made an able help to thine; What Harver had thou gavest, for's people free; Follow Green full of grace, to work thou didst assign: Godly Glover his rich gifts thou gavest, Thus thou by means thy flocks from spoiling savest. But Lord, why dost by death withdraw thy hand From us, these men and means are sever'd quite; Stretch forth thy might, Lord Christ do thou command, Their doubled spirit on those left to light: Forth of their graves call ten times ten again, That thy dear flocks no damage may sustain. Can I forget these means that thou hast used, To quicken up my drowsie drooping soul; Lord I forget, and have the same abused, Which makes me now with grief their deaths condole, And kiss thy rod, laid on with bowels tender, By death of mine, makes me their death remember. Lord, stay thy hand, thy Jacobs number's small, Powre out thy wrath on Antichrists proud Thrones; Here thy poor flocks that on thee daily call, Bottle their tears, and pity their sad groans. Where shall we go Lord Christ? we turn to thee, Heal our back slidings, forward press shall we.
Not we, but all thy Saints the world throughout Shall on thee wait, thy wonders to behold; Thou King of Saints, the Lord in battel stont Increase thy armies many thousand fold. Oh Nations all, his anger seek to stay, That doth create him armies every day.
CHAP. X. Of the endeavours of this people of Christ, to inlarge his King∣dom the world throughout, and first of their preaching Christ to the Indians, among whom they live. THese brood of Travellers having thus through the good hand of their God upon them, thus setled these Churches, according to the institution of Christ, and not by the will of man; they now endeavour to be assisting to others: The reverend Mr. Hugh Peters, and his fellow-helper in Christ Mr. Wells steered their course for England, so soon as they heard of the chaining up of those biting beasts, who went under the name of spiritual Lords; what assistance the Gospel of Christ found there by their preach∣ing, is since clearly manifested; for the Lord Christ ha∣ving removed that usurping power of Lordly Prelates, hath now inlarged his Kingdom there, and that not one∣ly by the means of these men, but by divers others, both godly and eminent servants of his, who never saw New-England; and by divers other godly Ministers of Christ, who have since gone from hence, both young Students and others, to the number of twenty, or thereabout, in the whole; besides some who were eminent in the civil Go∣vernment here, both gracious and godly servants of Christ, and some who have been Magistrates here, to the number of five or six, the Lord Christ grant they may all endeavour the advancement of his truths, both in Churches and ci∣vil Government: But before the Author cease to speak of England, he is bold to say, that the Lord Christ will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he hath caused such a Go∣vernment to be set up, as shall become nursing fathers to his new-planted Churches. The Indian people in these parts at the English first com∣ing, were very barbarous and uncivilized, going for the most part naked, although the country be extreme cold
cold in the winter-season: they are onely clothed with a Deers skin, and a little bit of cloth to cover their privy part. The Wo∣men for the most part are very modest, although they go as naked as the Men: they are generally very laborious at their planting time, and the Men extraordinary idle, making their squawes to carry their Children and the luggage beside; so that many times they travell eight or ten mile with a burden on their backs, more fit∣ter for a horse to carry then a woman. The men follow no kind of labour but hunting, fishing and fowling, in all which they make use of their Bowe and Arrowes to shoot the wilde creatures of the Trees, as Squirrells, gray and black Rockoones: as for Deer, they ordinarily catch them in traps, with a pole bent down, and a Cord at the end, which flyes up and stayes their hasty course. Bever, Otter, and Moose they catch with Traps also: they are very good marks-men, with their Bowe and Arrows. Their Boyes will ordinarily shoot fish with their Arrowes as they swim in the shallow Rivers, they draw the Arrow halfe way putting the point of it into the water, they let flye and strike the fish through; the like they do to Birds lesser and great: onely the Geese and Turkies being strong of wing, somtimes flee away with their Arrowes sticking in them; this is all the trade they use, which makes them destitute of many recessaries, both in meat, drink, ap∣parell and houses. As for any religious observation, they were the most destitute of any people yet heard of, the Divel having them in very great subjection, not using craft to delude them, as he ordinarily doth in most parts of the World: but kept them in a continuall slavish fear of him: onely the Powawes, who are more conversant with him, then any other, sometimes recover their sicke folk with charmes, which they use, by the help of the Divell; and this makes them to adore such; one of them was seen as is reported to cure a Squaw that was dangerously sick, by taking a snakes skin and winding it about her arm the which soon became a living snake crawling round about her armes and body; another caused the sick patient for healing, to pass bare footed through many burning coals; those that cannot cure them, they call Squantams powwons: but if the patient live, he is had in great admiration, and then they cry, Much winnit Abbamocho, that is, very good
Divell: for Squantam is a bad Divel, and Abbamocho is their good Divell. It hath been a thing very frequent, before the English came, for the Divell to appear unto them in a bodily shape, some∣times very ugly and terrible, and sometimes like a white boy, and chiefly in the most hideous woods and swamps: they report that sometimes he hath come into their wigwams, and carryed away divers of them alive: and since we came hither, they tell us of a very terrible beast for shape and bigness, that came into a wigwam toward the North-east parts, remote from any English plantations, and took away six men at a time, who were never seen afterward. The English at their first coming did assay and endeavour to bring them to the knowledge of God: and in par∣ticular the reverend, grave, and godly Mr. John Wilson, who visited their sick, and instructed others as they were capable to under∣stand him. But yet very little was done that way, till in process of time they by continuall coming to the English, became bet∣ter able to understand them; and now of late yeers the reverend Mr. Eliot hath been more then ordinary laborious to study their language, instructing them in their own Wigwams, and Ca∣techising their Children. As also the reverend Mr. Mayhewe, one who was tutored up in N. Eng. and called to office by the Church of Christ, gathered at a small Island called Martins Vineyard: this man hath taken good pains with them: but the particulars of our godly Ministers labours, together with the good hand of our God upon their indeavours, being already published, no further need be spoken. Aso Mr. Wil∣liam Leveriry Pastor of Sandwich Church, is very serious therein, and with good success.
CHAP. XI. Of the gratious goodness of the Lord Christ, in planting his Gospel in the purety of it, in Virginia: and of the first Church gathered there according to the rule of the Gospel. ABout the yeer the Lord was pleased to put it into the heare of some godly people in Virginia, to send to N. E. for some of the Ministers of Christ, to be helpfull unto them in instructing them in the truth, as it is in Jesus. The godly Mr. Phi∣lip Bennit coming hither, made our reverend Elders acquainted with their desires, who were very studious to take all opportu∣nities for inlarging the kingdome of Christ: and upon serious con∣sideration, the reverend Mr. Knowls of Watertowne, and Mr. Tompson of Braintree were sent unto them, who ariving there in safety, preached openly unto the people for some good space of time, and also from house to house exhorted the people dayly, that with full purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord; the harvest they had was plentifull for the little space of time they were there, till being opposed by the Governour and some other malignant spirits, they were forced to returne to N. E. again. It were much to be desired, that all people would take notice of the hand of God against this people, after the rejection of these Ministers of Christ: and indeed it was none other but the thrusting Christ from them; and now attend to the following story, all you Cavaliers and malignant party the world through∣out, take notice of the wonderworking providence of Christ toward his Churches, and punishing hand of his toward the contemners of his Gospel. Behold ye dispisers, and wonder. Oh poor Virginia▪ dost thou send away the Ministers of Christ with threatning speeches? No sooner is this done, but the barba∣rous, inhumane, insolent, and bloody Indians are let loose upon them, who contrive the cutting them off by whole Families, closely carying their wicked counsells till they had effected their desires, their bloody designe taking place for the space of 200 miles
up the River: the manner of the English Plantations there being very scattering quite contrary to N. E. people, who for the most part desire society. The manner of the Indians proceeding was thus, they divided themselves into severall companies, and beset the English houses a little before break of day, waiting for the first person that should open the doore and come forth, whom they cruelly murdered, beating out their brains, and then forth∣with entred the house and slew all they found within, sometimes fi∣ring the houses, and leaving the living children miserably to be con∣sumed with their dead Parents in the fearfull flames; some peo∣ple fleeing from this barbarous massacre, as they passed by a fired house heard a pitifull out-cry of a poor Child, crying, I burn, I burn: although they could willingly have made haste a∣way, yet the miserable out-cry of this poor babe, caused them to haft to the house, and rescue it forth the flames, that was even al∣most ready to scorch it: this cruell and bloody work of theirs put period to the lives of five or six hundred of these people, who had not long before a plentifull proffer of the mercies of Christ in the glad tidings of peace published by the mouth of his Ministers, who came unto them for that end: but chusing rather the fellowship of their drunken companions, and a Preist of their own profession, who could hardly continue so long sober as till he could read them the reliques of mans invention in a com∣mon prayer book; but assuredly had not the Lord pittied the little number of his people among this crooked generation, they had been consumed at once for this is further remarkable in this massa∣cre, when it came toward the place where Christ had placed his little flock, it was discovered & prevented from further proceeding, and the Lord by this means did so allay their spirits of ma∣lignity toward his people, they gathered in a Church in presence of the very governour himself, and called to office one Mr. Har∣rison, who could not long continue among them, by reason of their fresh renewed malignity, who had formerly an evill eye to∣ward them, and could no better refraine from oppressing them, then Pharoah after he had rest from the plagues under which he was. After the departure of Mr. Harrison, one Mr. Duren became an help unto them; but he and his people also were forced to remove many hundred miles up into the country, where they
now remain; but assuredly the Lord hath more scourges in store, for such as force the people to such sufferings: and therefore let this Church of Christ continue in the way of his truth according to the rules of his Gospel, and without doubt the Lord will preserve and continue them, let the adversaries of his Truth be never so potent. As also about this time, the Lord was pleased to gather a people together in the Isle of Bermoodas, whose hearts being guided by the rule of the word, they gathered into a Church of Christ according to the rules of the Gospel, being Mr. Natha∣neel White, Mr. Patrick, Copeland, Mr. William Gol∣ding. provided with able persons, indued with gifts from the Lord to administer unto them the holy things of God; and after they be∣gan to be opposed, their reverend elder Mr. Goulding came in∣to these parts, and from hence he went to England: but this lit∣tle flock of Christ not long after being banished from thence, went to one of the Southern Islands, where they endured much hardship; and which the Churches of Christ in these parts understanding, about six or eight of them contributing toward their want, ga∣thered about 800 l. to supply their necessity: the which they shipped in a small vessell hired for that end and sent by the hands of two brethren both corne and other necessaries: they arriving in safety by the blessing of God upon their labours, were well welcomed by their brethren, who abundantly blessed the Lord for them, and with godly and gratious expression returned a thankfull acknowledgement of the present good hand of the Lord Christ, in providing for them: so that as this book began with the wonderworking providence of Sions Saviour, in pro∣viding so wonderfull gratiously for his Churches the World throughout; so it here endeth with the same; and it were to be desired, that the Churches of Christ in Europe would gather up the wonderfull providences of the Lord toward them also, and more especially those in our native Country: for assuredly it would make much for the magnifying of his glorious works in this day of his power: and although the malignant and antichristi∣an party may say, they can shew the like wonders (as Jannes and Jambres that with-stood Moses) yet were the worke of Christ for his poor Churches, within these few yeers, gathered together by some able instrument whom the Lord might be pleased to stir up for that end, and laid open the view of all, they would be
forced to confess, this is the very finger of God, and no doubt but they would be a great strengthening to the faith of those, who are appointed of the Lord for the overthrow of Antichrist (the Lord helping) for assuredly the time of his having mercy upon Sion is come. CHAP. XII. Of the time of the fall of Antichrist, and the increase of the Gentile Churches, even to the prevoking of the twelve Tribes to submit to the kingdom of Christ. IT hath been the longing expectation of many, to see that nota∣ble and wonderfull worke of the Lord Christ, in casting down that man of sin who hath held the whole world (of those that profess any Christ) under his Lordly power, while the true professors of Christ have hardly had any appearance to the eye of the world; first, take notice the Lord hath an assured se time for the accomplishment of this work, which is set down in his word, although more darkly to be under stood; wherefore the reverend Ministers of Christ, for these many yeers have studied Rev. 17.14. and laboured for the finding it out, and that holy man of God Mr. John Cotton, among many other, hath diligently searched for the Lords mind herein, and hath declared some sudden blow to be given to this blood-thirsty monster: but the Lord Christ hath unseparably joyned the time, meanes, and manner of this work together, and therefore all men that expect the day, must attend the means: for such hath been and is the absurdity of many, that they make semblance of a very zealous affection to see the glorious work of our Lord Christ herein, and yet themselves uphold, or at least side with those that uphold some part of Anti∣christs kingdome: and therefore the lordly Prelacy may pray for his fall till their lungs are spent, and their throats grow dry. But while they have a seeming shew (and hardly that) to oppose his doctrines, they themselves in the mean time, make use of his power to advance themselves to honour: a also in these dayes there are divers desperate, blasphemous, and erronious per∣sons,
whose consciences and their own self-will are unseparable companions; these are very hot in their own apprehensions to prosecute the work; but in the mean time, they not only batter down the truths of Christ, and his own Ordinances and Instituti∣ons, but also set up that part of Antichrists kingdom, which hath formerly had a great blow already, even his deceiveable and damnable doctrines: for as one badg of the beast is to be sull of blasphemies, so are they, and these take unto themselves seven spirits worse then the former, making the latter and worse then the beginning, as this story may testifie: and some stories in our native country much more. But to come to the time of Anti∣christs fall, and all that expect it may depend upon the certainty of it: yea it may be boldly said that the time is come, and all may see the dawning of the day: you that long so much for it, come forth and fight: who can expect a victory without a battel? the lordly Prelates that boasted so much of these great atcheive∣ments in this work, are fled into holes and corners: Familists, Seekers, Antinomians and Anabaptists, they are so ill armed, that they think it best sleeping in a whole skin, fearing that if the day of battell once go on, they shall fall among Antichrists Ar∣mies: and therefore cry out like cowards, If you will let me alone, and I will let you alone: but assuredly the Lord Christ hath said, He that is not with us, is against us: there is no room in his Army for toleratorists. But some will say▪ We will never believe the day i come till our eyes behold Babylon be∣girt with Souldiers. I pray be not too hasty; hath not the Lord said, Come out of her my people? &c. surely there is a little space left for this, and now is the time, seeing the Lord hath set up his standerd of resort: now, Come forth of her, and he not partakers of her sins: now is the time, when the Lord hath assembled his Saints together; now the Lord will come and not tar∣ry. As it was necessary that there should be a Moses and Aaron, before the Lord would deliver his people and destroy Pharaoh lest they should be wildred indeed in the Wilderness; so now it was needfull, that the Churches of Christ should first obtain their purity, and the civill government its power to defend them, before Antichrist come to his finall ruine: and because you shall be sure the day is come indeed, behold the Lord Christ mar∣shalling
of his invincible Army to the battell: some suppose this onely to be mysticall, and not literall at all: assuredly the spiri∣tuall fight is chiefly to be attended, and the other not neglected, having a neer dependancy one upon the other, especially at this time; the Ministers of Christ who have cast off all lording power over one another, are created field-Officers, whose Office is Yea every Officer hath his own proper Re∣giment. ex∣travagant in this Army, chiefly to encourage the fighting Souldi∣ers, and to lead them on upon the enemy in the most advanta∣gious places, and bring on fresh supplies in all places of danger, to put the sword of the spirit in their Souldiers hands: but Christ (who is their general) must onely enable them to use it aright: to give every Souldier in charge that they watch over one another, to see that none meddle with the execrable things of Antichrist, and this to be performed in every Regiment throughout the Army: and not one to exercise dominion over the other by way of superiority: for Christ hath appointed a parity in all his Regiments, &c. let them beware that none go apart with rebellious Korah. And further, behold, Kings, Rulers, or Generals of Earths Armies, doth Christ make use of in this day of battell, the which he hath brought into the field already also; who are appointed to defend, uphold, and maintain the whole body of his Armies against the insolent, beastly, and bloody cruelty of their insatiable enemies, and to keep order that none do his fellow-Souldier any wrong, nor that any should raise a mutiny in the hosts. Notwithstanding all this, if any shall say, they will not believe the day is come till they see them ingage battell with Antichrist; Verily, if the Lord be pleased to open your eyes, you may see the beginning of the fight, and what success the Armies of our Lord Christ have hitherto had: the Forlorne hopes of Antichrists Army, were the proud Prelates of England: the Forlorne of Christs Armies, were these N. E. people who are the subject of this History, which encountring each other for some space of time, ours being overpowered with multitude, were forced to retreat to a place of greater safety, where they waited for a fresh opportunity to ingage with the main battell of Antichrist, so soon as the Lord shall be pleased to give a word of Command. Immediately upon this success, the Lord Christ was pleased to command the right Wing of his Army, to advance against the left Wing of Anti∣christ:
where in his former forlorn hopes of proud Prelates lay: these by our right Wing had their first pay (for that they had done to our forlorne before) being quite overthrown and cut in peices by the valiant of the Lord in our right Wing, who still remain fighting. Thus far of the battell of Antichrist, and the various success; what the issue will be, is assuredly known in the generall already. Babylon is fallen, the God of truth hath said it; then who would not be a Souldier on Christs side, where is such a certainty of victory? nay I can tell you a farther word of encou∣ragement, every true-hearted Souldier that falls by the sword in this fight, shall not lye dead long, but stand upon his feet again, and be made partaker of the triumph of this Victory: and none can be overcome, but by turning his back in fight. And for a word of terrour to the enemy, let them know, Christ will never give over the raising of fresh Forces, till they are overthrown root and branch. And now you antient people of Israel look out of your Prison grates, let these Armies of the Lord Christ Jesus provoke you to acknowledge he is certainly come, I and speedily he doth come to put life into your dry bones: here is a people not onely praying but fighting for you, that the great block may be removed out of the way, (which hath hindered hitherto) that they with you may enjoy that glorious resurrection-day, the glori∣ous nuptials of the Lamb: when not only the Bridegroom shall ap∣pear to his Churches both of Jews and Gentiles, (which are his spouse) in a more brighter aray then ever heretofore, but also his Bride shall be clothed by him in the richest garments that ever the Sons of men put on, even the glorious graces of Christ Jesus, in such a glorious splendor to the eyes of man, that they shall see and glo∣rifie the Father of both Bridegroom and Bride. OH King of Saints, how great's thy work say we, Done and to do, poor Captives to redeem! Mountaines of mercy makes this work to be Glorious, that grace by which thy works are seen. Oh Jesu, thou a Saviour unto thine, Not works but grace makes us this mercy find. Of sinners cheife, no better men they be, Thou by thy work hast made thy work to do: Thy Captaines strength weak dust appears in thee, While thou art brought such wondrous works unto.
Then Christ doth all, I all is done for his Redeemed ones his onely work it is. Doth Christ build Churches? who can them deface? He purchast them none can his right deny: Not all the world, ten thousand worlds, his grace Caus'd him once them at greater price to buy. Nor marvell then if Kings and Kingdomes he Destroy'd, when they do cause his folke to flee. Christ is come down possession for to take Of his deer purchase; who can hinder him? Not all the Armies earthly men can make: Millions of spirits, although Divels grim: Can Pope or Turke with all their mortall power, Stay Christ from his inheritance one hour? All Nations band your selves together now, You shall fall down as dust from bellows blown: How easie can our King your power bow? Though higher you in mens accompt were grown. As drop in bucket shall those waters be, Whereon that Whore doth sit in high degree. Christs wrath is kindled, who can stand before His anger, that so long hath been provoked? In moment perish shall all him before, Who touch'd Mount Sinai, and it soundly smoaked. New-England Churches you are Christs you say, So sure are all that walk in Christs way. No such need fear fury of men or Divels, Why Christ among you takes his dayly walk: He made you gold, you keeps from rusting evils, And hid you here from strife of tongues proud talke. Amongst his he for their defence doth bide, They need no more that have Christ on their side. Man be not proud of this thy exaltation: For thou wast dung and dogs filth, when Christ wrought In thee his work, and set thee in this station To stand, from him thy strength is dayly brought, Yet in him thou shalt go triumphant on: Not thou but Christ triumphs his foes upon. You people whom he by the hand did lead Seas with watry wall:
Apply your selves his Scriptures for to read: In reading do for eyes enlightned call, And you shall see Christ once being come is now Again at hand your stubborn hearts to bow. Though scattered you, Earths Kingdoms are throughout, In bondage brought, cheife by those make some shew Of Jewish rights, they Christ with you cast out: Christ well their Cords for you in sunder hew. Through unbeliefe you were to bondage brought: Believe that Christ for you great work hath wrought. He will your heart not member circumcise: Oh search and see, this is your Jesus sure, Refuse him not, would God you were so wise: None but this King can ought your hope procure. Once doting on an Earthly Kingdom you Mist of your Christ; be sure be wiser now. The day's at hand he will you wiser make To know Earths Kingdoms are too scant and base For such a price, as Christ paid for your sake: Kings you shall be, but in a higher place; Yet for your freedom Nations great shall fall, That without fear of foes, him serve you shall. You are the men that Christ will cause subdue Those Turkish Troops, that joyned Jews have been: His Gentile Churches cast down Babels crue: Then you that brood of Mahumetts shall win, Destroy his seed 'mongst Persians, Turkes and Moores, And for poor Christians ope the Prison doors. Your Nation prov'd too scant for his possession, Whose pretious blood was made a price for sin: And Nations all who were in like transgression; Some of the whole Christ to his Crown will win, And now makes way for this his work indeed, That through the world his Kingdom may proceed. Now Nations all I pray you look about, Christ comes you neer, his power I pray embrace: In's word him seek; he's found without all doubt: He doth beseech with teares, Oh seek his face: Yet time there is, the Battel's but begun; Christ call thy folke that they to thee may run.
Place them in thy strong Armies newly gather'd, Thy Churches Lord increase and fill withall: Those blessed ones are given thee by thy Father, The wickeds Rod off from their backs recall. Breake off their yokes, that they with freedom may Tell of thy workes, and praise thee every day. Lord Christ go on with thy great wonders working Down headlong cast all Antichristian power: Ʋnmaske those men that lye in corners lurking, Whose damned doctrines dayly sates advance. For why, thy Folke for this are dayly longing, That Nations may come in thy Churches thronging. What greater joy can come thy Saints among, Then to behold their Christ exalted high? Thy Spirits joy with ravishment stirs strong Thy Folke, while they thy Kingdomes glory eye. Angels rejoyce because their waiting is In Saints assembly, where thy name they bliss. Thy workes are not in Israels Land confined, From East to West thy wondrous works are known: To Nations all thou hast thy grace assigned, Thy spirits breathings through the World are blown. All Languages and tongues do tell thy praise, Dead hear thy voyce, them thou dost living raise. Oh blessed dayes of Son of Man now seen, You that have long'd so sore them to behold, March forth in's might, and stoutly stand between The mighties sword, and Christs dear flocke infold. Ʋndanted close and clash with them; for why? 'Gainst Christ they are, and he with thee stands by. No Captive thou, nor Death can on thee seize, Fight, stand, and live in Christ thou dayly dost He long ago did lead as Captives these, And ever lives to save thee where thou goest His Father still, and Spirit shall with thee Abide, and crowne thy Head with lasting glee. For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant know them, 2 Sam. 7. 21. FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books fol∣lowing are Printed for Nathaniel Brooke, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornehill. 1. TImes Treasury, or Academy for Gentry; excellent grounds both Divine and humane for their accomplish∣ment in arguments of discourse, habit, fashion; with a Ladies love-Lecture, and Truths triumph, summing up all in a cha∣racter of Honour, by Ri. Braithwait Esq 2. Morton of the Sacrament, in folio. 3. Physiogmony, and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the Sym∣metricall proportions, and signall Moles of the body, the subject of Dreames, to which is added the Art of Memory, by Ri. Sanders Student: folio. 4. Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum, containing severall poeti∣call peeces of our famous English Philosophers, which have writ∣ten the Hermetique misteries in their antient Language, by Elias Ashmole Esq 5. Chiromancy, or the Art of Divining by the lines engraven in the hand of man by dame Nature, Theologically practically, in 19. Genitures; with a learned discourse of the soul of the World, and universall spirit thereof, by Geo. Wharton Esq 6. Catholick History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councels and antient Fathers, Moderne writers, both ecclesiasticall and civill, in answer to Dr. Vane's Lost Sheep returned home, by Ed. Chiseuhall Esq 7. Planometria, or the whole Art of Survey of Land shew∣ing the use of all Instruments, but especially the plain Table; whereunto is added an Appendix to measure regular Solids, as Timber, Stone; usefull for all that intend either to sell or purchase. 8. An Arithmetick in number and species, in two Books: 1. Teaching by precept and example the operation in Numbers,
whole and broken by Decimals, and use of the Logarithms, Napyers bones. 2. The great Rule of Algebra in Species, re∣solving all Arithmeticall questions by supposition, with a Canon, of the powers of numbers, fitted to the meanest capacity, by Jonas Moore late of Durham. 8. 9. Tactometrica, or the Geometry of Regulars after a new, exact, and expeditious manner in Solids, with sundry usefull ex∣periments: Practicall Geometry of Regular-like Solids, and of a Cylinder body, for liquid vessell measure, with sundry new experiments never before extant, for gauging; a work very use∣full for all that are imployed in the Art Metrical, by John Wiberd, Doctor in Physick. 10. An Astrologicall discourse, with Mathematicall Demon∣strations, proving the powerfull and harmonicall influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies, in justification of the Validity of Astroligy, by Sir Christopher Heydon, Knight. 11. Magick and Astrology vindicated, in which is contained the true definitions of the said Arts, and the justification of their practise, proved by the authority of Scripture, and the experience of antient and modern Authors, by H. Warren. 12. An Astrologicall judgement of Diseases from the Decum∣biture of the ficke: also the way of finding out the cause, change and end of a disease: also whether the sick be likely to live or die, by N. Culpeper. 13. Catastrophe Magnatum, or the downfall of Monarchy, by N. Culpeper. 14. Ephemerides for the year 1652. being a year of wonders, by N. Culpeper. 15. Lux veritatis, or Christian Judiciall Astrology vindicated, and Daemonology confuted; in answer to Nath. Holmes, Dr. D. by W. Ramsey, Gent. 16. The History of the Golden Ass. 17. The Painting of the Antients, the beginning, progress, and consummating of that noble Art; and how those antient Artificers attained to their still so much admired excellency. sraels redemption, or the propheticall History of our Saviours Kingdome on earth, by Robert Matton, of Exon Colledgo in Olcon. 8.
18. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a de∣termination of the Originall of the Soul, at a Dispute held in the School at Cambridg at the Commencement March 3. 1646. by Charles Hotham, Fellow of Peter-house. 12. 19. Teratologia or a discovery of Gods wonders, manifested in the former and moderne times by bloody rain and waters, by I.S. 20. Foos Lachry marum, or a fountain of Tears, from whence doth flow Englands complaint, Jeremiahs Lamentations, with an Elegy upon that Son of Valour Sir Charles Lucas, by John Quarles. 8. 21. Oedipus, or a resolver, being a Clew that leads to the chiefe Secrets, and true resolution of amorous, naturall, morall and politicall Problems by G. M. 22. The celestiall Lamp, enlightning every distressed soul from the depth of everlasting Darkness to the height of eternall Light, by Tho. Fettisplace. 23. Nocturnall Lucubrations, or Meditations divine and mo∣rall, with Epigrams and Epitaphs, by Robert Chamberlain. 24. The unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy, by Tho. Nabs. 25. The Rebellion, a Comedy, by T. R. 26. The Tragedy of Messalina by Nat. Richards. 8. 27. The remedy of Discontentment, or a Treatise of conten∣tation in whatsoever condition, fit for these sad and troublesome times, by Joseph Hall late B. of Exon and Norwich. 12. 18. The Grand Sacriledge of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lords Table, by the late reverend, Daniel Featly D. D. 4. 29. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error Enmity Atheism and Prophaness, or a most hopefull way to Grace and Salvation, by R. Young. 8. 30. A bridle for the Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the Wavering to stay the Wandring to strengthen the Fainting, by John Brinsley Minister of Gods Word at Yarmouth. 31. Comforts against the fear of Death, wherein are severall evidences of the work of Grace by John Collins of Norwich. 32. Jacobs seed, or the excellency of seeking God by pray∣er,
by Jeremiah Burroughs, Minister of the Gospel to the two greatest Congregations about London, Stepney and Cripplegate. 33. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon, by Tho Threscot. 34. Britannia Rediviva, or a Soverain Remedy to cure a sick Common-wealth, preached in the Minster at Yorke before the Judges, August 9. 1649. by J. Shaw Minister of Hull. 35. The Princess Royall, preached in the Minster in Yorke be∣fore the Judges, March 24. 1650. by John Shaw Minister of Hull. 36. Anatomy of Mortality, divided into eight Heads. 1. The Certainty of Death. 2. Meditations of Death. 3. Preparations for Death. 4. The right behaviour in Death. 5. The Comfort in our own Death. 6. The comfort against the Death of Friends. 7. The Cases wherein it's lawfull or unlawfull to desire Death. 8. The glorious Estate of Gods Children after Death, by George Stronde. 37. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrolo∣gers, August 1651. 38. Mirrour of Complements fitted for Ladies, Gentlewo∣men, Scholars and Strangers, with formes of speaking, and writing of Letters most in fashion, with witty Poems: and a Table ex∣pounding hard English words. 39. Cabinet of Jewels, discovering the nature, vertue value of pretious Stones: with infallible Rules to escape the deceit of all such as are adulterate or counterfeit by Tho. Nicholls. 40. Quakers Cause at second hearing being a full answer to their Tenets. 41. Divinity no Enemy to Astrology, a sermon intended for the Society of Astrologers for the year 1653. by Dr. Tho. Swad∣lin. 42. Historicall Relation of the first planting of the English in New England in the year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the materiall passages happening there. Exactly performed.
