G1520 E141_13 99873169 156560
GODS DELIVERANCE OF MAN by PRAYER. AND Mans Thankefulnesse to GOD in PRAYSES. In a Sermon, by reason of the Lecturers absence in the Church of Saint Bartholmewes EXCHANGE, on Ash-Wendesday, at the Generall Fast, proposed. But at that time, by a Company of CHURCH Intruders very rudely opposed. And now at this time, for the publike satisfaction of All men faithfully in Print exposed. By I. G. D. D. Rector there. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Paybody, dwelling in Queenes Head COURT in Pater-Noster ROVV. 1642.
TO My Parishioners of St. Bartholmews Exchange London, Respective, or Disre∣spective, all manner Salutation. ON our Fast Day (doubly, a Fast Day, by Ancient use, by Recent Authority) The Curate, by the throng of people in the Church, not able to get in, I be∣gan Prayers. The Exhortation, and Confession were endured; But, the Absolution entred on, A Psalme was confusedly began. I read, They sang (rather howled.) Such was the rudenesse of the swervers from their owne Congregation; and Di∣sturbers of all Congregations, whether they in∣trude. Intreated I was, to be take me to the Pulpit; I yeelded, The Lecturer being not come, as I concei∣ved. In the Pulpit I was outfaced; in every cor∣ner of the Church, disgracefully nicknamed; out∣prated, rudely and savagely. Having got through my Prayer, I propounded my Text: Such were the
Yellings, they would not endure the reading of it; for all my deep charge, and citing of the disturbers to the Lords Tribunall. Well, downe I came, and Master Ash (The Lecturer, then come) went up, rebuked the disorder, orderly Preached, and sound∣lie; In the after-noone I finished my worke; And here You have it to review; Which, my Prayer is may be to your Aedification in the serious way of Right Christianity, The loving Pastour of you All, Iohn Grant D. D.
PSALM. 50. 15 Call upon mee in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. IN the forenoone few Auditors of those many had the patience so much as to heare my Text named, I hope to finde you in a better temper this afternoone, however here I am againe to doe my duty, and from the Lord of Hoasts is my message; It is the charge of that supreme Generall to all; Call upon me in the day of trouble, I wil deliver thee &c. A heavy loade of trouble is on our shoulders; yea, on our soules, a loade for us unsupportable; we have long burdened our God which our sinnes, and his judgements have we felt many wayes to our smart, I would I could once say, to our amendment. Wee are now under a generall humiliation, a fast by pub∣lique authority enjoyned the whole Kingdome, and the first day falls on Ash. Wednesday, a solemne day of fasting in the Church of Antiquity, in the
purer times of the Gospell; when Ionah the Prophet and Messenger of the Highest to Niniveh, the great, the Head City of Nations began to enter therein (as his Commission served him) he cryed, and said; yet forty dayes, and Niniveh shall be overthrowne, Ionah 3. 4. what followed? so the people of Niniveh beleeved God and proclaimed a Fast, and put on Sackcloth from the greatest to the least of them: For the word came to the King of Niniveh, and he arose from his throwne, and hee laid his robe from him, and he covered him with sackcloth and sate in ashes, and he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Niniveh, saying; Let neither man, nor beast, heard, nor flock, tast any thing, let them not feed, nor drinke water, but let man, and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; Yea let them turne every one from his evill way, and from the violence that is in their hands; Who can tell if God will turne, and repent, and turne away from his fierce anger that we perish not? And God saw their workes, that they turned from their evill way, and God repented of the evill that he had said that he would doe unto them, and he did it not. Our danger is as neere (for ought we know) and as great (we may feare) as was that by Ionah threatned unto Niniveh; Nay Gods judgments have beene, and are upon us in much Variety; we are all a publique Fast, a Fast by the highest authority over us on earth solemnly proclaimed, and sadly enjoyned: O let it not be a mock▪fast in a bulrushed Popishness or Pharisaicall dis∣figured-nss; what ever our outward garments, deportments, abstinence be, betake we our selves to ardent prayers, and unfained resolutions to shake off all our exorbitances, and sacrilegious actions, and
intentions; god-robbers can be no right fasters, neither the robbers of the honour due to his great name, nor of his Church revenews, the maintenance of those set a part to the administration of duties holy, and of Gods owne appointment for the best wellfare of his people; Gods sword is drawne, and will not be sheathed till we be amended, Gods wrath is out, and will not be recalled in, till our sins be cast out, the troubles on us shall not be mitigated, but multiplied; not remitted, but increased; not away removed, but with armies of new ones aggravated till we be not humerous, but ingenuous, in our hu∣miliations. Soon, and easily may we be deceaved, and deceave each others, but God is not, cannot, will not be moc∣ked by any of us all; he is serious, be not wee ludi∣crous, regular be out approaches, and addresses un∣to him, and the blessing of our text will come home into our bosomes, God will make us a yet more happy nation then ever we have beene, and we shall be the trumpeters of Gods prayses all the world o∣ver. The Contents, and extents of our present text are these. A deep Invocation; A seasonable exaudition; A due returne of Thankfulnesse. Call upon me in the day of trouble; there is the first, the deepe Invocation. I will deliver thee; there is the next, a seasonable Exaudition. And thou shalt glorifie mee; there is the last, of thankefulnesse a due returne; a glorifying of the deliverour out of troubles in trophyes of prayses Call upon me in the day of trouble; a deep Invocation. Out of the depths have I cryed unto thee O Lord, is the
Psalmists expression, Psalme 130. He was plunged in the depths of sinnes, and in the depths of Cala∣mities for sinnes committed. None can sinne and es∣cape unpunished, bee they never so high in worldly estate, or in the favour of the highest; presumpti∣ons have precipitations, and heights of sinne, have their depths of punishment. Gods owne people are not priviledged from miseries, when against God they doe harden their hearts, provoke him, tempt him, grieve him with their transgressions; when they doe erre in their hearts, and will not know his wayes. Israel like troubles upon troubles involve even them, and till they humble themselves in re∣pentance unfainedly, no hope of entrance is there at all into his rest: When sinne, one depth, hath plun∣ged us into misery, another depth, and misery into sorrow, another depth; it is then high time to take hold on the encouragement in our Text, Call upon me in the day of trouble. Had not wee this gratious warrant, with small comfort should wee life up our drooping heads out of these depths; by solemne Covenant, we Christians are the selected people of God, drawne out of the Masse of corruption, to be the heyres of salvation. The scope of our faith, and the ayme of our Chri∣stian hope is to be joyned unto the God whom wee seeke to be undistractedly, and unseparably his for ever in the Lord Iesus; this life of ours is but mo∣mentany: the life beleeved, and expected is the life of eternity, this is but a breathing: after that now, in our attendance by faith, and hope on that blessed day of eternitie, which shall not have any nights in∣terposition.
God hath not left us to our selves, but communi∣cates himselfe to us, to uphold us in that attendance, by His Word addresseth He Himselfe to us, and by our Invocation, is he unto us open; Seeke ye my face, is His expression to us; thy face wee doe seeke, is our hearts, faiths returned answer, and practice; a blessed harmony in harmonious blessednesse, Psalm. 27. 8. In the prophesie of Hosea, we find this in an accurate way of expression set downe, Thou shalt call me Ishai, and not Baali, chap. 2. ver. 16. Ishai, not Baali, My Husband, not my Idolized Lord; God will have us intire, not divided, halfe his, halfe not his, halfe the Idoll of our hearts, what ever that Idol bee: mungrell Religion, is to the onely true God abominable. Now goe wee on with the Prophet, verse 18. and so forward; for I will take away the name of Baalim out of her mouth; And they shall no more bee remembred by their name: And in that day will I make a Covenant for them, with the Beasts of the field, and with the fowles of the heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground; And I will breake the bow, and the sword, and the battle of the earth, and will make them to lye downe safely, (and here comes in the Cordialnesse of the businesse) I will betroth thee unto mee for ever; yea I will betroth thee unto mee in righteousnesse, and in judgement, and in lo∣ving kindnesse, and in mercy. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulnesse, and thou shalt know the Lord. And it shall come to passe in that day, I will heare (saith the LORD) I will heare the Heavens, and they shall heare the earth, and the earth shall heare the corne, and the Wine, and they shall heare Iezreel, and I will sow her to mee in the earth, and I will have mercy upon
her that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people; Thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art my God. Gods promises and our prayers thence make sure worke indeed, none like it. Without the Word of God, and that sounding, and resounding in our eares with the ministeriall applica∣tion thereof to our hearts by the spirits operation wee should live and dye in the grossenesse of igno∣rance: and without Prayer also in humble, and fi∣duciall manner put up unto our God in the merits, and mediation of Iesus Christ, wee should be hope∣lesse, helplesse, destitute altogether of the consola∣tions from above, the heavenly consolations in the times of afflictions, disturbances, feares. That prayer is a most important part of our Religious service to God ward, appeares in this most clearely, that the sacred booke of God under those appellations of prayer, and Invocation comprehendeth even the whole service of God: Let that among the rest be deepely weighed, and pondred in our hearts, Who∣soever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved, Acts 2. 21. Gods whole worship is contained un∣der this one phrase, to call upon God, no duty of godlinesse is to him more acceptable, no sacrifice in better part taken, then is that: the calling on the name of the Lord is, the open profession of him without dantednesse, Gen. 4. 26. Where ever Abraham, the Father, and patterne of the faithfull, where ever he came, there erected he an Altar, and called upon the Name of the Lord, Gen. 12. 7, 8. The house of prayer is the name of Gods house, and God gave it that name by his Prophet Isaiah, and our blessed Iesus ratifies it; Preaching we have here, and Sacraments
we have here; but prayer gives it the denomination, as the major service of God, and both implying, and including all the rest, needs must we all if there bee any ingenuity of Christianity in us, needs must wee acknowledge prayer to bee a matter of the greatest consequence even upon this consideration deeply volved, and revolved in our hearts, that every soule to heaven-ward setled makes the recommendation of his spirit into the hands of God, his practice un∣cessant, as being in no hands late but his; that of Davids is by frequency made his. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, thou hast redeemed, me O Lord God of truth, Psal. 31. 5. Gods promises are the faith∣fulls encourgaments, and in them presenting them∣selves to God, acceptance is to them confidently assured. Prayer is that hand which we reach, and stretch forth unto our mercifull God, to receive from him all his , Saint Iames calls them, all his givings, and all his good gifts, his good givings, and his perfect gifts; In the hand of faith prayer is a key, Heaven it openeth unto us, and from Heaven enricheth us with the best of treasures, our wounds layes it open to the right curer of them, the binder up, and exquisite healer of them all, up carrieth it, and dispreads before our piteous God the sobbings and groanings of our disturbed hearts in an humble, and holy familiarity, that will have no denyall, no repulse: of that force it is with God, when put forth a right, that it makes the rods and scourges of Gods correcting hand even fall there out,  power∣fully his fatherly affections, and removeth his justly conceived indignations.
Prayer in parties, and in Families well ordered is the customary sacrifice, is the Morning, and Evening perfume of the devoutly Religious: Let my prayer, (writes David) bee set forth before thee as incense and the lifting up of mine hands as an Evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141. 2. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Saint Paul utters it thus, pray , without ceasing, without fainting, 1 Thes. 5. 17. What ever the troubles be. Our Saviour thus; Watch, and pray that yee enter not into tentation, Matth. 26. 41. As justly wee may, and sufficiently wee cannot, admire the goodnesse of our God daigning his word to addresse himselfe in speech to our capacities; So are we to esteeme like∣wise, that as an high, and honourable favour, that he will heare us in prayer, and prayses approaching unto him, giving way to our importunities; nay even commanding us expresly to be importunate; to such prayers, yea only to such are his eares opened, and his Fatherly affections chayned; And marke it, he wills us to call upon him importunately, but so rest∣eth not; hee prescribeth us formes of prayer in his sacred word, puts the matter into our hearts and the very words, and tearmes into our mouths. Hence it is, that the spirit by the Prophet is called the Spirit of grace, and of supplication: Zach. 12. 10. Hence that also of the holy Apostle, The Spirit helpeth our infir∣mities, for we know not what wee should pray for as wee ought, but the Spirit it selfe maketh intercession for us with groaning which cannot bee uttered; And hee that searcheth the heart knoweth what is the mind of the Spi∣rit, because he maketh intercession for the Saints accor∣ding to the will of God, Rom. 8▪ 26, 27. Alasse, faulty
and guilty are wee all of us, and durst not without warrant and enablement approach unto our God; the troubles on us would even overwhelm us, and as it were keepe us from so much as looking up, were we not thus amiably invited thereunto, Call upon me in the day of trouble. What troubles of te have these three kingdoms under one Soveraigne been cast into? Nay still are in, and under? Our sister Nation Ireland even wel∣treth in bloud, and burneth in mutuall enragements: none there secured of▪ his life, scarce for a moment: and are not we, or we ought to be surely even drow∣ned in teares for them? for them: Yea, and for our selves too, who are in mutuall enragements and va∣rious suddaine uproares through our misaffections, and misinterpretations, and misconstructions of e∣very thing; bloudy mindednesse takes place in the most, and the casting about how to entrap, and en∣wrap one another in miseries, is the common misery of us all; what calumniations are vented, printed, uncensured, unpunished? what jealousies each gainst others are every where closely fomented? Charity the badge of Christianity, and coverer of what may be covered is from us exiled, and who can bee most of all uncharitable, is the thing every where laboured after. By this shall all men know (saith the patterne, and Patron of Charity our Lord Iesus) even by this shall all men know that yee are my Disciples, if yee love one another, Iohn 13. 35. But with sorrow, and shame enough too may it now be said, All men by this may know; We are none of Christs Disci∣ples, that wee hate one another; So raging, so out∣ragious, so notorious is our mutuall hatred. Many
knotts tye us, none will hold us being one to another eye-soares, if not heart-soares: As strangers are our enter-viewers not as compatriots, our conferences, differences; our Moaning the practice of Se∣paratists, &c. protestations, detestations; Re∣formation is intended, deformation even in our Church assemblies, and most remarkably there, and unblushingly practised; O! into what Schismes do we runne? Into what Sects are we dissected? As∣sunder are we rent, one from the other; yea where men rope together, it is but in a sandy manner, the least motion dissipateth, parteth the sandily roped together, and commotions not usuall in this age Am∣sterdam, England. Beloved who so is not troubled with these troubles, hath no life, no soule of Chri∣stianity at all left in him. These and the like considerations, as diverse o∣thers there are, ought to incite us unto constant, and instant prayer amidst them all, in throngs upon us of these Nations at this time; let us, I say, pray that from us they may yet timely be removed, that the full, and finall blow from heaven decide not our controversies in so much rancor steeped. O! that it were come to the Character of the Church, Christians Primitive age, Corunum, via una. One heart, one way, and till it come to that, troubles will involve us; and when it comes to that to all the world about us may we be a President, and an encouragement thereunto; mee thinkes the many, manifold, and manifest preservations of our God should frame us all as one Man to bring this a∣bout, to bee exemplary Christians to the whole world round about us; I shall recite but a few, yet these pregnant, and of fresh memory, and remark∣able
observation: Can that Octogessimus octavus mi∣rabilis annus▪ that wondrous yeare of 88. ever be forgotten? It was the yeare of Englands preserva∣tion, and of Spaines, and Romes abasement, trouble was on us, and we rid of trouble, ere we knew it was so neare: nor must the yeare 97. passe unremem∣bred, Spaine then had a second blow, and England, a second triumph; As formerly the Armado, stiled invincible was ruined; so then were their forces, and policies too shamefully defeated, and the Eng∣lish fleete for another purpose designed, brought up∣on them by the windes to sinke them into the wa∣ters, or bring them Captivated unto our Land: Those fell out in the dayes of the Maiden Queene, famous Elizabeth, for peace at home, and victory abroad, renowned. The next fell out in King Iames his Reigne, in the yeare 1605. The powder Treason was an hellish plot, contrived most strangely; Heaven went be∣yond hell in the businesse, and providence outreach∣ed divellishnesse, entangled them who long had the trap ready to have ruinated Protestancy for ever: In the yeare 1639. were not these two Nations in one Island, under one King (the present breath of our Nostrils) put upon a mutuall internecion? and is not that turned into a most blessed reunion? We are both the wonder, & the envie of Popish Territories; God even then preserving us when we were ready to be seized on as a prey unto mercilesse teeth, and to the Sepulcher throates of the Pontifician genera∣tion amongst us; no stories can more represent the vigilancy of mercy over any people then can ours, as David when hee was to encounter Goliah, the
stripling shepheard (that Tower of flesh loaden with Armes, and Instruments of death) said, He that de∣livered me from the Lion, and the Beare, will likewise from this uncircumcised Philistine deliver me; so may we say, He that delivered us from such, and such troubles, is the same still, is willing, and ready to deli∣ver us from our troubles incumbent, and imminent, all these intricacies we are in, and all the hovering and surrounding mischiefes what ever. If our pray∣ers can but lay hold on Gods promises, no troubles can trouble us. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deli∣ver thee. Will deliver thee. Gods promises are as good as performances, they are Yea, and Amen in Christ un∣to Gods glory, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Yea in the giving forth, Amen in the performance, certaine, constant, most firmly firme for evermore. Our welfare, and Gods glory are enwrapped in them: No marvaile then is it that Prayer is so effectuall with God, when by the heart, hand, mouth of faith unto him presented in the Name of Our Lord Iesus Christ: when thus we are enabled to pray▪ no marvaile that our prayer is to purpose effectuall; No marvaile, that God hea∣ring Himselfe in us, upon that audience giveth us deliverance in a way, and manner to the whole world remarkeable: And observe with mee that the Commandement, Call upon me, includeth the very promise of GOD therein. Beloved, God never calls us to call upon him as humble, and faith∣full sutors, to send us from him empty away, unsup∣plyed. Can we not be when our resorts are unto God warrantable, regular, orderly? Our hearts, Eyes,
hands are unto him never lifted up in vaine, never un∣answered, but for the most part above our thoughts and beyond even our hopes too answered. Of prayers effectualnesse memorable are the ex∣amples we have in the booke of God, and recorded they are for our close imitation and encouragement to that weighty and most usefull duty. Moses the Man of God, stood often in the breach betweene God enraged, and the people madde in their open rebellions against him. We reade of Ioshuahs prayer that made a stay of the Sunne, and Moone in the fir∣mament, that he might cut off the malitious enemies of God, and the Church. Ionah his prayer moun∣ted powerfully, and prevailingly mounted out of the Whales belly, (which hee calls hell) unto GODS Throne of Mercies, and Glories in the highest Heavens, Chapter 2. verse 2. Eliah by prayer both stayed, and procured raine, kept close and opened those cloudy bottles. And Daniel there∣by kept the affamished Lions pawes, and jawes from doing him the least harme amidst them. Ecclesiasti∣call stories mention, that the Christian Souldiers were Legio fulminatrix, the lightning and thundring legion of Aurelius the Roman Emperor; by their prayers were the enemies thundered to destruction, and the whole Campe whereof they were a part with a supply of raine in their extremity of drought refreshed. Sweetely remarkeable is that passage, Isaiah 65. 24. Before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will heare. A preventing God often, and a God timely succouring is our God ever, none waite, none depend upon him in vaine; He that sup∣plyes
the Lions, and Ravens in their affamishments (as the Psalmist relateth) will not bee wanting in ex∣tremities to the redeemed with his Sons bloud, and by his spirit in them, calling in prayer on him. Even that unjust Judge importun'd by the oppressed Wi∣dow righted her: much more will God help them that suffer wrong, much more will hee avenge the cause of his chosen in all their tentations, tribulati∣ons, persecutions, instantly calling upon him. Say not, Often have I prayed in trouble, but still in trou∣bles am entangled; prayed I have for my King, for my Country, for a reunion of all our distractions, but the worke comes on slowly, hath many pull∣backes, and various interruptions; I have prayed for friends in Captivity, but still they are unfettered, for friends on their sick beds, but their death beds have they proved; against the Churches open, and close Enemies have I prayed, but more, and more are they prevalent; prayed for peace, but behold Warre in his dismall colours; Nay that favourite of God; holy Paul prayed to God to bee rid of Sathans buf∣feting: yet must rest in this, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is in weakenesse perfected. To these and the like objections might this be an unre∣plyable answer: Yee aske, and receive not, because yee aske a misse, that yee may consume it upon your lusts. Saint Iames gives us that, Chapter 4. verse 3. how may wee say, and say truly, God not hearing us, heares us the more? Hurtfull things demanded, and received would be a curse on us not a blessing, would be to us as were the Quailes to the Israelites, not bliss∣full, but banefull; Plato the Heathen Philosopher could fay, O God give us good things though wee aske
them not, give us not evill things though we aske them; but to that of Saint Iohn, I refer you, and in that may we all rest as a direction, and as an encouragement, God hath given to us eternall life, and this life is in1 Iohn 5. 11. his Son. By believing on the name of the Son of God we may know that we have eternall life, v. 13 Marke now his inference, v. 14. and 15. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we aske any thing according to his wil he heareth us, & if we know, that he heare us whatsoever we aske, we know, that we have the peti∣tions that we desired of him, eternal life, & the things thereunto directly tending are the proper object of our faith Christian. The Creed Apostolicall is clo∣sed up with that, and for that have wee an absolute warrant to pray, and are enjoyned not to waver in expectation thereof: heare the Apostle; Let us draw neere with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22. hold we fast the confidence, and the rejoycing of the hope firme unto the end, Chapter 3. 6. 14. Where we have an Implication of their condemnation who so in a proud humility, and in a modesty impudent enough teach men to hold the life eternall and their salvation by the Lord Iesus in a doubtfull tenure. What doe they other, then labour to be faithlesse with reason? Methinks closely, thus they seem to be speake God; We find ourselves unworthy to pitch our credence on thy Word, unworthy to believe what thou promisest, the life eternall in Christ Iesus. These doe make the Gospells doctrine, a doct∣rine of unsetlednesse, of distrustfulnesse, of distra∣ction, which is the only setler of a waving and wa∣vering Conscience; no rest hath this Dove, but in this Arke; yet these not relyers on eternall life by
Christ, a rockie foundation and a building answera∣ble are ridiculously perswaded to relye on their own sandy merits, in which no marvaile is it that they do sinke into distrustfulnesse, and are swallowed up in the gulfe of desperation. Leave we the Popish gene∣ration to their rotten absurdities, and be we close in our mutuall and spirituall edification of one another to Heaven-wards, in that faith which was once deli∣vered unto the Saints, in Saint Iudes words, verse 3. of his Epistle; On that faith, most holy faith build we up our selves, praying in the Holy Ghost, and keep∣ing our selves in the love of God, looking for the mery of our Lord Iesus unto eternall life, ver. 20. 21. of the same Epistle. It is prayer that holdeth us in acquain∣tance with God, the peace making acquaintance, yet in this acquaintance, we must in the next place, in our prayer approaches to him both remember what he is, and what we are, he our God, we his dependant subjects, not able one moment to subsist without his protection and suppliance of good givings and per∣fect gifts, from whom they all descend, Iames 1. 17. he Iehovah the eternall, we mortalls, and miserables, in our selves vanity, yea lighter than vanity it selfe, dust and ashes, borne in sinfull, and hastning to shamfull corruption in the slime-pits, our graves; Wormes meate and our selves wormes most contemptibly contemptible. As those who addresse themselves often to the Po∣tentates of the Earth, Princes, Kings, Emperors, Monarchs, cloath themselves the more neately, and more heedfully order their language then others doe; So he that frequently betakes himselfe to God in prayer, the duty of every Christian must com∣pose himselfe aright, and bee ever readier to heare
than to offer the sacrifice of fooles, babling, raw, undigested prayers unto the GOD of awe, and order. In the third place know, that prayers rightly mo∣delled and moulded up will frame us to avoyd that defiler of all good exercises, base hypocrisie. It is before God, that wee appeare in prayer, whether it be in private, or in publike, alone in our closets, or with others in our Families, or in Church Assem∣blies, God sees us, heares us, observes us, there's no dallying with him, no deluding of him. The Copy of a faire countenance, and looks demurely compo∣sed cannot in his sight bee availeable, whose eyes pierce all darknesse even that of hell, and doe see through, and through the thickest mantles, and co∣verture of the closest hypocrisie, even that which hypocrites in the very cabinets of their hearts can∣not themselves discerne. Further Prayer in conscience bindeth us that use it, not to wrong any, no not the easiest to be wronged; to quit our hands speedily of what is others, not our own; Nay it importunes us to detest and ab∣horre even as hell, all ravenous, greedy, oppressing courses; None of which in whomsoever can pos∣sibly stand with the right profession of Christianity; observe that expression of God in his Prophet, Isai. 1. 15. When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers, I will not heare: your hands are full of bloud. In that consideration religious David said, I will wash mine hands in innocency; so will I compasse thine Altar O Lord, Psalme 26. 6. Hence that exquisite counsell of Saint Paul, advising us to pray every where lifting up
holy hands without wrath or doubtings, I Timothy 2. 8. Further yet prayer adviseth us to be rich to God∣wards in the relievance of his poore Saints, as now the distressed and dissipated Irish Protestants: The ablest in power, honour, wealth is, or ought to be a daily begging suitor unto God. And can any think of God to be heard and answered in his petitions, that suffers the godly to perish for want of their re∣dundancies? Suffers bleeding Ireland, which makes our Kings heart bleed, still to wallow, and welter in bloud, without stenching that bloudy issue? Who so perish through want of our timely compassionate remedy, their bloud, (I feare me) will be put on our accompts against the reckoning day of the Doome finall. Can our prayers worke our deliverance, our eares and hearts rejecting the suites of bleeding Protestants, or not seasonably relieving their al∣most desperate condition, and humanely forlorne hopes? The sentence is peremptory, Prov. 21. 13. Who so stoppeth his eares at the cry of the poore, hee also shall cry himselfe, and shall not be heard. On the con∣trary, Blessed are the mercifull (evermore blessed) for they shall obtaine mercy, Matth. 5. 7. Nothing so sure as their deliverance out of what ever trou∣bles, dangers, cares, feares. In the fifth place, Prayer it is that obligeth to dili∣gence in hearing Gods Word, and using aright the Sacraments of his Ordination. For how thinke we that God will regard our prayers, if we bee overly in the observation of his serious enjoyments? will he receive our demands, if we light over his com∣mands? if wee waite not constantly in his San∣ctuary,
on his sacred behests and appointments? Sixthly, Prayer doth bind us all to the good behavi∣our, one towards another, nay more to the Recipro∣cation of enterchangeable Reconciliation in the occurrences of what ever differences and offences. That passage is full and faire, Matth. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and goe thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. If wee serve not one another in love, which is an enjoyment Apostolicall, neither our persons, nor our prayers can please God. When our Saviour had prescribed us a forme of Prayer he reassumeth and reinforceth that Petition in it, Forgive us our debts as wee forgive our debtors, for, saith he, If ye forgive men their tres∣passes, your heavenly Father will also forgive you, but if yee forgive not men their trespasses; Neither will your Father forgive your trespasses, Matth. 6. 14, 15. We have it thus related by Saint Marke, chap. 1. verse 25. 26. When yee stand praying, forgive if yee have ought against any, that your Father also which is in Hea∣ven may forgive you your trespasses. Hold we to this, and we shall be happy in deliverances; but if thus cordially and really we pecce not up, in peeces shall we be like a Potters vessell gracelesse, uselesse, in all troubles remedilesse, which God avert, and bring us all into the right tune and temper of Christianity, and regular charity. I now passe on to the last parcell in our▪ Text; Our due returne of glory to our deliverer out of all troubles.
We are never right till God ingenuously bee ac∣knowledged by us, to bee , the remover of evills, and of whatsoever is good the gratious be∣stower. What we do must all be done to the glory of God, 2 Cor. 10. 31. To this end were all things made, in all creatures God sets forth his glory, and in them all will he be glorified; light cannot be hid, and God of lights is the Father, and in them all is represented; to be glorified by Men, the Sonne of God became man; he is God manifested in the flesh, and for that manifestation never can we men glorifie our God enough. By this hath God made his wis∣dome manifest in finding out a way to satisfie his Ju∣stice exactly, without the least prejudice at all to his Mercy. Nay, His Mercy is most evident in his Justice, his Sonnes death on the Crosse was the price of our Re∣demption, and the purchase of Heaven for us who had merited hell by the heinousnesse of our trans∣gressions. To be glorified will God againe send his Sonne, and in our nature too, but glorified. To bee judged and to death sentenced for our offences was his first comming; to bee the visible Judge both of quicke and dead shall his second comming be. To be glorified, God sets up, and takes downe whom hee pleaseth, Kings and Kingdomes are at his disposall; to the Kings of the earth is hee terrible (writes the Psalmist) Psalm. 76. 12. And the Courtly Prophet is plaine; The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea those Nations utterly shall be wasted Esay 60. 12. To be glorified, God remarkeably puni∣sheth his owne transgressing people, and at his owne house many times begins his judgement, but ends in
The ruine of his enemies. Wee see that in part ful∣filled, and to the height at last shall it be made full; As truely as I live all the earth shall bee filled with the glory of the Lord, Num. 14. 21. Yet thinke not here, beloved, that God stands in need of being glorified by men, or felt in himselfe a titillation from men; No, no, before we were, before the world was, glo∣rious was he above our thoughts. Stood hee in need of Glory, the Angels are abler, and readyer to ex∣toll him then all the whole race of Mortalls possib∣ly can. As we are lesse than the very least of all his mer∣cies, so his prayses are to him an abatement, to us onely an advancement; our very thanksgivings are beggings, and our owne Interest and improvements in his various blessings, the foundation of our ex∣alting his Name. It is a most Gratious vouch∣safement of our God that hee will by us bee glo∣rified. I might expatiate here, but my weake and spent lungs presse me to abreviate, and to contract much, which I purposed largely to have discoursed of into a narrow compasse of time. Thus then wee are to glorifie God. First, by speaking of his supreme Majestie with all due submissivenesse and reverence; All collogu∣ings, all dissemblings, all hypocrisies must here bee farre, farre from us; this, this it is to give glory unto God, to speake the truth though it be against a mans selfe: Give God the glory, (said Ioshuah to Achan.) That giving of glory was the open confession of his close sinne, Iosh. 7. 19. It is the acknowledgement that of all hearts God is the searcher, and the just
avenger of wickednesse, though never so palliated. We must not shrinke from confession in the case of Gods honour although it be to our owne temporall confusion; It was Achans case, and in every oath and solemn protestation we make and take, it is ours. Juggle wee not with our all knowing God, equivo∣cations, mentall reservations, and other cunning eva∣siions, may deceive, elude, and delude men, and bee we not deceived; God can we not deceive, hee will not be mocked: as we sow, we shall reape, or corruption or life everlasting, Gal. 6. 7, 8. If we hide our sinnes, we shall not prosper, God will not lose his glory, but if we confesse them and forsake them, God shall have the glory, and we shall have the comfort; Hee that confesseth, and forsaketh them shall have mercy, Prov. 28. 13. Againe wee doe glorifie God when his promises even in all our troubles are laid hold on by our faith. We reade of Abraham, of all in the Faith the Fa∣ther, that he staggerd not at the promise, through un∣beliefe, but was strong in faith giving glory to God, Rom. 4. 20. The Receiver of Christs testimony hath set to his Seale, that God is true (as Saint Iohn the Baptist hath it) in the Gospell by Saint Iohn cha. 3. 33. When God hath made knowne his will unto us in his Word, good reason it is that every one of us should thereunto give our full assent and consent, we must confesse it ingenuously, & professe it open∣ly never be ashamed thereof. And this is as a setting too of our Seale, that God is true, and in so doing, we doe glorifie our God, and it is a chiefe point of honour which of us he requireth, and indeed to re∣pent, and believe the Gospell is the summe and sub∣stance
of the Gospell, the full of a Christian, of God accepted for mans Righteousnesse, Marke 1. 15. Rom. 4. 3. Thirdly, wee doe glorifie God in a perpetuated course of good workes; So our Saviour plainely and expresly. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 5. 16. Fourthly, we then doe glorifie our God when we doe prostrate our selves in the truth of humility, and and humiliation before God. That of Iesus Christ to the proud generation of the Pharisees is remark∣ably observable. How can yee beleeve which receive honour one from another, and seeke not the honour that commeth from God only? Iohn 5. 44. An usuall and a just course is it with God to abase the lifted up, and to lift up the abased in their owne eyes, to cast down the mighty from their seates, and to exalt the hum∣ble and meeke; As the not givers of glory unto God shall be unglorious at the last for ever; so the glori∣fiers of God in the right way of humblenesse shall after petty disregards and disgraces here from un∣advised men be shining stars above in glory. Lastly, wee doe glorifie our God in our close de∣fending the cause of God, where ever and however opposed and vilified in the scornefull world, and in being seriously transported with a regular zeale un∣to the glory of our God, not regarding at all our dis∣esteeme in the world in that regard. In this frozen age variously humerous this is rarely practised, the least, very least word that toucheth our owne repu∣tation, goes as a dagger to our hearts; but God in horrid oaths and execrations is every where lewd∣lic
and lewdly blasphemed: his Church servants by the most vilified and scorned, and it troubles not our hearts at all, yea scarce our eares. O times, O man∣ners! Alasse! how few Lots are there in this Sodome, the present evill world? Lot vexed his righteous soule day by day, in seeing and hearing the unlawfull deeds of that City where he sojourned. 2. Pet 2. 8. Wee see and heare enough the like every day, and every night, and all houres and moments of both: God is dishonoured impudently every where, his ordinances abused, his holy name and attributes odiously polluted with rotten language, out of their reeking Sepulcher throat vented, and poysoning where it is with de∣light entertained: no sin abstained from, yea even with greedinesse unashamedly committed. It may be said of the most of both sexes in this age which the Prophet Esay uttereth of Ierusalem, and Iudah, Their tongue, and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory, the shew of their counte∣nance doth witnesse against them, and they declare their sinne as Sodome; they hide it not, woe unto their soule, for they have rewarded evill unto themselves, Esay 3. 8, 9. We may adde with the Prophet Ezechiel, and paralell this Nation with that. Behold this was the ini∣quity of thy sister Sodome. Pride, fulnesse of bread, and abundance of Idlenesse was in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poore and needy; And they were haughty and committed abomination before mee, therefore I tooke them away as I saw good, Ezek. 16▪ 49, 50. That our selves prove not an History in this kind let the recorded Histories of Sodom, Gomorra, Ierusalem be our forewarning, their plagues will be∣fall
us, if by serious and timely repentance we break not off our courses in the very same kinde and de∣grees of sinning. Saint Pauls spirit was exceedingly stirred in him, when he saw the City of Athens whol∣ly given to Idolatry, Acts 17. 16. And do not some doate on Images with the Romanists, and others on Imaginations with Factionists? How few are right in the right way of Gods prescriptions? which is Iehovah Elohenu, Iehovah Echad, the Lord our God is one Lord, Deut. 6. 4. Out of him all is but a ficti∣on; and no Religion sound and solid, but what wee have from the dictates of his holy spirit. This Lord our God, this one Lord hath made all things for him∣selfe, even the wicked for the day of evill, Prov. 16. 4. Assuredly God will be glorified if not by us, then on us; if not for his mercies in our deliverance▪ Surely then for his judgements in our sentencing to hell, ac∣cording to that in the Psalmist, The wicked shall be tur∣ned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God. He that will not voluntarily glorifie God as the Father of mer∣cies, in the rigour of justice will our God glorifie himselfe in his eternall ruine. If wee prove not the Heralds of his glory; examples shall we be of his just indignation. When his wrath is kindled but a little, O blessed are they that in him repose their trust, Psal. 2. 12. accursednesse shall enfetter all others in the chaines of everlasting darknesse. O! my beloved in the Lord; What ever we have been heretofore, be this hence forward to the end of our pilgrimage, and war∣fare on earth, our mainest care never any more to re∣ceave the grace of God in vaine, never turn the same into lasciviousnesse, which Saint Iude fitly calls, the denying of the only Lord God, and our Lord Iesus Christ:
improve wee rather with all manner of alacrity and industriousnesse the talents thereof unto us concre∣dited to the glory of our God, upon our receiving the end of our faith, even our endlesse salvation. By words; by works, in our lives and at our deaths set wee forth the prayses of our gratious deliverer, with the Psalmist from the ground of our hearts, say∣ing; Blessed be the Lord God, who daily loadeth us with his benefits, even the God of our salvation, he that is our God, is the God of our salvation, And unto God the Lord belong the issues from death, Psalme 68. 19, 20. Endangered is the Church of God at this day every where in the world, and in this Island, from the world divided endangered amongst Atheists, Pa∣pists, Sectaries, in troubles are all right Christians involved; O! now is the time of instant prayer for their gratious deliverance out of them all; Call we heartily upon our God, and his bowell mercies will tenderly reach us, and savingly relieve us, wee shall find and feele his timely succours, there is yet balm in Gilead, yet mercies and the plenteous redemption with our God; He, he it is that shall redeeme Israel from all his iniquities, bring all his people every where out of all their depths of sins, sorrowes, mise∣ries, Psa. 130. Vtterly will he never forsake his own people, the Israel of God, but upon their unfained repentance and faith without hypocrisie, settle them unremovably in himselfe, and let them see even their full desires on al their malicious enemies, and ungra∣tious opposers; for, seeing God for the love of his Church made the world; Sathan who labours the worlds ruine cannot with all his forces and devices ruinate the Church. The eternall God, the Lord of
Armies, and Mercies, who from that roaring, and circuiting Lion, hath many times and many wayes delivered us from the hands of men his Captives, and instruments how ever malitiously bent against us will still and still deliver us. Our Petitions shall be prevalent with him for us, and against them. And after he hath given us deliverance, upon deliverance here on earth, he will possesse us in Heaven with our inheritance there, our Inheritance immor∣tall, undefiled, and that can never fade away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. to this inheritance the King of glory bring us that there wee may for evermore glorifie him undstractedly. AMEN. FINIS. Post-Script W. A. D. D. Minor invidiâ I. G. D. D. Major contemptu. Lesser than Envie; greater than contempt; From th' One, and th' other, let me be exempt: I wish not Much; with little am content: So let My Yeares runne on; My Life be spent. There are some words mis-printed, others mis-placed; and the pointing here and there, unobserved. Pardon, and amend, friendly; then peruse, curteously.
The LORDS Prayer enlarged. The PREFACE. GRatious and glorious Father, all good, all migh∣tie thou art, with us alwayes present; but thy Ma∣jestie principally demonstrates it selfe in and from Heaven; in thee do we live, move, and have our being; as thou hast created us of nothing, so doest thou nourish, maintaine, defend us in the order, and ranke of our creati∣on. We have our gratious enjoyment to betake our selves in prayer unto thee, whose title is the hearer and answerer of prayers, the helper of us to pray aright▪ and the succou∣rer of us too in right prayer to thy glory in our salvation. Petion 1. O! cause thy Name and thy Selfe to bee made known upon Earth, and thy saving health among all nations, manifest thy selfe yet more & more in and to the habitable world, and be thou, holy and heavenly Father, by all of all conditions and sorts of Mankind honoured, and glorified in the thoughts of our hearts, in the words of our mouthes, in the deeds of our holy lives and conver∣sations even upon earth, heavenly. Petition 2. O! grant that the Scepter of thy King∣dome, the word of thy power, and the power of thy Word may bee efficacious and prevalent all the world over; let us receive it humbly, retaine it in our hearts closely, grow up thrivingly by it in the cleare knowledge of thee and thy Christ day by day. O let all Christian Churches agree in the truth of thy holy and lively word, and be strengthened in grace by it, and fitted by degrees for glory.
Petition 3. What thou willest be that accomplished, and all the opposers of thy will confuted really, and ever∣lastingly confounded. O be thy revealed will the rule of our thoughts, words, actions, and thy very least becke, our sway, as it is of all thy holy Angels thy ministring spirits by thee sent forth to minister for them, who shall bee the heyres of thy salvation. Petition 4. What is needfull for this outward man let thy divine providence supply us withall, and on that let our dependance be alwayes and in all things, and teach us that lesson, in what estate so ever we are with thine al∣lotments to rest contented, and in every thing to bee unto thy Majesty unfainedly thankfull. Petition 5. O! look not severely upon our innume∣rous errors, transgressions, sins, but cover them, par∣don them, cast them all into the Seas bottome, never to rise thence against us unto condemnation, and separation from thee, and give us all mutually forgiving hearts in the case of arising differences, and offences. Petition 6. We are in the midst of snares, O let us never bee ensnared, uphold us in thy feare, and deliver us from the feare of all thine and our enemies, Sathan, sin, death, hell, destruction. The Doxologie. WE are in thy Kingdom, O with thy golden Scep∣ter rule us: we are under thy power, O shelter us from all adversary forces, we breath after the propagation of thy glory in our eternall salvation, O manifest the same in thy due time, and that in all clearenesse and ful∣nesse to our redeemed soules. Amen, So be it is our prayer. Amen, be it so, will be thy ratification, thou art faithfull, and we are happie. Amen, Amen.
