L1573 E132_10 99858935 110995
A LETTER OF High consequence, Principally concerning the indamaging of this our Kingdome of England, subversion of Religion, and many more Papisticall divisions compi∣led, and directed to Colonell Lunsford scatte∣red in the Church of Saint Paul, and since come to publicke view. As also certaine Articles whereby the said Lunsford is convinced of high Treason, both to the King, State, and House of Parliament. Printed in the yeare 1642.
A Letter of high consequence, princi∣pally concerning the indammaging of this our Kingdome of England, subversion of Religion, and many more Papisticall divisions, compiled and directed to Colo∣nell Lunsford, scattered in the Church of Saint Paul, and since come to publicke view. Renowned Sir, WEe are generally joyfull beyond expression, to heare of the honor His Majestie hath been pleased to conferre upon your so well deserving selfe, though we must confesse we are no lesse sorrow∣full for the unexpected commo∣tion of that ungoverned Commonalty which have beene the occasion of suppressing your power, the which by the guidance and carefull diligence of your severity and austere demeanor, might have been a great furtherance to our present designes, which neverthelesse, although extenuated & lessened by this present hinderance of losing that preroga∣tive and place of honour of being Lieutenant of the Tower, wee make no question but the lustre of
knighthood which his Majesty hath beene pleased to transplant since upon you, will bee a meanes to extoll and strengthen your authority, to the ayding and assisting of our poore brethren there with you: of which wee shall not onely be mindefull, but also by our indulgent and vigilant indevours be ready to graunt and imploy our furtherance in whatsoe∣ver you shallbe pleased upon serious confederation to put in practise for their reliefe and establishing of the Catholicke faith and supremacy of the Church of Rome; let me intreat you in the behalfe of all the rest of our wellwishers, to be diligent in the prosecution of your intended enterprise, and to make as much expedition in the same as may pos∣sibly be conceived, unlesse the perspicuosity of our more curious than wary enemies pry into the secrets of our intentions through our too much tedi∣ousnesse and slackenesse in the performance of this our so necessary undertaking. Privacy will be like∣wise expedient, and a speciall care ought to be had in electing such as you may impose trust in: you know our enemies, therefore I need not specifie them; as for our friends, we have a faulkon, and pep¦per is very dear to us, (you understand me): you may draw together some forces of our friends under pre∣tence against us, his Majestyes favour towards you will bee sufficient to blinde the intellect of the people whose eies are already dimmed with the vaile of ignorance. Make your selfe as strong as you may: as or the charges, we will be correspondent in de∣fraying of them: if any scurrilous spirits should scandalize you and endeavour to defame your per∣son
with opprobrious speeches, of a suspition of some illegall intents, you may soone helpe that, for you are not without those on your side who will bee more ready to assist, then you to command, and are of sufficient ability to resist a meane power, yea a greater then a sudden commotion or a tumultuous rabble can proidve against you: as for what shall be wanting in you, shall bee made good by our endea∣vours, and what you begin wee will end. As for the present, we have been lately scattered, by reason of a sudden approach of the Scots upon us, so that we have lost some of our Officers, and some thousand souldiers. Captaine Denis Carley dyed volorously, and Captaine Thurlongking with Lievtenant Matchet, whose names with us shall bee eternized for ever, who chose rather to dye valiant∣ly in the defence of the Church of Rome, then to yeeld themselves prisoners to the Hereticke Scots; I will cease to speake further of them, whom wee daily lament: We are now gathering up our scatte∣red forces, and make no question but to be of ability to give them battell speedily: Our eyes are upon you in behalfe of brethren, we know there is no want of valour, power, wisdome, assistance, or whatsoever may be available for the designe in you or your friends; be valiant for the truth then: in so doing, you shall joy us, deliver our brethren, and prove your selfe an everlasting, reall and constant friend to the Church of Rome. G. Sartwell, Redmond, your friends, E. T. W. S. M. O. joyne.
Articles of high consequence against Colonell Lunsford, late Lieutenant of the Tower. 1 THat he hath trecherously conspired against this City of London, to subvert the same, and endeavoured to plant the ordnance in the Tower against it, diverse labourers being found there transporting Powder, and other Ammuniti∣on to the Bulwarke, and high Tower. 2 That he hath laboured to alienate the Parli∣ament from the King, speaking invective words, and scandalous aspersions against them, & by this means to make them become odious unto his Majesty. 3 That he hath endevoured to subvert the fun∣damentall lawes of the Kingdome, to the utter de∣molition of the State. 4 That he hath studied with great sedulity to advance the See of Rome, and to supplant the pure sanctitie of the Protestant Religion. 5 That he hath introduced many Popish inno∣vations and Idolatrous superstitions into our Church, labouring to bring schismaticall divi∣sions and Hereticall opinions amongst the peo∣ple. 6 That he hath endevoured to maintaine th
Episcopall Hierarchie & prelaticall Primacie, op∣posing the determinations of the Parliament. 7 That he hath gathered a regiment of horse being all Papisticall adherents, with an intent if that they cannot obtayne the fruition of their so de∣villish intentions, to innovate the Popish Religion, that then to force it in hostile manner, and there∣upon have linked themselves in the Irish Co∣venant. FINIS.
