L1885 E311_24 99861202 113330
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE THOMAS ADAMS Lord Major of the Metropolis of Eng∣land, the renowned Citie of LONDON. Right Honourable, THe concurrent desires of people of all sorts, (ex∣cept of such as raise their owne particular in∣terests out of the common ruines) for recovery of our peace, and the pantings of many lying under the power of the oppressour for delive∣rance from warre, have of late by the good hand of God upon our publique counsels and forces, thriven up to hopes, and those hopes to presages, that it will be an Honourable note upon your Name in time to come, to have had the good hap within your view (before you give up to another the Ensignes of your Honour) which is the generall vote of all the true hearted Patriots of three Kingdomes, that is a well com∣pounded, and compacted happinesse, made up of three of the most de∣sirable blessings of humane society, which are consistent with the con∣dition of mortalitie; and they are these, 1. A sincere and through reformation of Religion, in Doctrine and worship of God. 2. A Discipline and Government established according to
Gods word, and the example of the best reformed Churches: whereby, with the assistance of Divine grace, we may be better (then heretofore) secured from relapses into irreligion, heresie, schisme, and profanenesse, which have beene the great crimes and curses of the last precedent, and present times, though (through the cunning workings of Satan) the evils now in course (with some degrees of improve∣ment from bad to worse) are taken by some to be the remedies against foregoing corruptions. 3. A third thing (which in order of dignitie is the last, though in most mens affections it be the first) is, that according to the prescript prayer of the Apostle, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, 1 Tim. .1. he addeth in all godlinesse and honestie; but both these have beene virtually premised in the two precedent particulars. This will be of so much the sweeter tast to all, as either by actuall suffering, or by affectionate sympathy they have taken the deeper draught of the bitter cup of furious hostility. That none of this hopefull expectation may faile of effect, it will be requisite that every one (for his part and to his power) endeavour to make it good by all the good meanes, and helps, which conduce to the comfort and safetie not of a few, but of the whole Common weale, in each of the Nations now so much shaken, and in danger also to be bro∣ken in pieces. 1. By making an holy Covenant with God, and by being stedfast in the Covenant when we have made it; so we may engage his fa∣vour, and power to our partie, to be not onely a friend, and Patron to us, but an enemie to our enemies, and an adversarie to our ad∣versaries, Exod. 23.22. 2. By being at union among our selves, and studying as much to uphold it, as the seditious Shebaes on the other side plot the setting of discord betwixt the dearest brethren; and if it be not to be looked for, that all, who are equally concerned in the same Cause, should unani∣mously consent in that course which may carry it on to desired successe; yet there may be a fivefold union among us, which may give strength unto, and maintaine the reputation of the great Designe it hand, viz. a through reformation both in Church and State. The first union is of the two Sister Nations, according to our so∣lemne League and Covenant, which must be preferred before all either factions, or questuos interests of any particular party whatsoever.
For as no two Nations under heaven have more and stronger bonds of union, then we of England, and our Brethren of Scotland, being bounded, and surrounded by the Sea, as one entire Iland, united under one King, under one Title in the Kings Royall style [the King of Great BRITAINE] united yet more in Language, and Reli∣gion and most of all in our late Covenant for a generall Reformation of Church and State, and mutuall association and assistance against all malignant combinations; So nothing is more enviously observed by our common enemies then these many obligations of union betwixt us, nothing more cunningly contrived, or more seriously pursued by them, (and I wish some among our selves had neither hearts, nor heads, nor hands in the plot) then to dis-joyne us, and to make us, not onely perfidiously to fall off from performance of our common Covenant, but with the same hands which we have lifted up to the most High God, to fall one upon another, as the confounded and accursed Midianites, Iudg. 7.2. and when by such wickednesse we are brought to a weak∣nesse, which may be easily subdued (but God forbid, we should be both so bad, and mad as to act a Tragedie upon our selves, to set forth a Comedie for such malicious spectators, as would make their great∣est mirth of our most grievous misery) we must expect the execution of the bloody and destructive designe, resolved on in Ireland: which a knowing Intelligencer hath reported of the rebels there in these words: The Irish Remonstrance. p. 31. This Kingdome, viz. Ireland, settled and peopled onely with sound Catholicks, thirty thousand men must be sent into England to joyne with thrench and Spanish forces; and the service in England perfor, then they will joyntly fall upon Scotland for the reducing of that Kingdome to the obedience of the Pope, which being finished they have engaged themselves for the King of Spaine, for assisting him against the Hollanders. Wherein, though they reckon without the Lord of Hosts, who onely commands both Peace and Warre at his pleasure, and swayeth the successe to which side he will, yet this discovers their designe of unpartiall perdition of the Protestant partie; and the discovery thereof should be a motive of more confirmed union among our selves. The second Ʋnion is that of the Parliament and Citie; whereof we have had such happy experience, ever since the unhappy hostility betwixt the flatterers of the King, and friends of the Kingdome, that
we are bound to blesse God for it, and to pray for the continuance of it, both for our owne time, and for the ages to come. The third is the Ʋnion of the Parliament and Assembly of Di∣vines; whose reciprcall, and proportionable respects, (which I mean not in an Arithmeticall, but in a Geometricall Proportion) give much countenance and authoritie to what is propounded to the people in their names; for so the command of the one will be more awfull, the advice, direction, and resolution of the other more usefull, throughout the whole Kingdome. A fourth Ʋnion is betwixt the Assembly of Divines and the City Ministers; who may the more easily accord and agree together, be∣cause many of them be but the same men under severall relations; and most of them are swaid by the same principles of truth and pietie, and involved in a society and participation of the same duties, hopes, and hazards. The fifth Ʋnion is betwixt the City Magistracie and the Citie Ministery, to which both ingenuous, and religious correspondence doth dispose them; for no where in the Protestant Churches (so farre as I have read or received by report) are good Ministers better ac∣cepted of, or more respectively used, then in this City, nor by any Citizens more then by those who are most worthy of honour; and is cannot but be the desire, as well as the duty, of godly Ministers, to ad∣vance them as much as may be in the estimation of the people; and to presse upon them obedience according to their duty, and dependence, for conscience sake. And though it be obvious to common observation, how much the Magistrates favour maketh for the Ministers honour, and succour, it is not unknowne, nor unobserved by the wise, that the Ministers have been very serviceable to the Civill State, and to the Military too, not onely by their supplications to God, for good successe to all their publique undertakings, and their happy proceedings in all their warlike marches, and motions, as at the removall of the Arke. Numb. 10.35. Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, let them that hate thee flee before thee; but by their informations, and so∣liitations of the people, to engage both their estates, and persons, in the Cause of God, and their Countrey: and I could name such at have b looked on by the blood shtten yes of professed enemies, and
fained by them (by way of most hatefull reprach) at the Authours of the Rebellion of whole Counties, that is, (in the true sense of their charge) the perswaders of them, not to betake themselves to a divided party, but to unite in the union of the King and Par∣liament. And I am sure that some of them who have been envied, and revi∣led in Print (by libellous Schismaticks) as growing rich upon the re∣venues of fat sequestrations, (when by a just accompt they have come short of a competent subsistence) have been offered both riches and ho∣nour in the Kings name, by persons of eminent degree, to imploy their parts in his Majesties service (the termes were no worse, the inten∣tion likely not so good) and have modestly, and yet resolutely refused them, then when it seemed both most profitable, and honourable to a∣cept them, and not a little dangerous to withstand rewards, when there was power to call for observance by minatory commands. And it was then an advantage visible enough, which the King had above the Parliament (as the Pope hath above a Councell) that the dispoall of Church dignities was held in right, and exercised in fact, as a branch of the Royall Prerogative; whence arose the Proverbe which made so many Ecclesiasticall Courtiers, No fishing to the Sea, No service to the King; and by the power and Court Countenance that such had over the inferior Ministers, both they by the Prelaticall Clergie, and the people by them were made more obsequious and ser∣viceable to whatsoever constitutions, and impositions, which came upon them, whether from the Civill or Ecclesiasticall Authority. And though wee have cause to multiply our benedictions, as David did, 1 Sam. 25.2, 33. Blessed be God, and blessed be the Parliament, and blessed be their advice, not only to themselves, but to all the Kingdom, that the heavie yoke of the domineering Hirarchy is taken off our neckes, yet betwixt the Magistrates and the people, the godly Mi∣nisters of the Kingdome (and ordinarily the Ministers of this Citie especially (for the Synod of Divines is an extraordinary Assembly) will be alwayes as least instrumentally profitable for the promoting, and upholding of a conformity and commodious correspondence on both sides, according to the Relations, wherein for the glory of God, and the publique welfare they are mutually obliged to each other. In prposall of these particulars to your Lordship, I shall not be thought to present you with an impertinent discourse, by any thus will
consider bow much the union of three Kingdoms depends upon the uni∣on of this Metropolis, or mother Citie with the Parliament above it, the Ministry within it, and all the sister Cities, and daughter Townes and Villages round about it; and how much the union of this City now depends upon your Honour, and I doubt not but that by Gods speciall providence your Honour was reserved for such a time as this, when by a prudent, and zealous, and authoritative endevour for the cure of the manifold distractions among us, you may be a blessed meanes to keepe off the destruction from us, which is threatned by our Saviour to a Kingdome, (and there is the like danger to any either City or family) given over to division, Matth. 12.25. wherein your Lordship and your Venerable Colleagues may have the deepest share in suffering, accord∣ing to the measure of your eminent prelations in honour, and estate, above ordinary Citizens, if (which God forbid) violent and unruly spirits should not be circumscribed with the virge of your awfull au∣thoritie. To this end though the Presbyterian Government may be very subservient, and the Ministers of the City will be alwaies ready, (as their faculties furnish them with abilitie, and their duties oblige them with diligence) to serve your Honour, yet since that is set up but in part, and for a good part subiect to dispute, (as your power is not, for it is wholly compleat, and no way questionable) the through refor∣mation of this spatious and populous Citie, next under God, and the Parliament, will more depend upon your head for counsell, your heart for affection, and your hand for execution, then on any humane helpe or meanes, whatsoever it be. And if in regard of newly emergent mischiefs, (for Satan infu∣sth into his Agents new fancies, and devices, and stirreth them up to dangerous Innovations every day) you find not ready remedies for all present, or imminent evils, within the bounds of your municipall Charters, you are so neere the well-head, and spring of Civill Go∣vernment (the Legislative Senate at Westminster) that you may easily, and speedily procure a supplement of power, for any service that may conduce to the safety of the Parliament, and Citie, and (with both) by consequentiall operation, and virtuall influence, of many millions of subiects within the three Kingdomes, united in the most Sacred bond of our solemne Covenant; which may with more ige∣nuiti be desired, and with more facility be obtained, because thereby
the Parliament it selfe may be the better secured, both from contemp, and tumult, which may justly be feared from such an insolent, and violent generation of fanaticke, and some franticke Enthusiasts, and other fiery spirited Separatists, who account it the height of their E∣vangelicall zeale, to bring downe the highest and most eminent Wor∣thies of the State for true piety, prudence, dignitie, and power, under the feet of confused Anarchy, and popularity. Wherein that they meane to make no reserves of reverence for the supreme Senate of the Kingdome, nor to allow any protection by pri∣viledges of Parliament, is clearly discovered in that most seditious Pamphlet (besides many others) called Englands Birthright. For notwithstanding the present, pressing, and imperious necessities of the Commonweale, requiring the raising of supplies in extraordinarie wayes for its owne support, and preservation from perpetuall ruine, and notwithstanding the exemplarie justice of the Parliament, upon their owne members of both Houses, (to which may be added to their glory, and the Kingdomes comfort, their most just and impartiall provision against oppression of the people, either by themselves, or their substituted Committees) the Libellous (and in respect of some passages of his Booke, I may say blasphemous) Authour, taking no notice of any thing that may be justly pleaded for the proceedings of Parliament, labours to represent them to the people as a combination of most grievous, and ngratefull oppressours. I will set downe his owne words, but so as the Scripture doth the blasphemies of Satan, or Rabshakeh, and other such like The word cometh of Sa∣raph, which sig∣nifieth to burne, and of that is derived the noune Saraph, (with the one∣ly difference of a long vowell for a short) which is used for a fiery ser∣pent, Isa. 14.29. Sraphicall slanderers, that they may be as odious, as their disposition is dangerous to all good men, if they had as much power in their hands, as there is gall in their hearts, their tongues, and pens; the Title of this out-lash∣ing Libell is set downe in these words. For an Anti∣dote against such calumnies see M. Prinnes Booke entitled The Lyar con∣founded. Englands birthright justified against all arbitrary usurpation, whether Regall or Parliamentary, or under what vizor so ever. With divers Queries, Observances, and Grievances of the people, declaring this Parliaments proceedings to be directly contrary to those fundamentall Principles, whereby their Actions at fast were justifiable against the King, in their present Illegall dealings with those that have beene their best Friends, Advancers, and Preser∣vers:
And in other things of high concernment, to the Freedome of all the Free-borne people of England. What ever the man is, the Bke is no hypocrite, for it i ths within, which it seemeth without. For page the 33. he putteth this Qure (and his Queres are implicit resolutions on the wrong side.) Whether is it not agreeable to law, justice, equitie, and conscience, that there should be a Parliament once every yeare, and more of∣ten if need require? whereby he meaneth that this Parliament hath sate too long already, for a little after he chargeth them, that many of the Members have betrayed their trust, and those that remaine ingrosse Law-making, and also Law-executing into their owne hands, contrary both to reason and to the true intent and meaning of the Law; and within a few lines, he goeth on thus: By which manifest abusing, negligent, and not true using the Lawes, oppres∣sions, mischiefe, and grievances are no lesse (if not farre more) increased then they were before the Parliament began; and many times by the powerfull Interest of a faction in the Parliament, to save some one, two, or three of their Members undeserving cre∣dits, they so violate the knowne, unrepealed, and declared Law of the Land, yea and their owne Votes, Ordinances, Declarations, and Protestations, as if they had never made them; I say all these things considered, ought not the Freemen of England, who have laboured in these destroying times, both to preserve the Parlia∣ment, and their owne Native freedomes, and birth-rights, not one∣ly to choose new Members, where they are wanting, once every yeare, but also to renue and enquire once a yeare, after the beha∣viour, and carriage of those they have chosen. And having page 44. aggraed the condition of the times by taxes and impositions, instancing in the Trade of Hamakers, he con∣cludes with this enclamation (which may serve for an incentive to seditions tumult) O ruell, pitifull, and intolerable bondage, no longer to be endured, suffered, or undergone, the burden being heavier then the poore labourers can beare! And that we may know of how lawlesse a Sect himself in, and those whom e plead for, he prfesseth himselfe a litter enemy to Lawyers, first  the writer of a loose sheete of paper, under the Title
of Advertisements for the new election of Burgesses for the House of Commons (by the name of a worthy Authour) as a Caveat against filling up elections with such kind of men, making the knowledge of the Law of nouse for making of a Statesman, since it is, saith he, a confined and Topicall kind of learning, calculated onely for the Meridian of Westminster Hall, and reaching no fur∣then then to Dover; for transplant a common Lawyer to Calice, and his head is no more usefull there, then a Sunne-Diall in a grave. Whereas it is notorious to the world that sundry As the L. Ver. M. I. Seld. Will. Pr. (and some others) whose excellently learned labo praise them i the gates. professed Legists have been qualified with other learning, and that both with great va∣riety, and in an eminent degree, above other men. Having impeached their heads, he cometh downe to their hearts, and hands, and taxeth these for ill conscience, as the other for igno∣rance. Lawyers (saith he) being a bold, and talkative kind of men, will intrude themselves into the Chaires of all Committees, where (being accustomed to take fees) they will underhand pro∣tect Delinquents, and their concealed estates with tricks and de∣vises. He knoweth sure very little of the manner of Committees; for no man can thrust himselfe into such an employment, but is thrust into it by the major part of the Committee; but there needs none A∣pologie, where the Antilogie is none other then a most rash and un∣reasonable calumny; and my present purpose is but to note how head∣strong and unruly, how refractory to Government, and Law, the Sectaries are already; to what an height of insolence would they grow, if (which they presse for) they should be permitted a toleration by publique Authoritie? It may be some among them in time would take upon them as the proud and rude Rebell Wat Tyler, in Richard the Seconds time, who presumed, among other most lewd and impudent demand, to S. Daniel continuation of the History ad Rich.K 2. p. 5. propound this for one, That all Law might be abo∣lished, affirming with an execrable oath, before Night all the Law of England should passe through this strait, (clapping his hand upon his mouth.) But I must take my hand from this Table, lest I trespasse against the publique Interest, in detaining your Honour too long in beholding this Sciographie or shadow-draught of pernicious Sectaries, sixce it is a time rather of action, then of speculation; and yet if your Honour have any spare houres for further information in the various, and dangerous turnings, and windings of the spirits of Errour, (whom
Satan in these last and worst times hath sent out, not by couples, as our Saviour sent out his Disciples, Mar. 6.7. but almost by Legions, to seduce simple soules, to trouble our publique peace, and to reproach and retard the reformation desired) I should make bold to offer to your view an M. Robert Baylie his Dis∣swasive from the errours of the time; wherein the Tenets of the principall Sect of the Inde∣pend: are drawne toge∣ther in one Mappe: Printed for Sam. Gelli∣brand at the Brasen Serpent in Pauls Church-yard. exact delineation, or description of the whole body of Schismaticall, and Hereticall noveltie, drawne by a very skilfull and faithfull hand, and newly published to undeceive the English, espe∣cially the people of the City, of whom many are miserably misled, and more will be, if both Magistrates and Ministers doe not watch∣fully overlooke them, and seriously sot themselves to prevent their in∣crease: Wherein your Lordships prudence, and power, (beginning betime, and continuing your care in a proportionable tenour, untill your Office expire, (which is the expectation of all that know the soli∣ditie of your judgement, and stability of your spirit) may prevaile very much, though it be but for an yeare; for how great matters in how short a time have beene attempted and accomplished by that wor∣thy Generall Sr. Thomas Fairfax, undertaking, and prosecuting the warre (with a couragious and constant resolution) not as a Trade to enrich himselfe, but as a Remedy to deliver his Countrey, from partly present, and partly imminent miseries? And for that purpose your Lordships Sword in the City may be of very great use, as his in the field; and that with both the Sword of the Lord may be associated, as with the Sword of Gideon, Iudg. 7.18. and his power may still support your state, protect your person, and promote your proceedings to most happy successe, is the hearty de∣sire, and shall be the daily prayer of Your Honours most humble servant, JOHN LEY.
An Advertisement to the Reader to pre∣vent mistaking in the variety of Petitions. IN the Postscript of the late Answer to Mr. Burton from Aldermanbury, entituled The doore of truth opened, there is an Apologe∣tical Reply to his tart reproofe of a London Petition in these words: There is one thing that Mr. Burton mentioneth in the Pag. 2. ante med. Narrative, which though it concerns not Aldermanbury, yet we must not wholly bury it in silence, and that is concerning the late large Petition for the speedy establishment of Reli∣gion: Of which he speakes very dishonourably, as also of the Petitioners, as of men led with blind obedience, and pinning their soules upon the Priests sleeve. We leave it to the Petitioners to answer for themselves. For our parts we conceive that no Reader, unlesse blinded with prejudice, can charge them with blind obedience. For the Petitioners doe not desire to have the Modell of that Reverend Assembly established, but the government of Christ established, a Mo∣dell whereof, &c. These words, a Modell whereof, &c. come in with a Parenthesis, and the sentence is compleat without them, all that they affirme about the Modell is that the Reverend Assembly hath framed a Modell of the Go∣vernment of Christ according to their ability, and presented it to the Parliament. And who but he that hath pinned his faith upon an Independents sleeve, can except against this? But if Mr. Burton be displeased with the Modell of the Re∣verend Assembly, we would intreat him that he at last, af∣ter so long expectation, would set forth his Modell. Which some have mistaken, conceiving both parties
speake of the late Petition sent from the Common Councell of London, whereas there be these differen∣ces betwixt them. 1. That Petition is of a different style, tenour, and date from this of the Common Councell, for it was brought forth to light before this later was concei∣ved. 2. That hath the Parenthesis (a Modell whereof the Assembly of Divines, &c.) specified in the Exception and Answer; the Petition of the Common Councell hath no such clause in it, as I am informed, for yet I have not seen it. 3. That was never presented by the Petitioners to the Parliament, this of the Common Councell was. 4. The Petition of the Common Councell was not printed, that was priuted, both in a single sheet, and in the Booke called Truth it's Manifest, p. 130. Which I note in this place, because having denyed that the Pe∣tition of the Common Councell was yet printed, a Gentleman of qualitie said, he would shew it me pre∣sently, and produced for proofe the Booke foremen∣tioned. 5. Lastly, the former Petition had not so good ac∣ceptance with the Parliament, as the later partly hath had, and partly may be further hoped for, when the Honourable Houses have opportunitie to make their returne unto it.
The Contents. Section I. OF the Authour and Title page of the Quere, and Deter mination upon it. Page 1. Sect. II. Of the Title page. p. 3. Sect. III. The matter and scope of the Quere, and resolution upon it. p. 7. Sect. IIII. Reasons against the present settling of government taken from conscience, answered. p. 12. Sect. V. The Argument against the speedy settling of Church government taken from e∣ample of the New Testament in generall, answered. p. 14. Sect. VI. The Argument against the speedy establishment of Church government taken from Christs description, answered. p. 17. Sect. VII. Master Colemans experimentall exceptions against the severity and rigour of the Presbyteriall government, answered. p. 20. Sect. VIII. The Argument against the speedy setting up of the Presbyteriall government taken from Christs practise, answered. p. 23. Sect. IX. Reasons taken from rules and considerations of prudence, answered. p. 26. Sect. X. The Negative Argument taken from want of experience of the New Clergie, answered. p. 32. Sect. XI. Objections against the Reasons for the not establishing Church government, prope∣sed, and answered, as Objections against M. Saltm. his Tenet in the Quere, with Replyes to his answers. The first Observation, his Answer and the Reply unto it. p. 36. Sect. XII. Objection second, answered; with a Reply to that Answer. p. 38. Sect. XIII. An additionall Answer to some exceptions of M. Saltm. (taken out of M. Prins Vindication) against the present establishment of Church government, in his late Book entituled, The opening of M. Prins New Book called a Vindication. p. 45. Sect. XIIII. The Objections taken from a supposed needlesnesse of the Presbytery, answered. p. 47 Sect. XV. Of M. Colemans Interiist is all Magistracle. p. 51. Sect. XVI. The Objection of eager contestation for Church Discipline, and  p. 53.
Sect. XVII. The Objection of inefficacie for holinesse of life in such as live under the Presbytery, answered. p. 57. Sect. XVIII. Shewing what might be retorted upon the Antipresbyteriall party, but concluding for unitie and peace with allegation of M. Burroughs his propositions of reconciliation and accord: and some other particulars tending thereto. p. 61. Sect. XIX. Further grounds and hopes of union in the Churches of the Sister Kingdomes of England and Scotland, with Answers to the Objections that are made against it. p. 64. Sect. XX. An Appendix to the precedent Examination, being an Apologeticall Narrative of the Petitions of the Common Councell of the City, and Ministers of London, pre∣sented to both the Honourable Houses of Parliament the 19. and 20. dayes of No∣vember, 1645. with a Vindication of them, and the proceedings in them from the scandalous aspersions of the weekely Pamphleters, especially of him who miscals him∣selfe the Moderate Intelligencer. p. 71. Sect. XXI. The occasion of the Petitions of the Common Councell and Ministers of London, and the presenting of them to the Honourable Houses of Parliament. p. 77. Sect. XXII. The offensive acceptance of them by the Parliament as the weekely Newes-makers falsly report it: Cautions premised before their confutation. p. 79. Sect. XXIII. A Copy of the Ministers Petition, and the Intelligencers scandalous consure upon it. p. 84. Sect. XXIIII. Britanicus taxed for traducing the Petitioners. p. 89. Sect. XXV. An answer to the Intelligencers commination of the Petitioners. p. 92. Sect. XXVI. The misreport of the Diurnall and Weekly Account confuted, and the loose sheete called Perfect Passages convinced of absurditie and sedition. p. 93. The Conclusion. p. 97. The Postscript, or after reckoning with the Moderate Intelligencer, and Mer∣curius Britanicus. p. 99. Errata. PAge 70. lin. 10. after the word taken in the Parenthesis read the words and indeed it is, and blot them out in the following line: pag. 84. lin. 2. after the word tryall, for of read to: & lin. 3 after the word plainly for to read as: & p. 97. lin. 20. after the word lives read long: & lin. 21. for it was a read upon this: & p. uit. Marg. after the word called put out Lilbiues.
AN EXAMINATION AND RESOLVTION OF the New Quere. SECT. I. Of the Authour, and Title page of the Quere; and Determination, upon it. OF the Authour I have not much to say, save that when he was sent for examination to the Committee of Divines, I found him well qualified for parts, and gifts, to be imployed in the Ministery; and as he was entertained by us with beseeming civility and courtesie, so did he carry himselfe to∣wards us with an ingenuous modesty; and we met, and parted with mutuall accep∣tation: After that, he was pleased to owne me as his Friend, and to honour me as his Censor, with a request to peruse some papers of his which he intended to publish; yet to this day I never saw them, unlesse they were graduates from his pen to the presse; and so I might reade them, and not know them to be the same: whether he changed his mind concerning his owne paines, or my perusall,
or wanted a convenient opportunity to bring, or send them unto me, I cannot resolve, nor will I conjecture; but I will take his in∣vitation of me to play the Critick with him, for some more autho∣rity to examine his divulged dictates, then others have, who have none other interest in them then that of an ordinary Reader. Vpon this intercourse betwixt us, having heard adverse opinions, and reports of his impression, in the present difference of discipline, I thought I had acquaintance enough with him, to put a Question to him, Whether he were an Independent or no? (a Title by some of our dissenting brethren That proud and insolent title of Inde∣pendencie was affixed unto us, as our claime, the very sound of which con∣veighes to all mens appre∣hensions the challenge of an exempti∣on from all subjection and dependence; or rather a Trum∣pet of defiance against what∣soever power, spirituall or ci∣vill; which we do abhor and detest. Apolog. Narrat. p. 21. abhorred, by others Mr. Whites Book which he calls Truth glo∣riously appear∣ing, &c. in the Title page and fol. 2. pag. 1. of the Epistle Dedicatory, and fol. 2. p. 1. of the Epistle to the Reader. owned, and ho∣noured) he told me, he was not, but that he had a latitude of charity for them of that way; and so have I also. Since this answer, I had some glympse of more inclination in him to that side, then he acknowledged before, by his Dawnings of light, which have lately shone forth to a full discovery of his mind, in his booke which he calleth The opening of Master Prins Vindi∣cation; wherein he hath laid himselfe so open to the view of them that reade it, that none of them can doubt but he is an Independent at least, and at best not well affected to the Discipline so much desired, (as in the first page of his New Quere he hath phrased it) for in his Epistle Dedicatory, to the worthily much honoured Ma∣jor Generall Skippon, he makes the Controversie of these times to be but this, that some would walke more close with Christ, some can be content like Peter to walke at more distance, and to follow him afarre off, and to stand warming themselves with the multitude in the Com∣mon-hall; and let the world judge betwixt us, which is of best report. Who he meanes by such as walk close with Christ, and who by those that walke at more distance, we may gather by his answer to the Vindication, Pag. 24. Of the opening. where he saith, That our Parishes are not constituted, nor yet the government, according to the Gospell order; which he re∣ferres, for their originall, (by way of reproach) to Dionysius Bi∣shop of Rome, Anno 276. and in England to Honorius Bishop of Canterbury, while he endevours to prove the particular a. p. 33. ad pag. 37. gather∣ings, and separations of Congregationall meetings to be a fruit of the spiritual antipathy betwixt grace & nature, flesh & spirit, and that their pure and unmixt communion is the ordinance of Christ; of which (after he hath laid a charge upō the Presbyterial Churches) he saith, As I know not any such things among them, so I will make none Apo∣logie
for them, because that would bring them within the compasse of some thing like a crime, and I know nothing but well by them: By which comparative censure he bewrayeth himselfe to be partiall to one side, and prejudiciall to the other; and to that I professe my selfe a Servant, whereto he sheweth himselfe to be no friend; yet in defence thereof, I will not entertaine him as an enemie; for my Genius hath alwayes been very averse from jarres, and it is the lesse disposed to quarrel with him, because I see he dealeth not so harsh∣ly with Mr. Prin, as most of those polemicall Penmen have done, who have written against him; and to give him his due, in all that I have seene set forth in his name, I find him rather opiniative, than passionate, and more luxuriant in new notions of his braine, then ex∣orbitant in the passions, or perturbations of his spirit. I premise thus much, that you may not mistake my mind in my contestation with him in this cause, as if I tooke him for an enemie, because he telleth what he taketh to be a truth; for whatsoever dif∣ferent apprehensions we have in our heads, I wish wee may have nothing in our hearts, which may tend to effect, or foment any alie∣nation of affection betwixt us. For it is my desire, and shall be al∣wayes a part of my care, that while I seek after a controverted truth, I may not turne aside from a certaine duty; which is, in meeknesse to deale with a brother that is contrary minded; so farre as may not prove to the prejudice of what in conscience I am bound to under∣take, and to manage also to the best advantage. This for the Author and for the Title page besides (for the Authors Name is a part of it) it is as followeth. SECT. II. Of the Title Page. A New Quere at this time seasonably to be considered, as we ten∣der the advancement of Truth and Peace. He knew very well how the Athenian humour of listening after news prevaileth with our people of all sorts; and therefore being to fish in troubled waters, he puts upon his hook that bait, at which it was like many would be nibling. Next he saith, It is at this time seasonably to be considered, as we tender the advancement of Truth and Peace. He commends his
New Query to acceptance in two respects: 1. As seasonable. 2. As much importing the advancement of Truth and Peace. For the first; he saith it is at this time seasonably to be considered. So it is, now it is published; but it was very unseasonably offered: and I marvell that he, who hath written a whole booke of policy, should be so unpoliticke as to thinke it seasonable, to set forth such a Quere, and so to resolve it; such it tends to retard the establish∣ment of Government, whereto the Parliament is so much enga∣ged, not onely for the thing it selfe, but for a timely proposition, and imposition of it by their civill sanction. For the first, that they intend to set up a Church government, we have it, 1. From their expresse profession, December 15. 1641. We doe here declare, that it is farre from our purpose or desire to let loose the golden reines of Discipline, and Government in the Church, to leave private persons, or particular Congregations to take up what forme of service they please; for we hold it requisite, that there should be throughout the whole Realme a conformitie in that order, which the Lawes enioyne according to the word of God. So in the first Re∣monstrance of the Honourable House of Commons. pag. 25. 2. from the first Article of the solemne League and Co∣venant, published by Authoritie of Parliament, September 21. 1643. Wherein they, and all others that take it, doe covenant to endea∣vour the reformation of Religion in the Kingdomes of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, ac∣cording to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. 3. this Covenant was ordered againe by the Honorable House of Commons, Januarie 29. 1644. to be publiquely read every Fast day, and to be set up in every Congregation in a faire Table, where every one may read it; and to this are set the names of Master Speaker, and 243. more of the Honourable House of Commons. And for the second, that they meane to expedite the settling of Government with all convenient speed, we have good cause to conceive. 1. Because they have bestowed already very many dayes in consultation about it.
2. They insist in the same consultations still. 3. They (according to the eminence of their wisdome) appre∣hend many and great evils, that grow both in number, and power, by Doctrines of Libertinisme, which necessarily require the re∣straint of a reformed Church Government. 4. They have already set it up. 1. In their Ordinance of Ordination, set forth the last yeare. 2. In an Ordinance for making London a Province this last yeare, dividing it into severall Classes, and for choosing a Committee for tryall of Elders to be chosen, and Rules to be observed for orderly proceeding in the same; and this before this Quere came forth. 3. Since that, they have advanced further, by a Vote and Order for choosing Elders forthwith in particular Congregations. 4. And last of all, they have published an Ordinance, with rules and directions for suspension from the Sacrament, in cases of Igno∣rance and Scandall. Yet they cannot make that speed with the Government, which by most is desired, and very much desired by themselves (as we of the Assembly can witnesse, who have often beene sent to by that Honourable Senate to quicken our worke, and to ripen our debates to a full resolution) because as with us the libertie of speaking (wherein every one is free to propose, and prosecute any doubt) prolonged the Government in our hands; so the like libertie in the Honourable Houses (or rather our libertie is like theirs, it being the Prototypon) lengthens the debates, and delayes the Votes of that most Honourable Senate; and so much the more, because they are more in number then we in our Synod; and because their determinations are finall, as ours are not. And though that which is published doe not yet reach home to our full satisfaction, we hope it is in the way towards further per∣fection; which cannot reasonably be expected in the first Essayes of frames, and formes of Government; for we may say of Jeru∣salem as well as of Rome, that it was not built in a day, though in time it became the perfection of beautie, the ioy of the whole earth, Lam. 2.15. Such we pray God that fabrick may prove, which is under the hands of our Honourable and holy Nehemiahs; and Lord
polish, finish, and establish the worke in their hands, yea the worke of their hands establish thou it, Psal. 90.17. The other particular he propounds to make his Quere more plausible, is the reference it hath to two precious things, viz. Truth and Peace; both which are upheld by Government, Church-Go∣vernment; and without it, for truth we have abundance of errours, and heresies broached among us, which divide men into manifold Sects and Factions; and where they are multiplied, there can be no peace, without a treacherous toleration, which will resolve at last into an Anarchy and confusion. Having premised this, he putteth his Quere thus. Whether it be fit according to the Principles of true Religion, and State, to settle any Church-government over the Kingdome hastily, or not; and with the power commonly desired, in the hands of the Ministers. First, he putteth the case according to the Principles of Religion, and State: which if he had well considered, he might have thought the Parliament for the one, and the Assembly of Divines for the other, (competently qualified, each in their profession, for resolu∣tion of such a doubt, especially since it is a chiefe part of the pub∣lique worke of them both, to drive it to its issue) might have pre∣vented such a Quere as this, from a private Divine. Secondly, he suggests a suspition, as if the Parliament were dri∣ving on the Discipline and Government of the Church in Jehu's Chariot, with furious haste, whereas both Parliament, and Assem∣bly have much adoe, to ward off imputations of procrastination, and delay; for debating so long, and determining so little, whereof we have rendred the reasons before. Thirdly, he presents it as a gravamen, or of some dangerous con∣sequence, that the power should be put in the hands of the Mini∣sters, whereas Ministers put in for no more power as their due, either from the Magistrate, or over the people, then is consonant to the Scripture, and the principles of prudence; and if lesse then that be allowed them, since it is from God, and for God, not for themselves, God rather then they will be unworthily dealt with∣all; and if it be commonly desired, (as he saith) it is the lesse liable to his, or any mans exception.
Hereto having put his name, (which to me is of a savoury relish, by what I have tasted of his other Writings) he closeth up his Title page with the Testimonie of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.8. in these words, Our authoritie (which the Lord hath given us for instru∣ction, not for destruction); the ordinary reading or rendring of the originall word according to the literall sense, is edification; . but he refused that, and tooke the word instruction, which is metaphori∣call; either because he thought the Paranomasie more pleasant to the Reader, or lesse profitable for the Ministers claime to Church-Government; for edification importeth more power then instru∣ction doth; and he thought there would have beene too strong an intimation of Authority in the first substantive of his quotation if it had not beene allayed with a weaker word then the Gramma∣ticall construction bringeth with it: and for the other word de∣struction, if it be taken in a symbolicall sense to his resolution of the Quere, it implieth two things, which are of strong prejudice against the Government of the Church: 1. That it is a destructive thing, 2. That being such, it should neither be set up by the Magistrate, nor exercised by the Minister, nor received by the people: whereas indeed the severest act of discipline is salutary, and preservative to the better part of man; and though it be destructive to the worse, it is not to be rejected, but co nomine to be admitted; both these we make good by the authoritie of the same Apostle he citeth, though not in the same Epistle, deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Iesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. This for the Title Page of this New Quere. SECT. III. The matter and scope of the Quere, and resolution upon it. NOw for the Discourse it selfe, the drift whereof is to prove the Negative; viz. That it is not fit, according to the Prin∣ciples of Religion and State, te settle any Church Government over the Kingdome, &c. For this he pleads in eleven Paragraphs, which stand for so many
reasons for support of his Opinion; but they are set out rather with a Rhetoricall breadth, then a Logicall strength; and he seekes to cover the truth with a broad hand, which he cannot crush with his clutcht fist. I will endevour to present them rather according to the natu∣rall vigour (be it more or lesse) that is in them, then according to the artificiall colour he hath put upon them; about which the matter of greatest difficultie is to marshall them in a right method, which must be mine, though the reasons be his, and yet it shall be so farre his, as may consist with good sense, and the order of proceeding: and therefore I will divide them into the two heads, to which his Title page directeth me: Into reasons 1. Of Religion, and they are taken 1. From faith. 2. From Con∣science. 1. Positively, misguided to a popish compliance. 2. Negatively, not working any good upon the conscience. 3. From Christian examples 1. In generall, of the New Testament. 2. In parti∣cular, from the example 1 Of Christ his 1. Description. 2. Practice. 2. Of his Apostles. 2. Of Policy, taken from 1. Rules or con∣siderations of prudence, which are three. 1. The more time for trying of spirits, and proving of all things, there is the lesse danger to that State of erring in things received and authorised, &c. 2. There is no Religion established by State but there is some proportion in the two powers, &c. 3. Our parties or dissenting brethren being now together and clasped by interest a∣gainst the common enemic, this founda∣tion of common unitie is such, as may draw in both affections and judgements, if not too suddenly determined, &c. 2. Examples of practice 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.
The first reason, (taken from the rules of faith) because it is the clearest and cometh neerest to his negative conclusion, though it stand too farre off either to build, or uphold it. I will propound his owne words, The rules laid downe in the word for practicall obedi∣ence are § 1. p. 3. these in part, Let every one be fully perswaded in his owne mind, Rom. 14.5. and, whatsoever is not of faith is sinne, vers. 23. Now the setling of any government upon a people who are yet ge∣nerally untaught in the nature and grounds of it, is to put upon them the practice of that wherein it is impossible they can be perswaded in their minde, and so either on a necessity of sinne, or misery. Answ. If Mr. S. had minded, as he ought, what he was to prove, he should have planted his reason directly against the enioyn∣ing, or imposing of a Government, rather then against obedience to it; and so the Scriptures alleadged should have beene made remoraes to the erecting of a government, thus: Those that set up a government whereof they are not fully per∣swaded im their mind, and which they cannot doe in faith, doe sinne. But they that now set up a Church government, with power com∣monly desired in the hands of Ministers, doe set up a government whereof they are not fully perswaded in their minds; Therefore in so doing they sinne. The maior proposition hath warrant from the forecited places; but the minor is that wherein the weight or weaknesse of the Ar∣gument doth consist; and that cannot be proved, nor can, without breach of charitie, be supposed of such as have taken so long time, made use of so many learned and faithfull Counsellours (discussing and resolving all points of difficultie by the Scripture) to be sound∣ly grounded both in conscience, and prudence, for what they set forth, touching the government of the Church. Secondly, if we take this reason to stand immediately against o∣bedience, and consequently against commands or impositions, it will be somewhat more formall, but every whit as feeble, thus: That whereof every one (under governement) cannot be perswa∣ded in his own mind, and whereto he cannot yeeld  obedience of faith, may not be set up or setled in the Church. But of the government of the Church, with the power com∣monly desired, every one under government cannot be fully per∣swaded
in his mind, nor submit to it of faith; And therefore it may not be set up, or cannot at all be set up without sinne. Here the Minor proposition granted, the Maior must be de∣nied: For it is flatly repugnant to religion and reason, and makes as much against the former Protestations of the Parliament, and the late Covenant of three Kingdomes; yea against all assurances of either kind, as against the Government in question; for there will be alwayes some that will be scrupled with any thing that is pub∣liquely established. Obiect. But saith he, § 1. p. 3. The people are generally unt aught in the nature, and grounds of this Church Government; and therefore to put upon them the practice of that whereof it is impossible they can be fully perswaded in their minds, is to put them upon a necessitie either of sinne or of misery; To which, The Answer is so easie and ready, that it may be some matter of marvaile an ingenious man (as Mr. Saltmarsh is) should make such an Objection; for 1. The Church Government desired, is no other then (for the chiefe parts of it) hath good warrant from the word of God. 2. For what is of lesse moment, if it be not directly deduced out of Scripture, it is not repugnant to the Scripture, but agreeable to grounds of prudence, and the example of the best reformed Churches. 3. For the practice of Government, it belongeth not to the peoples part (as he puts the case), to be active in it; but to the Mi∣nisters, and Elders, and they are not to enter upon the exercise of their authoritie before they be sufficiently informed in it: and thence it is that (though there be an Order given for it): they that should officiate in it make a pause, and deliberate upon it, before they set upon the practise of it. 4. For the people, so farre as concerneth their compliance or cor∣respondence with the government, they are to be instructed in it before they yeeld submission to it; for that purpose the Govern∣ment is proposed by parts, and by degrees, so as it may be best ap∣prehended by all; and the Preachers appointed to teach both the offices of the Gevernours, and the duties of the people, so as each may performe his part without scruple, or doubting.
5. If any after this information out of weaknesse remaine unsa∣tisfied, be is not (as this Writer resolveth) put upon such a dange∣rous Dilemma, as either to make choyce of sin by obeying, or of misery by refusall to obey; for such as (not out of wilfulnesse, or faction, but out of tendernesse of conscience) cannot comply with the rule, are not presently to be ruled with the rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. but with meeknesse to be instructed though they be contrary minded, 2 Tii. 2.25. and with so much longsuffering and patience to be forborne, as may not be injurious to the truth of God, and prejudiciall to the peace of the Church. 6. Whereas he would have the generall ignorance of the people touching government a roason to suspend the setting of it up, it may rather be pleaded for expedition in the worke; for if it be not set up, the people cannot know it practically; and while it is unknowne unto them, it is impudently slandered by some, and impotently yeelded by many others, to be injurious and tyrannicall; whereas if it had beene experimentally knowne as it is, it would have beene before now both honourable, and amiable in the eies of them, who are not prepossessed with prejudice against it. 7. For those two Texts which he alleadgeth for deferring the Government (and if there be any weight in them as to that pur∣pose, they make against it not for a time onely but for ever) I com∣mend to his consideration, and wish he would preach and presse to his people when the government is set up, (as I hope it shortly will be) or rather before-hand to prepare them for it, such Scriptures as these; We beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: and to esteeme them very highly in loe, for their works sake, 1 Thes. 5.12, 13. Let the Elders that rule well be accounted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine, 1 Tim. 5.17. Remember. them which have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God, Heb. 13.7. & vers. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your soules, as they that must give account, that they may doe it with iy, and not with griefe. Thus much for his first Paragraph, which may deserve the first place, and a fuller answer then any of the rest, because it brings more appearance of proofe, both by Scripture and reason, then any of the other.
SECT. IIII. Reasons against the present setling of Government taken from Conscience answered. THe next reason for adjourning or putting off the Government to a further time, is taken from Conscience; and that in two respects. 1. In that the conscience hereby, that is, by a speedy setting up of government, is mis-guided to a compliance with a § 2. p. 3. Principle of Popery against the Nationall Covenant. Answ. It is very strange that any one, who remembreth the Nationall Covenant (as he taketh upon him to doe that citeth it) wherein we are bound sincerely, really, and constantly to endevour the reformation of Religion in the Kingdomes of England and Ireland in Discipline and Government, in the first Article of it, should from the same Covenant plead for delay in the establishment thereof; and yet more strange, that he should doe it under the title of Po∣pery, which in the next Article of the Covenant is disavowed; which (if his reasoning were right) were such a contradiction, as would argue the composers and penners of the Covenant to be men of most pitifull simplicitie. But wherein appeareth this Popery? Why, in § 2. p. 3. bringing the people under a Popish implicit obedience; and he confirmes it by expe∣rience: § 2. ibid. We know it by eeperience (saith he) that the people have beene ever devoted to any thing that the State sets up, all the disputes or conscience of the common people ending in this, Whether it be esta∣blished by Law, or no; and going usually no higher, or further then a Statute, or Act of State for their Religion. To which I answer. 1. For that he saith of implicit Popish obedience, it is very im∣pertinently applied to the Discipline, or Government in question; since (as I have shewed in what I said to his first reason) it is so or∣dered already that therein instruction must preced, or goe before observation; nor shall any one be bound to act in that particular any further then according to his light. 2. For his observation upon experience, it maketh as much a∣gainst matter of Doctrine as mattes of Discipline; and more a∣gainst
the Authority of the Parliament then the authority of Ministers; since They, not Ministers, make Statutes, and establish Lawes; and if the people be so apt to idolize a Statute, or an Act of State, (but I beleeve they more often offend in defect then in exeesse of respect unto them) it will be the duty of such as have the Legisla∣tive power (wherein he that finds the fault is fittest to doe the office of an Admonitor unto them) to suspend their authoritie for matter of Religion, and to ordaine and decree nothing of that sub∣ject to be received or observed. 2. A second reason, which hath reference to Conscience, he brings in upon experience thus: §. 5. p. 4. We have found by experience that the speedy setling of Government upon a Nation, hath made reforma∣tion take little root, save in the outward man, or formall obedience; because they received not reformation in the power of the word; but of the State, which went not so deepe into the conscience but they could part with it at any time upon a Law: And he concludes his observa∣tion with a patheticall interrogation: O then why doe not dayes speake, and multitude of yeares teach knowledge? To this may be replyed: 1. That if he meane it in respect of our owne Kingdome (and that experience is most like to come within his cognizance) the fault was not in the over-speedy setling of a Government, but in the choyce of a wrong Government: viz. that of Prelacy, which by an Act and Ordinance of Parliament, and by the Nationall Co∣venant is cryed downe. 2. If when Discipline is established, Doctrine were abolished, or for a time suspended and silenced, there were some force in this exception of Mr. Saltmarsh; but Doctrine goeth on where Disci∣pline cometh in; as a Schoole master is at the same time in Office both a teacher, and a corrector of his schollers; and so the power of the word may go deep into the conscience, and the Discipline or Government is rather an helpe, then an hindrance to that opera∣tion: for, 3. The Discipline or Government is as an hedge or wall about the Doctrine of Religion; a goad or spurre to the meanes of grace, to bring men under the power of the Words operation; a curbe to licentious courses; all which conduce much to the keeping of the conscience voyd of offence toward God and man: and though with
many the reformation reach no further then the outward man, yet that is not to be imputed to the Discipline which brings them to the Word, but to their owne corruptions, and Satans sleights, and deceits which hinder the Words kindly and saving worke upon them. 4. Where the Discipline hath beene rightly chosen, and timely established, God hath blessed it with better fruits; as in the King∣dome of Scotland; whence it is that that Church hath had the fa∣vour and honour from God, to be free both from heresie and schisme, where with we of this Kingdome and State have abounded so much the more, as the Discipline bath beene the more delayed; which agreoth to Mr. Saltmarsh his politick observation in these words: M. Saltmarsh his practise of policy, pol. 81. p. 69. When places of authoritie be likely to be vacant (much more when authoritie it selfe is at a nonplus) be ready in proiect with a successour; long interregnums or interstices, (i.) intermissions in government, are the Winter and ill season of a State, where the nights are long, and the dayes short. 5. And lastly, for his Epiphonema with the words of Elihu forementioned which are taken out of Iob 32. vers. 6, 7. Why doe not dayes speake, and multitude of yeares teach knowledge? they make nothing for his purpose; for the meaning of them is not that Government, or Discipline, or any other usefull thing should not be with all convenient speed established, but that the ancient, with whom is wisdome, Iob 12.12. the gray headed and very aged men, Chap. 15.10. who have had the experience of many dayes, and yeares, should be heard and heeded in matter of advice, and con∣sultation, before such green-headed Counsellours as Rehoboam followed to his ruine, 1 King. 12. vers. 13, 14. SECT. V. The Argument against the speedy setling of Church Go∣vernment taken from example of the New Testa∣ment in generall answered. A § 3. p. 3, 4. Third head of exceptions against the speedy (so he calls it Paragraph 5. though the word hastily please him better in the body of the Quere) setting up of Government is taken from Christian examples.
Contrary to 1. The New Testament in generall 2. In particular to 1. The example of Christ, and that two wayes, in respect 1. Of his description, §. 6. p. 4. 2. Of his practise, §. 3. p. 3, 4. 2. The example of the most ancient Christi∣ans, and excellent Ministers of Christ. 1. As of John Baptist; Christs forerunner. 2. The Apostles his followers. 1. For the generall; § 4. p. 4. We never read in the New Testament of a Go∣vernment setled upon any, that were not brought first under Gospel obedience by the power of the Word and Spirit, which thousands of Congregations in this Kingdome are not; for as in materiall build∣ings, stone and timber are not to be clapt together without hewing and squaring, so not in the spirituall; and whereas in the Temple there should be neither axe nor hammer heard, because things were fitted before hand, and so laid together, I question how this could be in our Congregations now; I beleeve there would be now more of the axe and hammer heard, then of the building seen. Answer. 1. Here he argueth from the example of the New Testament negatively; which, (considering the difference and disproportion of the times) is very impertinent. For the conversion we read of in the New Testament was from Paganisme and Judaisme to Christianitie; and while men were Iewes or Pagans, they were uncapable of a Christian Government; our Congregations in Eng∣land consist of professed Christians; who, as such, are capable of, and lyable to a Gospel Government, without which the sanctifica∣tion of the Sabbath, the preaching of the Word cannot be well or∣dered, nor either of the Sacraments rightly administred. And though in thousands of Congregations there be many whom the power of the Word and Spirit hath not brought to Go∣spel obedience, it is no cause why a Gospel Government should
not be established over them; nay rather it is reason why it should be hastened upon them; and we may impute the profanenesse of the people to the want of it, or of some parts of it, whereby Church Governours may be enabled to put a difference betwixt the holy and the profane, the uncleane and the cleane, Ezek. 22.26. For the rod of Discipline, 1 Cor. 4.21. may have a salutary operation in the Church, as the rod of correction in the family, Prov. 23.13, 14. 2. He makes a comparison betwixt a materiall and a spiritual building; See § 11. as in the materiall building stone and timber are not to be clapt together without hewing, and squaring, so not in the spirituall; of which words (if I rightly understand them) the meaning is, that Churches must be gathered and made up onely of holy, reformed Christians, which are as hewen or squared stones; to which I answer: 1. That similitudes may illustrate a truth proved, or to be pro∣ved, but they prove nothing. 2. That conformity betwixt materiall and spirituall things is not to be carried too far; similitudes, (as the common saying is) run not on foure feet. 3. There is this difference betwixt the building of the spirituall and material Temple, that in the spiritual there is nothing but what is homogencall, and of one kind, all squared and living stones, but in the materiall the foundation and walls are made up not onely of hewen and squared stones, but of others, yea many pieces of stone which are but as rubbish, have their use in the materiall building. 4. And yet wee may say of those whom hee accounts rough and unhewen stones, that they are in part squared towards a conformi∣ty to the rest of the building (in that they submit to the Gospell rule in many particulars) though they be not so exactly squared, or so perfectly polished as others. 5. Vpon this difference the best stones are not to be taken from the rest to make up a building by themselves, as in separated Con∣gregations many pretend, but performe not; for of those who se∣parate from others as from profane persons, divers are not onely rather gilded Hypocrites then golden Christians; but they are sun∣dry of them such as for want of charity and humility Christ would not owne for his disciples, Ioh. 13.35. Matth. 11.29. and who for
railing and covetousnesse, and other raigning sinnes of an haynons guilt ought to be discarded from Christian society, as well as a for∣nicator, a drunkard, or an idolator, 1 Cor. 5.11. Lastly, To conclude with a Negative Argument from the Now Testament, as he began his fourth Paragraph, (and against him it is good Logick, as an Apocryphall Text is good proofe against a Pa∣pist.) Let him shew any example of such a separation as he aymes at, in the New Testament; where when there was a mixture of holy and prophane, (as there was in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.21.) the Apostles, or Evangelicall persons, gathered out the holy part to make a separated Church from the rst, as many doe now adayes. That which followeth, concerning Axes and Hammers not heard in the building of the Temple of Salomon, hath a mysterious truth in it, but not to the purpose for which he produceth it; for it importeth that the spirituall Temple is built up chiefly by the soft whisperings and secret motions of the Spirit; whereof men heare no noyse, nor can take notice; and what is this to what hee would have? SECT. VI. The Argument against the speedy establishment of Church Govern∣ment, taken from Christs description, answered. THen for particular example he propounds Christs example, and therein observeth first his Description, secondly, his Pra∣ctise. For the former, he saith, The setting up of Government, §. 6. p. 4. is against the nature of Christs Description of himselfe, and against that sutablenesse he presseth for among all such as should submit to his Commandements; He shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any one heare his voyce in the streets, Matth. 12.12. My yoke is easie, and my burden is light, Matt. 11.29. His Commandements are not grievous; neither doe men put new wins into old bottles. Answer. In these words we have reason pretended, and Texts of Scrip∣ture annexed as sutable to it, but how impertinently, will be easily apprehended by such as please to observe.
1. That his reason, if it have any force, is not against a speedy Go∣vernment alone, but against Government at any time; for if it be contrary to the nature of Christ, it is lyable to that exception when∣soever it is set up, and worthy presently to be cryed down againe; but we adde further. 2. That if there bee a difference betwixt the Description of Christ and Church Government it is no marvell, for Christ as a Sa∣viour came to suffer, to be under government both just and unjust; He made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke upon him the forme of a servant, and humbled himselfe, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Crosse, Philip. 2.7, 8. which is crosse, and quite con∣trary to the condition of Government. 3. That neither is Christ so remisse as not to take upon him a Government in his Church, for he is the Head of it, Ephos. 1.22. and the Head doth, may, nay and must governe the body; nor is his Government so meeke, but that he hath an iron red to dash in pieces like a patters vessell, Psal. 2.9. those that are wilfully wicked; as well as a golden Scepter to call those into his prefence, who are gracious in his eyes, Esther. 5.2. and though comming to suffer, he descended to the low condition of a servant, Philip. 2.7. (as hath been said) and to the lowest kind of service, washing of the feet of his owne servants, Ioh. 13.5. yet sometimes he tooke upon him to be a Lord; and as Lord of his house, with a scourge of small cords drave the chafferers out of the Temple, and the oxen, and sheepe sold by them there, and overthrew the Tables of the money-changers, Ioh. 2.14, 15. And that we may not thinke he is made all of lenity and meeknesse, even the: where he is called a Lambe, a formidable wrath is ascribed to him, which maketh mighty men, and military men, free men and bond- to seeke to hide themselves from him th sitteth in the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe, Rev. 8.15. .|Nor is the Government or Discipline so unsuitable (in regard of severity) to the description of Christ, as in the protended dispa∣rity is sluggested, for it is to be administred with the spirit of meek∣nesse in admonition, to such as are humble and conscientious in their way, as well as with the rod of Discipline, to those who are . .|For the places of Scripture produced in the close of this Para∣graph, they are all quite besides the Question, or very little to the
purpose. For which they are brought; for the first, Matth. 12.19. Hee shall not strive nor cry, nor shall any man heare his voice in the streets; it sheweth the singular patience, and meeknesse of our Sa∣viour, when he was under the pursuit and persecution of his ene∣mies; as in the 53. of Esay he was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a Lambe to the slaughter, and as a sheepe before the shearers is dumbe, so opened he not his mouth, v. 7. Yet at other times he tooke liberty to speake, and authority to re∣prove very sharply, as Matth. 23. from vers. 13. to 35. as if out of his mouth had come the sharpe two edged sword, in the apparition to Iohn the Divine, Revel. 1.16. For the second place, My yoke is easie and my burden light, Matth. 11.29. and the third, (His Com∣mandements are not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5.3. which is so like unto the former, that one answer may serve for both) they make nothing against a speedy, but against a grievous Government; and yet surely, though the Evangelicall yoke of our Saviour in regard of the rigo∣rous yoke of the Law of Moses, (which neither we (said Peter) nor our fore-fathers were able to beare, Act. 15.10.) be easie, and yet more easie by the assistance Christ giveth his servants to beare it, (whence it was that the Apostle professed, that he tooke pleasure in infirmities, in necessities, persecutions, in distresses for Christs sake; for when I am weake, said he, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. When he was weake in himself, then was he strong by the support of Christ.) Yet is his yoke in it selfe, to those that are not by him enabled to beare it, very burdensome; as where Christ requireth the plucking out the right eye, or cutting off of the right hand, that is, of any con∣cupiscence or contentment (which becommeth a scandall or an of∣fence to the soule) if it were as deare unto us, as a right eye, or right hand; Matth. 5.29, 30. and the deniall of a mans owne selfe, and taking up his crosse to follow him, Matth. 16.24. the hating his nearest kindred, not onely in a collaterall, but in a directline, whe∣ther above or below him, yea, and his owne life also, Luke. 14. The last place is, neither doe men put new wine into old bottles, Matth. 9.17. Whereof it is hard to make any sober sense, which may serve to stay the Government at Discipline for a moment; and how it belongs to the resolution of this New Quere is hard to find out, though by a sober and serious consideration of the Case. If his meaning be (which he should not have put his Reader to
study for) that a new Government should not be put upon those, who have long beene accustomed to the old, lest it make a breach upon their conscience, or patience, as new wine wil by its working be like to break crazie bottles, if they be stopt while it is in working, then it makes rather for the continuance of the Prelacie, then against the setting up of the Presbyterie, and not against the Govern∣ment, or Discipline at this time onely, but at any time; for when∣soever it comes, it will be new Wine at the first, and the longer it is delayed the older will the bottles be into which it must be put: but the truth is, the Government is neither so new as he would make it, nor will there be any violent working by it to the breaking of any bottle, or vessell, unlesse it be a vessell of wrath fitted to de∣struction, Rom. 9.22. His last words in this Paragraph, and the next to those but now rehearsed are, all which cannot be fulfilled in the Parochiall congre∣gations. All which? all what? why, what is fore-mentioned, what is that? the Discipline of Christ, the sutablenesse he presseth for, his meekenesse, and silence, his easie yoke, and light burden, his Comman∣dements not grievous, and the putting of new wine into new bottles, all which (saith he) cannot be fulfilled in Parochiall Congregations: what language is here? what sense? what Logicall connexion, that may joyn the premises and conclusion together to beget a thought of compliance with the resolution of the Quere? Conceiving the Penner to be a sober man, I must thinke in this passage the Prin∣ters braine might be troubled with the fume of new wine, to con∣clude with non-sense for a rationall consequence: and I beleeve no new wine and old bottles, how new or old soever, can worse agree together then the fore-going evidence and finall sentence of this Paragraph. SECT. VII. Master Colemans experimentall exceptions against the severitie and rigour of the Presbyteriall Government answered. BVt doth not Mr. Coleman complaine of the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment as too severe and domineering, and that upon his
owne experience, and thereupon forecast some strange feares, and strong prejudices against it? Yes, and he doth it in these words, I will tell you, saith he, both what, and whence my feares are; I feare lest the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment should incroach upon the Civill; and I also feare lest it should Prelatically tyrannize; and these my feares arise from Scot∣land, and from London. 1. From Scotland, I my selfe did heare the Presbyterie of Eden∣borough censure a woman to be banished out of the gates of the Citie; was not this an incroachment? Answer. It may be not, for there might be Civill Magistrates in the Pres∣byterie; and they, (as Civill Magistrates, not as Presbyterians,) might inflict such a Censure upon her; or upon proofe of notorious lewdnesse, they might say, she was not worthy to be suffered to live in the Towne; and therefore that she deserved to be banished out of it: but that the Presbyterie did, as a Presbyterie, authorita∣tively take upon them to banish her, he doth not affirme, much lesse confirme by any good evidence; and I am credibly informed, On monday, November 3. that some of the Reverend Commissioners of Scotland have confidently gainsaid that report to his face. And what if that were one exorbitant act, and usurpation upon the Civill power? will that one act make voyd the right of a power which is Presbyteriall? And what if a Civill Magistrate should take upon him to preach, and administer the Sacraments, as Ʋzziah would have burned incense, 2 Chron. 26.16. would that make a forfeiture of all Civill authoritie? Mr. Coleman will not say it, nor can he prove what he pretends, by such an incroachment, against the Presbyterie. But for this I leave him to his Antagonist, the religious, learned, prudent, and modest Commissioner of Scot∣land; who, I doubt not, will doe the Cause and himselfe right a∣gainst Mr. Coleman his exceptions in time convenient. 2. From London; Presbyterie (saith he) with us here is scarce yet in its infancie, we have had but one or two preparative meetings, and yet in them we had as Prelaticall a trick endevoured to be put upon us, as the nature of the businesse could possibly beare; and when I stood up to plead for an equall interest, and to prevent such usurpations, the
grave Prelaticall checks of knave and foole were at least whispered for mine entertainement: Hence these feares. Answer. He doth not shew what Prelaticall trick that was; but as (since he hath explained his speech to a reverend Brother of the Assem∣bly) it appeareth upon examination, that he was much mistaken both in the person he suspected, and in the motive and intention of the speaker; so that it was so farre from being a Prelaticall trick, that it was neither a trick, nor Prelaticall, no nor Presbyteriall nei∣ther; for what if the spirit of Diotrephes be in a single Presbyter without a Presbytery? I am sure that meeting (which he mean∣eth) was no formed Presbyterie, none such as was endowed with, or assumed any power of Ecclesiasticall censure; if it had, neither he nor his opposite would have beene suffered in such incivilitie of language, as he hath expressed. Nor is it reasonable to intitle the extraordinary excesses of par∣ticular persons to any sort or society of men; for there be some and but some, in all Professions, who are very masterfull in their opi∣nions, and forward to engage in termes of contradiction, and when they are once heated with a fond affection to their owne fancies, (which is the more blowne up by the breath of an opposite) they are not masters of their owne words, nor can they exercise any reasonable rule either upon their spirits, or speeches; and some∣times they second their precipitancie in both, with such a perti∣nacie of will, and stoutnesse of stomach, that they choose rather to cast firebrands about, to put Nations and Churches into a dan∣gerous combustion, then quietly to compose any personall quarrell of their owne, though never so inconsiderately stirred up by them; this is the extremitie of that malignant and mischievous practice, which God professeth especially to hate, Prov. 6.19. And for the opprobrious termes he complaineth of, if he had the patience to beare them when he heard them, and did not re∣ciprocate one contumely for another, (as some say he did) he should have had the prudence (and to that) should have advised him, had I been of his counsell) to have buried them in silence; and not for that which was but whispered in the eare, to propose it to publique view, that every one may read the reproach of K. and F. put upon him, in print.
SECT. VIII. The Argument against the speedy setting up of the Presbyteriall Government taken from Christs practise answered. A Second exception reduced to the example of Christ in his practise is that § 3. p. 4. Christ Iesus himselfe could as easily have set∣led his Government by miracle, as any can now by Civill power, if there had beene such a primary, or morall necessitie of establishing it so soone upon a people scarce enlightened for any part of it. But we see the contrary, first in himselfe, he taught long, and Iohn before him, and so the Disciples, and the gifts for Government were not given till he ascended, and the modell for Government was not brought forth but by degrees, and as people fell in, and were capable of the yoke, and would mould more easily to the Commandements of Christ; and whe∣ther then or no, is yet a Question (which some have sit the debates to) though not with me, who am fully perswaded of the power of order which the Apostle ioyed to behold; though a power with as little do∣minion in government, as tradition in worship. Answer. 1. The acts and times for the Divine providence towards his Church are various; and the reasons of them many times reserved to God: he could, no doubt, have governed his Church in the first age of the world, by the scepter of his written word, but there was no Scripture till God wrote his Decalogue or ten Comman∣dements in Tables of stone, Exod. 31.18. and if the Booke of Ge∣nesis were written before, it was yet after the birth of Moses, (for he was the Penman of it) who was not borne till the yeare of the world, 2373. all this while God had his Church, and no written Law for the government of it. Yet when he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, (which was in the yeare, 2454) the next yeare af∣ter, he gave direction for the building of a Tabernacle; and to the Morall Law forementioned added Lawes Ceremoniall, and Iudi∣ciall; divers of which were not to be put in execution untill their coming into Canaan, which was well neere fortie yeares after∣ward; so farre was he before-hand with the government of his Church of the new edition.
2. Whereas he saith, that Iesus Christ could have as easily set∣led the government of his Church by miracle, as any can now by Civill power; we grant it, yea and more, that he could have done it without a miracle; and yet more, that he did so, when he chose Apostles and gave them the keyes of the Kingdome of heaven, Matth. 16.19. for remission and retaining of sinnes, Ioh. 10.23. and set downe a rule of graduall proceeding with offenders, Matt. 18.15, 16, 17. 3. If it be said, that this was late in the Ministery of our Saviour, and therefore we must take his example, not onely for the thing it selfe, but for the time; this will make more for the Anabapti∣sticall delay of Baptisme, then for delay in Discipline or Govern∣ment: for he was not baptized untill he was about thirty yeares of age, Luk. 3.23. but he began to set up a government of his Church within the compasse of his publique Ministery, which at the most lasted but foure yeares space, and many learned men confine it to three yeares and an halfe, or thereabouts. As for Iohn Baptist, his time was shorter, for he was beheaded in the second of the foure yeares forementioned; nor did it belong to his Office to set up a government in the Evangelicall Church, but to prepare the way of the Lord by preaching repentance unto the people, Matth. 3.3. Isa. 40.3. 4. Whereas he saith, the gifts of government were not given till Christ ascended; to that it may be answered: 1. That he ascended fortie three dayes after the period of his publique Ministration, which added to the yeares forementioned, make but small difference as to the government in question. 2. That though he gave them an increase of gifts for govern∣ment, as he did for preaching, he put his Apostles upon neither of those offices without competent gifts, and qualifications for them. 5. For the model of government, which he saith was brought forth by degrees, as people fell in and were capable of the yoke; I would know what model he meaneth; if he meane any model of Christ or his Apostles (as it appeareth he doth, for saith he, against Mr. Colemans opinion, I am fully assured of a power of order, which the Apostle reioyced to behold, Col. 2.5.) I aske whether this be given by tradition, or contained in the Scripture; I suppose he will
say of Government (as well as of Worship) not by tradition, but by the written word; and if so, though it were but young in the time of Christ, or his Apostles, it is very ancient to us; (for we have no part of the written word but it is fifteene hundred yeares of age at least) why then should that which is so old in constitution, be thought too soone to be put in execution at the present? especially since (besides the direction for it in the Scripture) we have had these many yeares severall patterns of it, in many reformed Chur∣ches in the Christian world. Nor doe our brethren of Scotland (though they assert it from Scripture to be the will of God) expect that the Parliament should establish it Jure Divino. M. Gelaspi his brotherly examination of M. Colemans Sermon. p. 32, 33. If they shall in a Parliamentary, and Legislative way establish that thing, which is really and in it selfe agreeable to the word of God, though they doe not declare it to be the will of Iesus Christ, they are satisfied. If it be best, (as his words imply) that the government be brought in by degrees, so it is in the present reformation; for it hath by soft and slow degrees passed the debates, first of the Assembly, and afterward of the Parliament; and as for approbation, so for ex∣ecution, it passeth by degrees the Civill sanction, which authorised first an Ordinance for Ordination, after that a Directory for wor∣ship, a good while after that was the Citie of London, and the Parishes annexed made a Province, and divided into Classicall Presbyteries, and then with some intermission of time was a power granted to choose a Committee for triall of Elders; and now lately a Vote and an Order for the choice of Elders in every Parish; and since that an Order or Ordinance touching admission to, and rejection from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and yet there remaine other parts of government to be added to them, which we hope will be authorized in time convenient, and the sooner the better.
SECT. IX. Reasons taken from rules and considerations of prudence answered. THus much for his Reasons which respect Religion: Now for the Politique part of his Quere, in 1. Rules or considerations of Prudence. 2. Examples of practise. His rules of Prudence in the generall are three; the first he layeth downe thus: §. 7. p. 5. The more time (saith he) for trying of spirits, and proving of all things, there is the lesse danger to that State of erring in things received, and authorized, and of involving it selfe into the designes of Ecclesiasticall power, then which nothing hath sooner bro∣ken the Civill power; as may be seene in Popish Kingdomes, and our late Prelaticall. There can be no great danger in the not sudden in∣corporating the two powers. Since Moses is not alive to bring downe the iust patterne of the Tabernacle, there may a new starre arise, which was not seene at first, which if we shut up our selves too soone, while the smoke is in the Temple, cannot appeare. Answer. 1. It is the dutie of a State, that is, of them that governe a State, not onely to try spirits, but to rule them; and rather to rule them then to try them; and for that purpose the sooner they be brought under government, the better; for the rod and reproofe, saith Solo∣mon, give wisdoms, Prov. 29.15. And on the contrary, the longer they live without the yoke of Discipline, the more enormous will they be: and so the observation of Solomon will be verified, a child left to himselfe bringeth his mother to shame, Ibid. and his fa∣ther too, whereof we have an example in his brother Adouijah, 1 King. 1. vers. 5, 6. And for proving of all things to be imposed, there is a due proportion of time to be observed, which may as well be too much, as too little; and it hath beene, if not the fault, the ill hap of our Church and State, to have the Government flut∣tering upon the Lime-twig of deliberation at Westminster, when it should be upon the wing of actuall execution, all over the King∣dome.
2. Whereas he makes it a dangerous matter for the State to in∣volve it selfe into the designes of Ecclesiasticall power, because it is a meanes to breake the Civill power, as may be seene in Popish King∣domes, and our late Prelaticall. His position and proofe are most unseasonably, and impertinent∣ly applied to the Presbyteriall government, which abjureth both Popish, and Prelaticall dominion by solemne Covenant, and taketh a course not onely to suppresse and bury, but to keepe them down, that there be no feare of a resurrection of them. 3. And when on the contrary he saith, § 7. p. 5. There can be no danger in the not sudden incorporating the two powers: since Moses is not alive to bring downe the iust patterne of the Tabernacle; there may a new starre arise which was not seene at first; which if we shut up our selves too soone, while the smoke is in the Temple, cannot appeare. This is a very perplext and confused expression, darkning the truth which he should illustrate; wherein if his meaning be that there is no great danger in the not establishing Ecclesiasticall go∣vernment by the Civill State, or that if now it were done, it were too sudden and hasty, it is a groundlesse conceit, refuted already; and for that he bringeth in of Moses not being alive to bring the pat∣terne from the Mount, and of a new sterre to arise, it bewrayeth his designe not onely to delay the government desired for a time, but to debarre it for ever; or to prepare the way for some seducing See Bucol. Ind. Chron p. 156. ad an. 134. & Schindl. Pentag. col. 826. Benchocheba, or Barchochebas, (as his name soundeth) the sonne of a starre, who (pretending himselfe to be the starre of Iacob fore∣prophecied, Numb. 24 17.) tooke upon him to be a new guide unto the Iewes; but misleading them to their ruine, he was called Bencozba, the sonne of a lie. 2. For the other prudentiall rule his words are these: There is no Religion established by State, but there is some proportion in the two powers, and some § 10. p. 6. compliance betwixt the Civill and Ecclesiasti∣call state; so as the establishing the one, will draw with it some motions in the other; and we all see (saith he) how hazardous it is to dis-in∣interesse any in the Civill part, even in Kingdomes that are more firme, as France, where the Protestants are partly allowed their Re∣ligion, in pay for their civill engagements; and so in other States; and sure I am, the State is most free where the conscience is least strait∣ned; where the tures and wheat grow together untill the harvest.
Answer. Here he makes the Civill and Ecclesiasticall State so linked, and neerely allied together, that if there be motions in the one, there will not be quietnesse in the other; and that the Ecclesiastical State hath such an interest in the Civill, that it is hazardous to the Civill part, if it be not allowed: and for that reason the Protestant Reli∣gion is tolerated in the Popish Kingdome of France, which is as a pay or a recompence for their civill engagement. In which pas∣sage (as in divers others) he aimes at the perpetuall prohibition of Government; not at a temporall forbearance onely; and he carrieth it on so as if we must allow him the authoritie of a prolitique Dicta∣tor without any proofe of Scripture, reason, yea or of any humane testimony; for what he saith, (though in the way of a rationall ratifi∣cation) hath so little strength of reason in it, that it reacheth not halfe way to the resolution of the Question in the Tenour of his Tenet. For what if the Church and State be so symbolicall as to reciprocate interests, and conditions, betwixt themselves? shall the Civill State leave every man, or every Congregation to their owne libertie to be governed, or ungoverned as they list? every man in matters of Religion to doe that which is right in his owne eyes, as when there was no King in Israel? sudg. 17.6. Nay rather, because disturbances are communicated from the one to the other, the Civill State ought to settle the government of the Ecclesiasti∣call, according to the word of God, and the example of the best refor∣med Churches; that it may the more securely enjoy its owne peace. And for that he saith of the toleration of the Protestants of France, the originall of it was not out of any principle of compli∣ance of all Religions with the Civill State, but because the King himselfe Henry the fourth having beene a Protestant, and recover∣ing his right by the Armes of Protestants, (though he wickedly revolted from his Religion, and wretchedly suffered for his Apo∣stasie) he could doe no lesse in humanity then allow them the li∣bertie of Religion; which hath beene continued unto them not upon Mr. S. his ground before mentioned, but because the Protestants are the trustiest friends of the Crowne of France, and most enga∣ged to defend it against the interests, and designes of the Spaniard, whose longing after an universall Monarchy, is carried with the strongest degree of concupiscence towards the Crowne of France,
as the fayrest marke of his boundlesse ambition. Now though his argument fall farre short of probable, he concludes with assurance: Sure I am (saith he) that State is most free where the conscience is least straitned; If he meane most free in indulgence, by letting loose the reigns to all Religions, it is true, and if he allow of such a freenesse, (as by his ensuing words it seemes he doth) he com∣plieth with the Authour of the Booke of the Bloody Tenet, who holdeth (as absurdly as impiously) that it is the will and command of God that (since the coming of his Sonne the Lord Jesus) a permis∣sion of the most Paganish, Iewish, Turkish, The sixt Pro∣position of the twelve prefixed before the Book published Anno 1644. and Antichristian con∣sciences, and worships be granted to all men, in all Nations and Coun∣tries, and they are onely to be fought against with the sword, which is onely (in soule matters) able to conquer, to wit, the sword of the Spi∣rit, the word of God. If he meane, where there is such licentious allowance of all Religions, there the State is freest from commo∣tion, and distraction, manifold experience in severall Ages, and Countreys proveth the contrary. He concludeth this exception a∣gainst the settling of the Government with the Parable of the Tares and the Wheat, wherein he closeth with the forementioned Authour, cap. 18, &c. of his wicked booke. But withall, if there must be such a mixture of the tares with the wheat, what warrant is there (for his party) to pluck the wheat from the tares, nay the wheat from the wheat (for they leave as good Christians as they take) in their new gathering of Churches? A third Remora against the setting up of Government of pru∣dent or politick consideration, is this: § 11. p. 6. Our parties, or dissenting Brethren being now together, and clasped by interest against the common enemy, this foundation of com∣mon unitie is such, as may draw in both affections and iudgements, if not too suddenly determined into hereticks and schismaticks. It is pos∣sible while a Controversie is long suspended, and time given for conclu∣sion of things, opinions may be soone at peace: A fire let alone may dye out under that wood, which stirred in would kindle it; The contentions of brethren are like the strong barres of a Castle, and a brother offen∣ded is harder to be wonne then a strong citie, Prov. 18, 19. Answer. The danger of a common enemie is many times, and should be alwayes, a cause of suspension of particular antipathies; the wild
beasts in the Arke were reconciled with the tame, while without it the overwhelming flood was round about; but this clasping of dissenting brethren in the Campe upon present undertakings, must not leave us loose to division in the Citie; for that (as Mr. Saltmarsh himselfe acknowledgeth) M. Saltmarsh practise of po∣licy, l. 4. pol. 12. is the mother of confusion; and he Idem l. 2. of his Book of the Practice of policy. pol. 123. p. 288. calls private Conventicles the very Parliaments of factious deliberations and resolutions; and saith, they are to be observed and dispersed. And by the Text he citeth, viz. Act. 4.26. he meaneth such factions, as are adverse or opposite to true Religion; and for expedition in repressing the perill of such combinations he giveth this advice, (which if he had now thought of I suppose he would not have made such a dilatory discourse as he hath done) M. Saltmarsh his practise of policy l. 2. pol. 124. p. 289. Kill factions betimes, as Herod did the Infants in their cradles; if you let them grow, they may prove too strong for you; when sedition is at an age, it is more able; a little Physick will disperse a gathering disease, which (if it knot) hath more danger and difficulty: it was enough to make the servant bad when he thought with himselfe, My Lord delay∣eth his coming, Matth. 24.48. And truly the delay in setting up a Government hath beene an occasion of the multiplication both of heresies, and schismes, and of an increase both of number and cou∣rage of such as are ingaged in them; and the longer the delay is drawne on, the more difficult will the reducement be; for men who are disposed to divsion, make account that such as forbeare the remedy are either inclinable to them, or unable, or afraid to displease them; and by such conceits they foment their owne san∣cies, and heighten their spirits to contumacie, and contempt; whereof there is but too much evidence given in many that op∣pose the settlement of Religion by establishing Church Govern∣ment. And whereas he saith, It is possible while a Controversie is long suspended, and time given for conclusion of things, opinions may be sooner at peace: We answer. First, that possibility is but a poore plea against probability, nay, against particular experience; for it is obvious to any mans view that will observe the method of proceeding, and manner of prevail∣ing of the dissenting party, that while their brethren have endevour∣ed by all amicable carriage towards them, and by courteous com∣pliance with them, to worke and win them to a brotherly accord, they have driven on their owne designe with a politique activity,
and have gained more by the slownesse of their adversaries pace, then by the goodnesse of their owne cause, though therein they would be thought to have the advantage. He addeth, A fire let a∣lone may dye out under that wood, which stirred in would kindie it. But when a fire is kindled, not in greene, but in dry wood, (which will easily burne) will men let it alone till it quench of it selfe? or shall we thinke, that the setling of a Government is as the bellowes to a fire, to blow it up into a flame? No wise man can imagine either the one, or the other; and the contrary is plaine by manifold exam∣ples of the Anabaptists, and other seditious Sectaries in Germany; for whom at first Guy de Bres against the er∣rour of the A∣nabapt. p. 6. Luther did mediate with Fredericke Duke of Saxony, That within his Dominions they be favourably dealt with all, because (excepting their errour) they seemed otherwise good men; but afterwards, by the connivence and indulgence that was used to∣wards them, increasing both in bodies and boldnesse, he was faine to Sleyd. Com∣ment. l. 5. fol. 76. p. 22. stirre up the Princes and people of Germany against them, as for the extinguishing of a common combustion, or a fire that threat∣ned the burning of City and Country. Which I mention not to ex∣cite Authority to any needlesse or unseasonable severity, but to note the danger of too much delay, in applying remedies to imminent mischiefes. He concludes this politick consideration, with a sen∣tence of Scripture, which is, The contentions of Brethren are like the barres of a Castle, and a Brother offended is harder to be wonne then a strong City, Prov. 18.19. And this he brings in as a seale to this politick Aphorisme, for the ceasing of differences of them∣selves by silent forbearance: But will the barres of a Castle be bro∣ken by letting them alone? And shall one expect to take a City, a strong City, and doe nothing against it? Wee have not found it so for the most part of our late warres, either in England or Ire∣land. Thus farre his Politicke Rules. Now for particular Instance: We find it of two sorts; 1. Negative. 2. Positive.
SECT. 10. The Negative Argument taken from want of experience of the New Clergie, answered. FIrst, for the Negative, § 8. p. 5. We have not yet any experience of our new Clergie, (saith he) who are many of them branches of the old stocke, and so may weild the Government too much of the Episcopall faction; as the Samaritanes did with the Jewish Government, because they were not naturall Jewes: It is not safe trusting a power too much into those hands; our Brethren of Scotland have been better used to the way of Presbytery, and may better trust one another upon mutuall experience, then we can yet. Answer. Have we not yet experience of our new Clergie? Then they can∣not be charged with the mis-government of the people; but we have experience of much evill for want of Government; but how can there be experience of them, if there be no government to try them withall? He saith, Many are branches of the old stocke; and so may weild the Government too much of the Episcopall faction; and yet presently he compareth them to the Samaritans, and Iewes, who were most adverse in affection, and disposition, and dealing one to another; compare Ioh. 8.48. with Luke 9.53. and Ioh. 4.9. and then saith, It is not safe trusting a Power too farre into those hands; I thinke he needs not much to feare that; The Government will be so qualified for the thing it selfe, and so disposed of for the persons that are to manage it, that it will not be in the power of any to a∣buse it, but upon their perill. Here lest the example of our Brethren in Scotland should be brought in by way of prejudice to his advice, and resolution against the timely establishment of the Presbyteriall Government in England, hee saith, They are more used to the way of Presbytery, and may better trust one another upon mutuall experi∣ence, then we can yet. It is well that Scotland (the Kingdome or Country wherein there is best experience of the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment) yeelds least occasion of exception against it; a great commendation of it doubtlesse; which alone were enough to con∣vince all those who stand for a liberty of conscience, against a cer∣taine
and generall rule; of which liberty if there were as much tri∣all made, as hath been of the discipline of that Kingdome, it would appeare faulty, scandalous, dangerous so many ways, as would make all good and wise men weary of it; and there are men of note who affirme (upon late experience in some Counties of the King∣dome) that the best way to suppresse the multiplicity of Sects, is to let them have scope, and they will runne themselves out of breath; whereto I cannot give my Vote, since we may not give way that God should be dishonoured, nor the people be indangered, nor false teachers tolerated, if wee may hinder it, no not for an houre, Ga∣lat. 2.5. 2. For the Positive Instance, his next words are, § 9. p. 5. Wee experi∣ence in part some remainders of Prelacie working in many, which shewes a constitution not so cleare nor pure, as the Disciples of Christ should have; then whether it be safe committing the power too sudden∣ly; for though I question not but some may be like the ten, yet there are others that are like the two brethren, who strove which should bee the greatest, till the Lordended the difference, It shall not be so among you. Answer. This parcell of his Politickes beginneth scarce with good Eng∣lish, for where reades this writer this phrase, We experience? and why did he not keepe to the Termes he used in the precedent Paragraph, Wee have experiment, or experience? And he goeth on with as little good sense, for a little after he saith, Then whether it be safe to commit the power too suddenly, for though I question not, &c. Where he suspends the sense of his speech, and leaves it to be made up by a supplement of the Reader; yet we know his mean∣ing thus farre, that it is not safe to commit the power too suddenly; if he meane by this, and by the word hastily, (in the body of his Quere) rashly, or inconsiderately, we say so too; but we deny (which he meaneth) that if it had beene done sooner, or be not deferred longer, it will be too suddenly done; but it appeareth (by what before hath been observed) with him to commit any power, or establish any government, (especially the Presbyteriall govern∣ment) it is too soone or suddenly done, if it be done at all. In the next part of this Paragraph he beginneth to be rationall, but so that it may make more for that part he opposeth, then for that which
he pleadeth for, in these words: For though I question not (saith he) but some may be like the ten, yet there are others like the two bre∣thren, which strove who should be the greatest, till the Lord ended the difference; It shall not be so among you. Where if we keepe the pro∣portion he brings in, and make application accordingly, we may say, for two ambitious Presbyterians, it is like there may be tenne that are more modestly, and humbly minded, then to affect such a preeminence above their brethren. Besides, the Presbyterian government is framed directly accor∣ding to the resolution of our Saviour, (It shall not be so among you) as opposed to the Prelaticall authoritie. § 9. p. 5. We find (saith he further) the hottest controversie is now moved about Church government, and there hath beene most spoken and written this way, and in most violence. Now when the contention for power is so much, and the controversie streames most in government, we may soone discerne dispositions. Answer. But is it not an hotter Controversie that is now moved, and in motion, and in commotion, touching Civill Government? And for the discoverie of dispositions thereupon, it may be so without any fault in those that are for government in question, but not without a crime in such as oppose it, or despise it in any thing wherein it is consonant to Gods word, and found reason subordinate to it; espe∣cially when in a great part it is settled already, and they who are in authoritie are intentively imployed to bring it to perfection. But saith he, § 9. p. 5. Is it good parting with the stakes yet, while there is such quarrelling for them, and when one party cannot but take it for an iniury, if wholly given to the other? This Question prosupposeth and importeth an evennesse, and e∣quality as betwixt parties that lay wagers, or play matches, and lay downe stakes upon equall termes; whereas the difference indeed is betwixt Government and no Government; and betwixt the high Court of Parliament, and all the most orthodox Churches, and Divines of the Christian world on the one side, and a small and inconsiderable partie, in respect of them, on the other; who for the most part (though there be some of them of good note both for learning, and life) might with good Decorum be brought to the Barre, to receive consure from those, with whom they cannot take
upon them contestation without arrogant presumption so it cannot be an injurie to resolve for government against them, no more, (no nor so much) then against the Bishops ill government, who had possession of Prelacie by a prescription Legally authorised, whereas those who are against the government desired, have no possession or prescription, nor pretence of Law, for their Anarchie against it. And therefore if the Bishops had struggled more for their chaires in the Church, and their seats in the Parliament, then they did, and had beene all of them as obstinate as two of them were, B. W. of L. & C. & B. W. of L. who said, they would be hangd at the Court gate, before they would yeeld up their votes and places in the House of Peeres; they had beene more excusable in that contumacie, then most of those who wilfully withstand the Presbyterie resolved on. The last part of this proofe is, that §. 9. p. 5, 6. It is to be feared (saith he) there is too much of man, because the by as runnes most in these times towards the truth of Government, and many others are wholly set by, which might well be looked upon with it: which, if there were not a principle in man more fitted for a truth of this kind, then any other, would not be. But every truth hath its age, and season: this onely for Caution. Answer. Most of this may be granted, and nothing gained to Mr. S. his cause; if there be two much of man in the Controversie, it is like to be in those, who despise Government, who are presumptuous, and selfe willed, and are not afraid to speake evill of Dignities, a Pet. 2, 10. If the by as run most in these times toward the truth of Govern∣ment, it is but as it should be, and as it was when the Prelaticall power was opposed and suppressed by the Parliament; and if the by as were wryed aside from the truth, it were rather to be noted as matter of exception, then that it bendeth towards the truth; especially since he saith a little after, there is a principle in man more fitted for a truth of this kind then any other; and if, (as he saith) every truth hath its age and season, surely then this truth of Pres∣byterian Government is seasonable now; For the Bishops Go∣vernment being put downe, it is necessary some other should be set up, and before all other the Presbyteriall, as most agreeable to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches and it is yet more seasonable to establish it with speed, because for
want of it in part, are so many divisions and distractions in Church and State. And if that be true which he saith, that many other truths are wholly set by, which might be looked upon with it; it may be the fault of those who set themselves too much against that Government; who, mistaking the truth and integritie of it, make it their maine worke to revile, and reproach it, to make it odious among the peo∣ple before they have any true understanding thereof. But for such as are most for the Presbyterie, I am sure they are intentively stu∣dious to discover, deliver, and defend all other truths of faith and manners, which make for salvation, as well as for the setting up or settling of the Government in question. The end of this Paragraph is, This onely for Caution. Then nei∣ther for proofe, nor reproofe; and I wish he had had more caution in his mind, (for if so, he would not so hastily have set upon the Go∣vernment, as too hastily either intended or attempted) and more in his paper, and then I should have spared some labour, for he would have had fewer faults, and a shorter refutation would have served the turne. SECT. XI. Objections against the Reasons for the not establishing Church Go∣vernment, proposed, and answered, as Objections against Mr. Saltm. his Tenet in the Quere, with Replies to his answers. HAving plaid the assaylant against the Church Government hitherto, (but without any impediment or impeachment of moment) he now turneth Defendant, and takes up the Bucklet to ward off objections against his opinion; but whereas there be many such, he meddles but with two onely, and those two such as he thought himselfe best able to answer. Obiection 1. p. 7. But the Temple was builded with all speed, in Nehemiabs time, and therefore, &c. And Haggai calls to the building of it, Is it time? Hag. 1.4. To which be makes this answer: Ibid. Yea, but the materiall pat∣terne wa mre clearely left, and knowne, then the Gospel patterne;
the other were more in the letter, these more in the Spirit; now there must be a proving of all things, else there may be more haste then good speed, and the Temple may be built by a false patterne, as well as a true, and then better no building, then no right Cedar to build with; and there were Prophets then who knew the periods of times, and could pro∣phecie, as Haggai, and Zechariah, but none so exactly now; and these knew both the fashion, and the time for building; yet who ought not to hasten the Temple, if the Timber be ready, and if the Prophets and Apostles be there for a foundation, and Jesus Christ for a chiefe coruer stone? Ephes. 2. Reply. That he may not be thought to side with Sanballat and Tobiah against the speedy building of the Temple, who scorned and deri∣ded the expedition of Nehemiah and his brethren, in being so for∣ward to the worke, as if they meant to make an end in one day, Neh. 2. v. 19. & Chap. 4. v. 2. he endevours to shew considerable diffe∣rence, 1. Betwixt the Materiall patterne and the Gospel patterne, (though See Sect. 5. p. 16. before he married them together to ingender an excepti∣on against the Presbyteriall government). 2. Betwixt the builders of the one, and the builders of the other; whence he would in∣ferre, that in the former builders there was good speed, in the latter there would be too much haste, if it should be set up sooner then he would have it. And if it be too soone now for the Gospel government, will he set a time for it when it will be seasonable to establish it? will he have it stay till it be a materiall building, as the Temple was? or till we have inspired Prophets, as Haggai and Zechariah were, to order the work? If so, the answer is a contradiction to government not for the present, but perpetu∣ally; and tendeth not to a delay in setting of it up, but to the keep∣ing of it downe for ever. If not, then surely it cannot be an under∣taking of too quick dispatch, if we endevour to set up the Gospel patterne according to the rule and direction which we find in the Dictates of the Holy Ghost, in the New Testament; which to us of this age cannot be called new, nor the determinatiō sudden, or hasty, since it is made after frequent, and serious consideration of the Scriptures, and advised consultation with the best Divines of the reformed Churches, and studious collation of the exactest patterns of Discipline; after many and long debates in the Assembly of Di∣vines,
where the dissenting Brethren (who by their party were thought most able to manage an opposition to the government) have had libertie to object what they pleased: And lastly, after a re∣view, and re-examination of matters debated and voted in the As∣sembly by most of our grave and prudent Senators, the two Houses of Parliament: And in all these passages, by all the Builders espe∣ciall regard hath beene had to the firme foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Iesus Christ being the chief corner-stone, Eph. 2.20. and care taken that the superstruction thereupon be not of wood, hay, or stubble, or of any materiall unsutable to it, 1 Cor. 3.12. and so by Mr. Saltm. his consent the worke may goe on, for in such a case, saith he, who ought not to hasten the building of the Temple? SECT. XII. Objection 2. p. 7. BƲt vice, heresies, and schismes will grow too fast. Answer. To which the Answer he makes may be divided into foure par∣ticulars. 1. That this Objection makes no more for expedition in ere∣cting of an Ecclesiasticall Government, then in the time of the Go∣spel from Iohns first Sermon to Pauls Epistles, and the sending of the Spirit; presently upon the setting downe of the objection, the words he returnes are these: p. 8. So they might have done from Iohns first Sermon to Pauls Epistles and the sending of the Spirit; but ye see there was no government settled till afterwards upon the people of God. 1. Reply. So they might have done? and did they not doe so? did they not grow too fast? sure it was too fast, if there were any growth at all. Yet to say the truth, hereie hath not in all ages advanced in the lame pace. But why doth be beginne at Iohn Baptists first Ser∣mn? were not the Phariss, Sadduces, and Esseans, Heretiques, or Schismaticks? and were not they long before Iohn Baptist was ? consult with  in his 13. Book of Antiq. .9. and
with a Chronologie annexed to it, and you shall find them noted upon the yeare 144. before Christs birth. And were not the Sama∣ritanes heretiques? and very ancient also? See Epiphan. his first Tome and first Booke, where he brings in them, and nineteene more severall sorts of Heresies and Heretiques, all before the incar∣nation of our Saviour Christ. Since Christ, it is a question who was the first Heretique; Epiph. haeres. 21. E∣piphanius gives the Senioritie to Simon Magus before all others; but Aug. exerit. in Psal. 54. hom. . Augustine will have those to be the first Heretiques in Chri∣stianitie, who took offence at our Saviour for saying they must eat his flesh, Iohn 6.52. and went away with a carnall construction of a spirituall speech. Howsoever there were variety of Heresies and Schismes but too soone, (and very much vice withall) as that of Ebion & Cerinthus, who denied the Divinitie of Christ, which oc∣casioned Iohn the Evangelist to begin his Gospel with the God∣head of our Saviour, and the heresie of Hymeneus and Philetus, who said the resurrection was past already, 2 Tim. 2.18. though the greatest harvest of such Tares was in after times, when Satan Videns Diabo∣lus Templa dae∣monum deseri, & in nomen Mediatoris cur∣rere genus hu∣manum, haeretics movit, qui sub vocabulo Chri∣stiano doctrinae resisterent Chri∣stianae. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 8. c. 51. see∣ing his Idolatrous Temples deserted, and mankind begin to run after a redeeming, and delivering Mediatr, stirred up Heretiques, who, un∣der the Name of Christians, made opposition to the Christian Do∣ctrine. But as he makes Iohns first Sermon terminus a quo for heresies, and schismes, so he makes Pauls Epistles the terminus ad quem; But which of his Epistles doth he meane? from Iohn Baptists first Sermon (which was in the twenty ninth year of our Saviours life) to Pauls first Epistle, which was the first to the Thessalonians, in his fiftieth yeare, were twenty one years; and eight yeares after was the last of his Epistles written, viz. that of Paul to Philemn, which from Iohns first Sermon make up twenty nine yeares: After the Epistles he bringeth in the sending of the Holy Ghost at the Foast of Pentecost, which was much-what about the mid-way be∣twixt the two termes before mentioned; and then he saith, But yet you see there was no government, till after, settled upon the people of God; till after what? If after the Feast of Pentecost or sending of the Spirit at that time, that was in the thirty fourth yeare of Christ, and but five yeares after the first Sermon of Iohn Baptist; and if after Pauls first Epistle, it was but twenty one yeares; if af∣ter
his last Epistle but twenty nine yeares, and before the end of his Epistles that government was written which we find in Scri∣pture; for the most of that which is produced for Church Govern∣ment is taken out of them; and if so, the setting up of Church Go∣vernment was not long suspended: but had it beene adjourned to a further time, it would not prejudice any expedition we can make in this matter, because the people of that age, being many of them dispersed Converts, could not generally so readily be for∣med into Christian Congregations, and government settled among them, as with us they may be. Besides, what hath been so long agoe established in Primitive times, cannot be said to be suddenly or hastily taken up in our dayes, especially after so many discussions, and so deliberate resolutions, as hath beene pleaded in a former answer. I need not give particular instance of schismes as I have done of heresies, in this place, for heresie is the mother of schisme, and sometimes schisme is the mother of heresie, for as ice and wa∣ter they many times mutually produce each other, whereof see the proof in the Advertisement next to the Preface of the New English Annotations on the Bible in folio. Answer 2. The second particular is the needlesnesse of Church Govern∣ment: 1. In respect of man. 2. In respect of God. For the first (saith he) p. 8. If Heresies stirre up their Patrons against the State, the Magistrate bears not the sword in vaine; and if morall transgressions, let the Magistrates be set on in every place, to quicken the Statutes; and Preachers every where sent forth to publish the Gospel. Reply 2. What if they do not stirre up their Patrons against the State? but Heretiques busily bestirre themselves to poyson the soules of the people with damnable Doctrine; and what if that doctrine be in an high degree derogatory to the glory of God? as the opinions and positions of Paul Best against the Trinitie of Persons in the Deitie, and the Divinitie of the sonne of God, and the blasphemous Verses be made against them, shall they be suffered so to reproach the most High, and to seduce the simple to the perdition of their soules, if they doe not perturbe the publique peace? that were a sinne of neere alliance to old Elyes indulgence to his wicked sonnes, whose mildnesse toward them is interpreted by God, an honouring of his
sonnes above him, 1 Sam. 2.29. If Truth be not more precious then Peace, why did our Saviour with reference to the offence (taken at Gospel truths) and the defence of them against all gaine-sayers, say, he came not to send peace, but the sword? Matth. 10.34. Why are ancient Fathers in their disputes against the The Arians would have had it . Arians commended for their constancie, in that (for reconciliation with them) they would not change a letter of the word ? and why doe we expose our selves to the quarrels of so many adversaries, especially those of the Romish Religion, rather then be at peace with them, with giving up any part of those truths, wherein God is dishonou∣red by their antitenets, though the peace of the State be not distur∣bed by them? And for morall transgressions, he would have the Magistrate set on in every place. Set on, by whom? and how? doth he mean that the Magistrate is as a shepherds dogge, to be set on the wolfe that comes to make spoile of the flock? we cannot have so meane a thought of the Magistrate, as to make mention of him in such termes of disparagement; nor dare we take upon us so much, either interest in all Magistrates, or so much power in any, as to give them the watchword when to draw the sword, and to expect that they should weild it as we would have them. And if Ministers preach, and doe what they can with their assistant Elders, by Church Disci∣pline, to regulate men in a way of religious walking, there will notwithstanding be worke enough for the Magistrate to bring them under a Civill triall, and suffering, who make no conscience to deserve, and have so much contumacie as to contemne the Ec∣clesiasticall censures: but I shall meet with this exception againe in the 14. Section, and there shall make a further answer unto it. Answer 3. A second needlesnesse is in respect of God: God wil make out by ex∣traordinary what is wanting in ordinary meanes, as with armour from heaven against Principalities on earth; and he gives instance in the Prince of Persia, Dan. 10.20. and makes as sure of the conquest, as Christ was in his single combate with Satan in the wildernesse, Matth. 4. His words next following those fore-cited are these. p. 8. And what if the Prince of Persia withstand for a while? truth is o∣therwise armed from heaven: though Satan be in the wildernesse with Christ, yet Christ shall conquer.
3. Reply. While we know how to distinguish betwixt saith and presum∣ption, we cannot thinke it meet to divide subservient meanes from the supreme power; nor the exercise of Discipline and Govern∣ment, from his assistance who can make it effectuall; though the Sword of the Lord be able to cut downe the enemie as the Mower doth grasse, yet the Sword of Gideon must goe along with it to the warres; and in those warres wherein the enemies were miracu∣lously discomfited, and confounded; the Sword of the Lord and the Sword of Gideon are voiced together, Iudg. 6.20. we must take in all helps, helps in government, 1 Cor. 12.28. to suppresse Heresie, Schisme and Profanenesse; and when we have done all we can, we must ely upon Divine aid for successe; and therefore must we pray, as the Apostle prescribeth, that we may live a quiet and peace∣able life in all godlinesse and honestie, 1 Tim. 2.2. Answer 4. The fourth and last thing which he brings to answer the Obje∣ction is the imputation of jealousie, in such as are desirous to set for∣ward the Government; and he makes as if it were a propertie of Pa∣pists, and Prelates, to keep up their supposed truths, by suspecting every thing that appeares for an enemy; which he thus sets downe and aggravates by an Antithesis of the boldnesse of the Gospel. p. 8. It is the Papists and Prelates iealousie to keepe up their supposed truths by suspecting every thing that appeares for an enemy; the Gospel dares walke abroad with boldnesse, and simplicitie, when traditions of men, like melancholie people, feare every thing they meete will kill them: For the Angel that comes downe from heaven hath great power; and the earth is lightned with his glory, Revel. 18.1. 4. Reply. There is a jealousie which the Apostle calls godly iealouse, 2 Cor. 11.2. and such a one is that which would set up as many securities as may be, against heresie and impietie. Among them Church Go∣vernement is one; of which, they that stand for it, are not afraid to let it goe abroad, for they have made it publique, and exposed it to the view of all eyes. The jealousie which is a fault is rather to be found in thse who have laboured to stifle the government in the birth, and to supprosse it that it might never be brought forth; and who talke of a more perfect modell, but cannot be perswaded to
bring it to light, that it may be viewed and tryed whether it be a well grounded truth, or a groundlesse fancie. But there is a feare which we professe, and I hope without offence, it is a feare of Gods anger and of imminent danger, for communion with, and connivence toward hereticall, and wicked men, which makes the godly abhorre their company, as we see in Iohn the Evangelist Iren. advers. haeres. l. 3. c. 3. & post eum Eusebius.; when he suddenly got out of the Bath, so soone as the Heretick Cerinthus came into it, fearing it would fall upon his head, and theirs who accompanied him; and so it did, so soone as Iohn was departed out of it. And there is in some an aversion from Heresie, Schisme, and Profanenesse, out of hatred of whatsoever is opposite to the glory of God, and to the safety of man; and this hate is a great evidence not of a causelesse jealousie, but of a true zeale, and love of God and man. Hence was it that Iren. advers. haeres. l. 3. c. 3. Polycarp the Disciple of Iohn (a Scholler of a religious temper like his Master) was so adverse to Marcion the Heretick, that when (scraping acquaintance of him) he asked him whether he knew him or no? he answered, he knew him to be the eldest sonne of Satan; and that Hilary against Auxent. p. 217. Hilary speaking against Auxentius an Arian Heretick, said, he would never speake otherwise of him then as of a Devil incarnate; and that Hierome Hieron. in Psal. 5. Tom. 8. p. 4. called Hereticks men of blood, who daily shed the blood of soules; and Hieron. Pr∣log. in Dial. ad∣vers. Lucif. Tom. 2. p. 263. averred that as he had never spared Hereticks, so he never would, and that he stu∣diously desired to make those his enemies, who were enemies to the Church. There be many other causes then, (besides a Popish or Prelaticall jealousie (arising out of guilt or mistrust of the weake∣nesse or crasinesse of the cause) which make the godly desirous of a prevention o suppression of Heresie and Schisme; and sincerely to endevour the compleat establishment of puritie and unitie in the Church of God. But I will take up with that one of the Lords and Commens in Parliament Assembled their Ordinance of the 20. of October, 1645. concerning rules for receiving of the Srament of the Lords Supper, which is the Obligation of Religious gra∣titude to God piously acknowledged in this patheticall expression. The Lords and Commons considering the wonderfull providence of God in calling them to this great and difficult worke of reforming, and purging his Church and people; his guidance and manifest protection
of them in it, doe acknowledge that never any of his servants since the foundation of the world had more high and strong engagements, heartily, and sincerely to endevour the compleat establishment of puri∣tie and unitie in the Church of God, then they have; they doe there∣fore require all Ministers and Elders, &c. And if Mr. Saltm. had well considered who were engaged for the establishment of Church Government, and how farre, before he published his New Quere, he would not surely have so farre undervalued their Pietie and Prudence, as to compare them to Papists, and Papall Prelates, and melancholy men who thinke every thing they meet will kill them. I will conclude my Reply to his Answer, with a piece of his M. Salm. pol. 201. p. 174. own politick advice, in three particulars. 1. To suspect plausible and faire language in him whose person may render him suspicious; and such for the most part are seducing Schismaticks, and Hereticks, who by good words and faire speeches deceive the heart of the simple, Rom. 16.18. 2. Ibid. pol. 228. To study to remove the occasions of faction and heresies. 3. Ibid. pol. 246. In factious stirres, if it be requisite, to muster forces with all expedition for appalling them; and thus, (saith he) you weigh downe the weight of one scale, with the weight of another. And it is no lesse a part of prudence to prevent them, then to supplant them. Vpon such principles as these, in part, is Church Government ordained, and there being so many, and stirring factions, it is with as much speed (as with conveniencie may be) to be settled as a remedy against them. There is nothing more in his Answer but a Text out of the Re∣velation, it is Chap. 18. v. 1. which with the word For is brought in as a proofe of what was last spoken, and as a seale to close up the totall summe of his resolution of this New Quere thus: For the Angel that cometh downe from heaven hath great power, and the earth is lightne with his glory: But this serves to none other pur∣pose, but to shew, that as he began, so he endeth his paper with misapplication of Scripture.
SECT. XIII. An additionall Answer to some exceptions of Mr. Saltm. (taken out of Mr. Prinnes Vindication) against the present establishment of Church Government, in his late Booke entituled The opening of Mr. Prinnes new Booke, called a VINDICATION. IN this Booke which he nameth The opening of Master Prinnes new Booke called a Vindication; the Authour hath opened him∣selfe plainly to be an Independent at least, and opposite to the Pres∣byteriall Government; which he hath formerly disavowed, when in conference with him I desired him to declare to which part he inclined; as Section the first hath beene observed. I shall present the Reader with so much of the matter in this New Booke, as I find symbolicall to the sense and resolution of his New Quere; the summe whereof is in his last answer of P. to C. of which two letters (representing two persons in conference Dia∣logue wise) it is very probable P. may stand for Presbyterian, but for C. to me it is very doubtfull whether it be put for the name of my reverend Brother Mr. Coleman, whom he citeth in the fourth page of his New Quere; or whether C. stand for Congregationall; or if I did not conceive him to be of a better spirit then I have obser∣ved in many Antipresbyterian Scriblers, I would thinke C. stood for Christian, with intimation that the Presbyterian government is Antichristian; but I cannot censure so of him, especially since he professeth to honour Presbyterians as beleevers, and brethren in the Lord; brethren as Christians, not his brethren as Presbyters; (if it be true which I heare that he preacheth not as a Presbyter, but as a gifted brother) but this but by the way; that which in this Book we are now to observe is that P. as convinced, and converted by C. is made to say: P. Well, I am at this time well perswaded, p. 23. Of the opening. and having heard all this, for my part I cannot but see, that in settling things suddenly up∣on this Kingdome, and things thus questionable, and unwarrantable in the way of administration, and a Kingdome so full of impenitent and
scandalous sinners as Parochiall Congregations generally are, there is danger of great sinne, and great trouble. Answer. This may be true if government, whereby the scandalous will be severed from the religious, be either not established at all, or too long deferred: but that it may not be set up at all, or not so soone as is necessarie, he brings some proofes from Mr. Prinnes Vindi∣cation, (which he endevours to disprove, and confute in other parti∣culars) and I am willing to take notice of them rather from him, then from Mr. Pr. (though I have read them in his Booke) for divers reasons. 1. Because Mr. P. is a friend to the Presbyteriall government, having both M. Prinne his Vindicati∣on. p. 56. pleaded for it, and beene persecuted (as he saith) by Se∣ctaries, and Independents, for his good will unto it. 2. Because he So in the E∣pistle to the Reader before his Vindicat. fol. 2. p. 2. professeth to love and honour with his soule the Assembly of Divines; and hath in a booke of purpose vindicated them from Libellous aspersions of the Antipresbyterians. I con∣fesse Mr. Saltm. was once so reverently and religiously conceited of them, that he honored them in print with the Title of a most Sa∣cred Assembly, in a M. Salem. his Dedication, of the Examinati∣ons, or the Dis∣covery of some dangerous posi∣tions delivered in a Sermon of Reformation in the Church of the Savoy on the Fast day, July 26. 1643. by Tho. Fuller. B. D. Dedication of a little book unto them; some of whom (my selfe for one) desired him to forbeare that Title in the rest of the Copies which were not then wrought off from the Prese; but being so farre engaged against the Presbyteriall way as now he is, I cannot thinke he hath so good either opinion of, or af∣fection to the Assembly, as formerly he hath professed unto them, and towards them. 3. Because I am confident that whatsoever Mr. P. writeth (though I approve not all that is set out in his name) he writeth with a very upright and sincere heart; without any sinister end or aime at gaine to himselfe, or glory with men. 4. Because I have found him so kind to me in severall kinds, that I am loth to take him for an adversary in any publique conte∣station; and yet I shall take the boldnesse (as just occasion shall in∣duce me) to use the freedome of a friend unto him, and to be true to the truth, without partiall respect to friend or foe. 5. Because Mr. Pr. doth not write what Mr. Saltm. alleadgeth out of him, against expedition in the setting up of Presbyteriall
government, much lesse finally to suppresse it, which seemes to be the desire and endevour of Mr. Salt. SECT. XIIII. The objections taken from a supposed needlesnesse of the Presbytery answered. THat which he produceth against the Presbytery in Mr. Prinnes name, consisteth chiefly of two particulars. 1. That there is no necessitie of it, that it should be established. 2. The want of efficacie in it, where it is established. For the first, he produceth a remarkable passage (as he cals it) out of Mr. Prinnes Vindication in these words. And if our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach a∣gainst that catalogue of scandalous sinnes, and sinners, they have pre∣sented to the Parliament, and the Parliament prescribe severe Tem porall Laws and punishments against them, and appoint good Civill Magistrates to see them duely executed, and inflicted; I am confident, that this would work a greater Reformation in our Church and State in one halfe yeare, then all the Church Discipline and Consures now so eagerly contested for, will doe in an age, and will be the onely true way, and speediest course to reforme both Church and State at once; which I hope the Parliament will consider of, and take care, that our Ministers (like the Bishops formerly) may not now be taken up with ruling and governing, but preaching and instructing, which is worke enough, wholly to engrosse their time and thoughts. Answer. This saying of Mr. P. I see beginneth to be had in honour by out Independent Brethren; for it is the Alpha of Mr. S.E. and Mr. T.T. their defence of positions, it is as the Omega of Mr. S. his answer to Mr. Prins Vindication, (and I wish the Authour of it may have so much of it from the better sort of them as may make him some amends for the contumelies, and calumnies he hath suffered from the worse) and if Mr. P. his Testimony be so authentick with them, (but with most of them I know it is not) it may not be a∣misse to minde them, not of a piece of a lease, but of whole Independencie examined, un∣masked, refuted by 12. new par∣tiular Interro∣gatories: dete∣cting both the manifold absur∣dities, incon∣veniences that must necessarily attend it, to the great distur∣bance of Church, State, the di∣minution, sub∣version of the lawfull undoub∣ted power of all Christian Ma∣gistrates, Par∣liaments, Sy∣nods: and tha∣king the chiefe pillars, where∣with its Patrons would support it. And, A fresh discovery of some prodigious New wandering-bla∣zing starres and firebrands, &c. Books of his making, against their way.
The words forecited containe three things. 1. A remedie a∣gainst scandalous sinnes, and the sufficiencie of that remedie, with∣out Church-Discipline, and Censures, so eagerly contended for. 2. An hope that the Parliament will consider of, and take care that Ministers may not (like Bishops formerly) be taken up with ruling, and governing. 3. A reason of that hope, because preaching, and instructing is work enough to engrosse their time and thoughts. 1. For the first, the Remedy prescribed against scandalous sinnes. If our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach against that Catalogue of scandalous sinnes, they have presented to the Par∣liament, and the Parliament prescribe severe Temporall Laws, and punishments against them, and appoint good Civill Magistrates to see them duely executed and inflicted. Answer. Here is lesse required of the Ministers then is performed by ma∣ny of them; more promised concerning Lawes, Punishments, and Magistrates then without presumption can be expected by any: For, 1. For the Ministers, they preach against those scandalous sinnes contained in the Catalogue, and more too; and undertake to adde many more to the Catalogue then are expressed; and the Honoura∣ble House of Commons hath sent an Order to the Assembly of Di∣vines to that purpose; and when a supplement is made in obedi∣ence thereto, there will be yet more found out not mentioned be∣fore; so that there will be still new matter for addition, unlesse there be a reserve , of remaining particulars, to be added when they are discovered, and some cautionary Order made that the Minister may not be put upon this hard Dilemma, either to administer to any against his judgement and conscience, or to suspend his owne act of administration with hazard to himselfe, either for his person, or estate; which will be a greater inconve∣nience then any worthy Communicant can suffer, if he be upon the Ministers mistake unworthily denied his right to Gods Ordinance for one turne onely; (for before the next celebration of the Sa∣crament that which was doubtfull before may be fully cleared) and of this difference there be two Reasons.
1. If the party came worthily prepared, and were refused, he may have his part in the benefit of the Sacrament, as if he had actually received; for in such a case God accepteth the will for the deed. 2. If he have well prepared his heart for that holy Com∣munion, he hath so much charitie, as not to take offence at the scrupled conscience of his Minister, at least not to desire that he should act any thing against it, because of the counsell and deter∣mination of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sinne, Rom. 14.23. so much humilitie, as to take the repulse in a doubtfull case with meeknesse, and patience; so much faith, as to beleeve that though his innocence for the present be under a cloud, the Lord will bring forth his righteousnesse as light, and his indgement as the noone day, Psal. 37.6. Object. If it be said, the Minister may pretend conscience when it is perhaps some secret grudge, which tempts him to put upon his Parishioner an open disgrace. Answ. 1. I hope we shall have such Ministers, so well knowne by their faithfulnesse in preaching, and conscionablenesse in walk∣ing, that there will be no ground for such a suspition at such a time. 2. Though the consciousnesse of mine owne innocent intenti∣ons might dispose me, for mine owne particular, to accept of any penaltie that a civill Sanction can impose, or that the arbitrary re∣venge of the repulsed partie would inflict, if I were convinced to have kept any from the Sacrament out of spight, or a perverse spi∣rit, or inconsiderate rashnesse, without a cause which may be al∣lowed to be just before a competent Iudge; yet I hope, that all who have authoritie to determine any thing upon such miscarriage of the Minister, will thinke it sufficient, and answerable to exact justice, that he who shall abuse his power or transgresse his dutie in such a case, be dealt withall lege talionis; that is, that the Classis for his undue suspension suspend him from the Sacrament, which will bring so much more reproach and shame upon him, then he brought upon the party refused, as the more prudence, pietie, and charitie was required in him, and the more notice is taken of him when he prevaricates in his office and function, and is punished for it in such an open, and eminent manner.
Object. But to leave it in the power of the Minister, without an expresse and particular rule, to receive, or reject whom he pleaseth, is to put into his hands an unlimited arbitrary power, which on all hands, in all sorts of men is disliked, and disclaimed. Answ. 1. It is not to be left to the Minister alone, but to the Presbyterie. 2. Though he act alone in the administration it selfe, he is not to be thought to act by an arbitrary power, when according to his duty (following the rule and his present light) he endevoureth to put difference betwixt the holy and profane, betwixt the uncleane and the cleane, zek. 22.26. and to preserve the holy Sacrament from contempt, that by a confusion of holy and unholy communicants, the Brownists & others who act according to their principles, may not be hardened in their separation from our sacred Assemblies. And in such a case for any private man to obtrude himselfe upon the Minister, is to act an arbitrary power upon him, yea an arbitrary tyranny if he should be authorised so to doe: and should it be so (out we have so much experience of the piety, prudence, and indul∣gence of the most Honourable Houses, that we can never suspect any such pressure to proceed from them) we can readily resolve to act, or to forbeare what according to the Dictate of our consci∣ences we conceive to be enjoyned, or prohibited by our great Ma∣ster, and to beare and suffer what shall be imposed on us by our Superiours under him, to whom we professe our obedience is due, (being but private persons) either actively or passively, in whatso∣ver they shall determine concerning our persons, liberties, and estates. 2. For that he saith of severe lawes and punishments to be consti∣tuted, and good Magistrates chosen to see them actually executed, we confesse, if that could be generally, and perpetually expected, or but for the most part, there were great hope of much helpe by such meanes against both the scandalous sinnes contained in the Ca∣talogue, and others of like kind; but so long as Magistrates are men of no purer mould, or metall, then Ministers are, and they passe not through so severe an examination before they be admitted to their offices, as Ministers doe, nor have so many obligations laid upon them for sinceritie, and integritie, as are laid upon Ministers; nor so many eyes upon them to observe their aberrations from a right
rule, as Ministers have; nor are like to have so many mouthes open to reprove, or reproach them for, or so many hands to restraine them from misdoing, or to punish them for it, (as most Ministers in regard of their poverty, and impotencie, for the most part may expect, which the Magistrates their superiours in estate and autho∣ritie need not so much to feare) there is no reason I conceive, to take all power of censure from the Presbyterie, for the Ministers sake (for the Elders are not denied to be capable of jurisdiction as they are members of the Civil State) and to put all upon the power, and vigilant and conscionable execution of the Magistrate. And I doubt not but we may confidently averre, and the expe∣rience of precedent and subsequent times will make it good, that it is so farre from being superfluous that there be a concurrence of the Civill and Presbyteriall power for suppression of sinne, that when both are imployed and improved with all prudence, dili∣gence, and conscience, to suppresse the corruption of nature, and to prevent the spreading and prevailing of scandalous sins, and when the severe and strict discipline of private Families, and of common Schooles is added unto them, there will be no cause, for all that, to suspect any pleonasme either of piety, or civilitie, among the people of the Kingdome. SECT. XV. Of Mr. Colemans Interimisticall Magistracie. NOr would that way which Mr. Coleman in his late (and yet perhaps too soon put forth) Re-examination of the Examina∣tion of his Sermon remembreth, be so sufficient of it selfe, A Brotherly examination, reexamined. p. 1. as that if it had prevailed, there would have been no need of a Presbytery to supply the defect thereof, as he delivereth it: it is this, At the extirpation of the Prelacie, the Honourable Parliament would have established Commissioners in all Counties as an Interi∣misticall Magistracie, &c. And this he seemeth to conceive a better way of Church Government then that of the Presbyterie; so much better, that if that had beene set up, this would have beene superfluous.
But in this historicall passage of his, there be many particulars which may come under correction; for first, he saith the Parlia∣ment would have established Commissioners in all Counties, as an In∣terimisticall Magistracie; And would the Parliament have done it? why did they not doe it? was any power greater then the Parliaments? any prudence more prevalent then theirs? Second∣ly, Some, saith he, (and who they were is enough knowne) fearing that if once it were there placed, they should never get it into their hands a∣gaine, cryed it downe, and were a stop in the way of the intended worke. Answer. Who these some were, is not knowne enough, I thinke not at all; for it is like that a party, a smaller party, (for so must that be which is a contra-distinct to the Honourable Parliament) should oppose and overbeare the greater part, resolutions being made by plurality of Votes? It is much more probable (to say no more) that some, and but some, would have set up an Interimisticall Magistracie, and that the Honourable Parliament cryed it downe and were a stop in the way of the intended worke; my reason is, 1. Because they never made Ordinance, or Order for that In∣terimisticall Magistracie. 2. Because they have done both for the Presbyteriall Govern∣ment. 3. Because an Interim Ger∣mania decesta∣bibis farrago. Bez. respons. ad Baldwin. p. 49. See Bucolz. Ind. Chron. p. 562. ad an. 1548. Epist. Brentii Calvine. p. 77. Interimisticall Temperament hath beene al∣waies by the godly, and orthodoxe party attended with jealousie and feare, and hath beene by them as much hated, as feared. 4. Because that Interimisticall Magistracie that was projected, was too like Prelacie to be liked (by such as desired a thorow Re∣formation;) and that in three things especially. 1. In that it had no warrant in the word of God. 2. That it would shrinke up the power into a few hands, which should be communicated to many, as the Prelacie did. 3. In that it was contrary to the example of all the truly refor∣med Churches in the Christian world.
SECT. XVI. The Objection of eager contestation for Church Disci∣pline, and Censures answered. HAving done with Mr. Colemans Interim, (which came in as a parenthesis to the Discourse we were in, though it be per∣tinent to it) I returne to Mr. Saltm. his exception, taken out of Mr. Prinnes Vindication, where he aggravates the matter against the Presbyterie, in that, though by the sufficiencie of other Reme∣dies it be needlesse, (so it hath beene said, and thereto we have re∣plied) it is yet very eagerly contended for. The Answer is, if he meant it concerning admission to, or re∣jection from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which is that which hath beene most agitated betwixt him and some of our Tribe) the contestation on the Ministers part is but for the libertie of their conscience, the puritie of Gods Ordinance, the preventing of Scandall, which causeth and confirmeth Schisme; and in such cases it becomes them not to be remisse, or to manage such a Cause with a Laodicean luke warmenesse, but with servencie of spirit; and yet I doubt not, but their zeale therein, for the chiefest of them, is, and will be guided with knowledge, and both tempered with humility, modesty, and meeknesse of spirit. And that it hath none affinitie with an affectation of power, or liberty to reject men from the Sacrament at their pleasure, I be∣leeve (because I am confident it is the mind of most of those Mini∣sters who are competently qualified with knowledge, and grace for their holy function) that it is matter of great griefe of heart unto them to have any occasion of sending any of their Congrega∣tions sad from the Sacrament, or (as it may be likely to prove in most cases) with wrath, and heart-burning against themselves. For my part I ever tooke it for one of the great aggrievances which many godly Ministers (who were conformists in the gesture of re∣ceiving the Lords Supper) suffered under the domination of the Bishops, that they put it upon them to put such from the Sacra∣ment as out of scruple of conscience durst not kneele at the receit of it; and that such were threatned with suspension (and some
actually suspended from the Ministery) as admitted Communi∣cants either standing, or sitting, though never so well instructed and well affected in matter of Religion, and never so religious in life and conversation; and if I might make mine owne choice, I had rather submit my selfe to the meanest man within my Pastorall charge, in the most servile offices belonging to his person, for a weeke together, then for one time onely returne him from the Lords Table, as unworthy to be admitted to partake of the provi∣sion thereof; or as Coenam proximo die dominico sinnus celebra∣turi. Hinc cogi∣ta quibus an∣gustiis nunc constringar; utinon me ab∣sente posset cele∣brari, bac con∣ditione, ut ad vos usque vel manibus repta∣rem. Calvin. Epist. Farello, data Calend. Septemb. 1546. Ep. p. 64. in fol. excus. Genev. anno 1575. Calvin once said on the like occasion, I had ra∣ther absent my selfe from the Sacrament for that turne, when there is cause to turne any from the Sacrament, though I went away somewhither upon mine hands, then to make any distinguishing disturbance in the celebration of the Supper. And if I know mine owne heart in this point, I thinke it would be as great a trouble to me to be an agent, as to any man to be a patient in such a repulse; and as great a joy if any were able to cleare it unto my conscience, that no part of that Government ought to be committed to my charge, which I ever apprehended as a burden, (and that an heavy one) rather then a priviledge. Secondly, for the hope that he hath that the Parliament will con∣sider of, and take care that our Ministers, (like the Bishops formerly) may not be taken up too much with ruling and governing. Answer. I hope so too, and I have more then hope also; for I am well as∣sured the Parliament is so wise, that their Reformation will have so much of the spirit of sound judgement, so little of pangs of ex∣cessive antipathy, that they will not runne so farre from one ex∣treme, as to arrive at the other. There is a golden medium be∣twixt so much as the Bishops had, and none at all, as some would now have it. Thirdly, for the Reason of that hope, it is because preaching and instructing is worke enough wholly to engrosse their time, and thoughts. Answer. Yet not so wholly, but that there may be a competent time al∣lowed for assistance in Discipline; there have beene many Disci∣plinarians who have beene frequent Preachers, and great Writers also; as Calviu, Beza, Moulin, and divers others; and there are
many Divines at this present, who bestow many howres daily at the debates, and other businesse of the Assembly at Westminster, and yet are not wanting to their Pulpits on the Sabbath, and who preach many times on the weeke dayes besides; and (in modesty to omit the account of mine owne time, studies and taskes for a∣bove fourtie yeares together, and I beleeve divers of my Brethren have much to say for themselves to the same purpose) I shall in∣stance onely in the great abilities, and diligence of my very learned and religious friend, and Brother, Dr. Hoyle, who had occasion by way of Apologie, to plead for himselfe, before his Rejoynder to the lesuite Malone, in this manner. The Booke indeed is presented to the world farre later then my ex∣pectation; which hath beene ready, as it now comes forth, these many yeares: But the Presse was still employed, and occupied with other things, by them that had command. He that herein imputes sloth or negligence to me, knows me not. For if I should give but an Indiculus of my studies, Et vacet annales nostrorum audire laborum; I might make the Jesuite, and a thousand more ashamed of their idlenesse. Farre be it from me to brag and beast, who have ever abhorred all shadow of vain-glory: remembring Solomons words, Let another man praise thee and not thine owne mouth, Prov. 27. And therefore leaving it to the disposer, and prosperer of all mine endevours, I content, and feast my selfe with the suffrage of my conscience, as desirous for mine owne part to have something more then the world knows. Though I might appeale (if need were) to the grand Reader of Europe, as best acquainted from the very first with me, and my studies. But what the world knows give me leave to speake: that it may ap∣peare that this worke could never fall into fuller hands, or to a man more imployed; who could allot no more time to it then what must be gained succisivis horis. Pro Archia. Never could Tully speake more truly of his abstracted life, and importunate lucubrations. I expounded the whole Bible through in the Colledge, in dayly Lectures, and in the chiefest bookes ordinarily a verse a day; we need not Origens : this work we held almost fifteene yeares. A few yeares before this was ended I beganne likewise the second Exposition of the whole Bible in the Church: and within tenne yeares have ended all the New Testa∣ment, excepting one booke and a piece, all the Prophets, all Solomon and Iob; so that my Answer to the Iesuite did in part concurre with
both these labours. What preaching, what expounding, this is my con∣stant practise, (neither sicknesse nor any thing else withdrawing me) thrice every Sabbath for the farre greater part of the yeare; once e∣very Holy-day, often twice, besides many other extraordinary sudden occasions. Adde to these my weekely Lectures (as Professor) in the Controversies, and my Answers to all Bellarmine in word and wri∣ting. Where in above eight yeares I finished his Tome of the seven Sacraments, for there we beganne; his last Tome in sixe yeares, and now sundry years in the Tome or Tomes remaining. What breathing time had I in all these imployments? or how could this worke be com∣mitted to fuller hands? And though there be but a few who are so eminent in parts, and in performances so laborious, yet the most of those Ministers who are to beare a part in the Discipline of the Church, either are, or (if the Refomation proceed) will be so well qualified, that they may give due attendance upon preaching, and yet have competent time for other duties, whereto as men, as Christians, or as Mini∣sters, whether in the Church, or Consistory, they are engaged. And Mr. Pr. knowes by experience in his owne profession, that many are able (being habituated in Book-learning, and Law-cases, and pleading of Causes) upon a little warning to speake more, and better to the purpose, then many others by long preparation; and he himselfe, we see, hath time enough, not onely to plead his Clients causes, but to write so many books, as were they bound up together, would make divers very competent Volumes: and while a good Minister, (and I hope we shall have more store of such then in former times) is exercised in Church Government, he is not quite out of office for preaching, and instructing, for he may have just occasion and faire opportunitie, ministerially to ad∣monish those that are convened, either as parties to be cen∣sured, or as witnesses to be examined, in the Ecclesiasticall Con∣sistorie.
SECT. XVII. The Objection of in efficacie for holinesse of life in such as live under the Presbytery answered. THe second particular he produceth, in Mr. Prinnes name, a∣gainst the Presbytery is, M. Salim. in his opening of  the Vindication. p. 23. 24. and in the Vindica∣tion it self. p. 57. the want of efficacie in it, where it is established; which he exemplifieth by instances in severall refor∣med Churches elsewhere, and comparing England with them, he saith, That the practicall power of godlinesse is generally more eminently visible in the lives of the generalitie of the people, more strict, pious, lesse scandalous, and licentious in our English Congre∣gations, where there hath beene powerfull preaching without the pra∣ctise of excommunication, or suspension from the Sacrament, then in the reformed Churches of France, Germany, Denmarke, or Scot∣land; for which I appeale (saith he) to all Travellours, and Inde∣pendent Ministers, who have lived in the Netherlands, who will, and must acknowledge, that in the sanctification of the Lords Day, strict∣nesse of life, and exemplarinesse of conversation, our English Mini∣sters and Protestants excell all others. These be Mr. Pr. his words, upon which Mr. Saltm. maketh this inference, viz. That the Vindication, though it pretend in the generall face of it to be for the Presbyterie, yet it is cleare, that in aspersing the Government in all those reformed Kingdomes, where the practise and power of it hath beene, it secretly wounds the glory of it in the opinion of the world; and though it pull not downe the Govern∣ment quite, yet it Weakens the posts, or judgements of men, on which it stands. Answer. 1. By what I have read of Mr. Prinnes writings, what I have observed of him my selfe, and received by report of such as are best acquainted with his mind, and wayes, I conceive him to be so true an Israelite, without all guile, that he will not pretend one thing, when he intends another. 2. For the Assertion it selfe, there be two things to be con∣sidered. 1. Whether it be true or no.
2. If so, what may be the reason of it, that alleadged, or some other. For the first: Whether the Assertion be true or no? The resolution of this Question must be made with difference of times; for Countreys, as well as particular persons, have their variations in Religion, not onely for profession of the faith, but for practise of holinesse: as in King James his dayes, upon the Declara∣tion and libertie granted upon the Sunday, (that is the name in the Declaration, and it is the fittest name for a licence of profanenesse) for sports and pastimes, renewed by the King that now is, the peo∣ple of England were more loose and licentious on that day, then now they are, upon the burning of that Book, and an Ordinance of Parliament set out for the more holy observation of the Sabbath. The Application of this distinction may resolve the observation se∣verall waies; and we may say, that sometimes one people or Na∣tion, sometimes another, (and the same people at one time more then at another) may be more conformable in practise to the principles of piety. And as there is a distinction of times, so of places; some are more, some lesse civilized; as in Scotland Abbot Geogr. P. 207, 208. the Low-land is the most civill part of the Realme, where Religion is most orderly established; but the other part called the Highland, which lyeth further to the North, or bendeth towards Ireland, is more rude and savage, and so further from conformitie in Religion. And there may be great difference also in respect of Preachers, and Sermons, wherewith some Countries are much better fur∣nished then others; and thence are not onely more Civill, but more Religious also; for civilitie and religion mutually conduce to the helpe of each other; Civilitie makes men more capable of Re∣ligion, Religion makes them more conformable to Civilitie; this is observable in many parts of Wales, and Cornwall, which are but poorely stored with well gifted Preachers, in comparison of Lon∣don, and many other places of this Kingdome. And whereas it is said, that in the reformed Churches, as in the Churches of France, Germany, Denmarke, and Scotland, the peo∣ple be lesse strict and pious, more licentious and scandalous then in England, where there hath beene powerfull preaching, without the practise of excommunication, and suspension from the Sacrament.
It is to be considered that in England both suspension from the Sa∣crament, and excommuication have beene in use, before the depo∣sition of the Prelates and Service Book; and by this Argument we might plead for the retaining of the English Prelacie and Litur∣gie, and against the establishment of the Presbytery and Directory, both which Mr. Priune hath in a better opinion and reputation, then the Government and Book which were their predecessors in the English Church; and if we suppose there is powerfull preach∣ing with the one Government, and not with the other, we should ascribe the prelation to that which is principall and present, viz. the preaching of the word, and not cast a reproach upon that which is accessory (though in a secondary degree necessary also) because it is absent, since the want thereof can contribute nothing to spiri∣tuall proficiencie, but the presence and exercise of it, very much. 2. Question: If the precedent assertion be true, what may be the reason? Answer. If there be lesse strictnesse in those forementioned Churches, then in the Church of England, it cannot be charged upon the Pres∣byterian Discipline, or Government; for there is nothing in that which tends to licentiousnesse, and scandall, but to the quite con∣trary; and I can speake it by experience, that the formall admo∣nition of inordinate walkers by the Minister, and Churchwardens, without any further proceeding in Discipline, hath kept many in more awe, and better order, then without it they would have beene; so that where the Word is powerfully preached, and that Discipline duely, and piously, and impartially administred, it is not onely very effectuall for preservation of the profession of Christi∣anitie from Heresie, and Schisme, (as See the Pre∣face to the new Annotations of the Bible. p. 1. of the Church of Scotland is observed), but for promotion of the practise of piety, and pre∣vention of loosenesse of life, as of the Church of Geneva is noted, and acknowledged by Bodine, a Papist, in the sixth Chapter of his Booke, de meth, historiae. And if any where the people living under this Government be more generally profane, then where it is not, it may, or rather must, be referred, 1. To some other reason, as in Germany the sinne of Drunkennesse prevaileth so much, that this reproachfull Proverbe passeth upon them, Heylin G∣ogr. p. 256. Germanorum vivere est bibere: The Germans
life is drownd in his liquor: whence it is that they abound in Brewers, Ibid. p. 260. having 777. of that Trade, 40. Bakers, one Lawyer, one Physician, in the Towne of Hamburge; and where they are habitually addicted to that vice, they are little disposed to the power of godlinesse. 2. In some Countries where the Presbyterie is established, the Ministers are in meane estimation, because they are reduced to a despicable povertie, their revenues being kept from them, by the No∣bility and Gentry, and they tucked up to The large Declaration of the late Tu∣mults in Scot∣land. p. 7, 8. some poor pittance, either by way of stipendiary benevolence, or some other meane allowance, unwor∣thy of the Ministers of the Gospel; and which exposeth them to all manner of contempt, and a base dependance upon their patrons: Now where the Ministers of the Gospel are despised, the Gospel is lesse honoured, and the people lesse affected with any doctrine, or dutie of piety, and conscience. 3. Some reformed Churches, though they admit of the Pres∣byterian Government, are the lesse reformed, because they are in their habitation, and conversation, mingled with profane Papists, as in France. 4. And lastly, the most reformed Churches in forraine parts are, and long have beene much unreformed in the Doctrine of the Sab∣bath; which few foraine Divines teach so soundly, few foraine Christians observe so conscientiously, as doe the Divines and Chri∣stians of the Church of England; and it is experimentally proved, that according to mens care, or neglect of the sanctification of the Sabbath, they are more or lesse pious, or profane, strict, or licen∣tious in their conversations. It is not then the absence of Discipline, where the Word is powerfully preached, and the Sabbath religiously observed, that furthereth any thing to holinesse of life, but the want of these (which should be joyned with Discipline) which makes it lesse effectuall for popular reformation; but where all are joyned toge∣ther, there not onely the ordinary behaviour of men is more order∣ly, but divers are in their lives so strict, so exact, that, as a The Essayes of the Lord erulam. Essay 2. . witty Authour makes the resemblance, they are like a verse wherein every syllable is measured.
SECT. XVIII. Shewing what might be retorted upon the Antipresbyteriall party, but concluding for Ʋnitie and Peace, with allegation of Mr. Burroughs his propositions of reconciliation and accord: and some other particulars tending thereto. HItherto I have for the most part held out the Buckler of Apo∣logie against the exceptions taken at the present setting up of the Presbyteriall Government. I could now take up the Sword of Assault, and put Mr. Saltm. to be Defendent, while I bring in Objections against the haste which some of his party make in setting up their Congregationall way, not onely without Authoritie, but against it. For the Pres∣byterian Discipline hath beene by Authoritie of Parliament in ∣bate, first in the Assembly, afterward in both Houses of Parliament; and so farre as it is agreeable to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, covenanted to be established in this Kingdome, and in the Kingdome of Ireland, contrary to the Con∣gregationall and Independent platform; and many parts of it have beene set forth already by Ordinance, or Order of the Honourable Houses; yet the Presbyterians take not upon them to be active in the choice of Elders, or in any other part of Ecclesiasticall power, but humbly wait for further warrant from the Parliament, to pro∣ceed in the work; while many of our dissenting Brethren, of their owne accord, and without the command, or consent, and against the Vote of the Civill State, gather Churches, or continue the Go∣vernment of those they have gathered, according to the modell of their owne choosing, notwithstanding the joynt admonition of many eminent Ministers, as well Independent as Presbyteriall, to forbeare, untill what was, and yet is, in part, under deliberation, came to accomplishment: and M. S. Eaton Teacher, and Tim. Taylor, Pastour of the Church of Duckenfield in Cheshire, in their late de∣fence of sundry positions and Scriptures to justifie the Congrega∣tionall way. some take the boldnesse pub∣likely, and in print, to avow themselves as Ministers under the name, and office of Teachers and Pastors of new constituted Churches, and publikely to assert their repugnant principles, and practises, in opposition to that which the Honourable Houses of
Parliament have partly authorised already, by their Civill Sanction, and engaged themselves further to authorise, throughout the Churches of both Kingdomes, as God shall be pleased to make way for a thorow reformation, by reducing the severall Countries under the command of the King and Parliament. But I had rather (then recriminate) friendly and kindly close with my yet dissenting Brother; and therefore heartily commend it to his Christian consideration, to study the reconciliation, and union of all the godly party, (as Mr. Burroughs hath lately done) and not to proceed to discourses which tend to make, or maintaine divi∣sion, or estrangement, and alienation of affection betwixt them. To that purpose I shall propose as a patterne of imitation to Mr. Saltm. and to all others who partake with him in his present Opi∣nion, what he hath set downe in the seventh Chapter of his Ire∣nicum in his owne words. First, Mr. Burroughs his Irenieum. c. 7. p. 43, 44, 45. Those in the Congregationall way acknowledge, that they  bound in conscience to give account of their wayes to the Churches about them, or to any other who shall require it; this not in an arbi∣trary way, but as a dutie that they owe to God, and man. Secondly, They acknowledge that Synods of other Ministers, and Elders about them, are an Ordinance of Iesus Christ, for the help∣ing the Church against errours, schismes, and scandals. Thirdly, That these Synods may, by the power they have from Christ, admonish men or Churches in his Name, when they see evils continuing in, or growing upon the Church; and their admonitions carry with them the anthoritie of Iesus Christ. Fourthly, As there shall be cause, they may declare men or Chur∣ches to be subverters of the faith; or otherwise, according to the na∣ture of the offence, to shame them before all the Churches about them. Fiftly, They may by a solemne act, in the Name of Iesus Christ, refuse any further communion with them, till they repent. Sixthly, They may declare, and that also in the Name of Christ, that these erring people, or Churches, are not to be received into fel∣lowship with any of the Churches of Christ, nor to have communion one with another, in the Ordinances of Christ: Now all this being done in Christs Name, is this nothing to prevaile with conscience?
If you say, private brethren may admonish, and declare in the Name of Christ. This is more then if any private Brethren should do the same thing; for at Synod is a solemne Ordinance of Christ, and the Elders are to be looked on as the officers of Iesus Christ. But our Brethren say, There is one meanes more in their way, then the Congregation all way hath, that is, if the sixe former will not work, then Synods may deliver to Satan. In this very thing lies the very knot of the Controversie, betweene these who are for the Presbyteriall, and those who are for the Congre∣gationall way, in reference to the matter in hand, namely the meanes to reducing from, or keeping out errours and heresies from the Church, in this lies the dividing businesse: But I beseech you con∣sider at what a punctum we divide here, and judge whether the cause of division in this thing be so great, as there can be no helpe; and whe∣ther, if an evill spirit prevaile not amongst us, we may not joyne; For, First, consider, what is there in this delivering to Satan? which is a seventh thing which our Brethren thinke may hopefully prevaile with mens consciences, when the sixe former cannot. Yes, say they, for by this they are put out of the Kingdome of Christ, into the kingdome of Satan, and this will terrifie. This putting out of Christs Kingdome, must be understood clave non errante; if the Synod judges right, not otherwise; yes, this is granted by all. Then consider whether this be not done before, and that with an authoritie of Christ, by those former sixe things; for bereticall Con∣gregations, or persons, are judged and declared in a solemne Ordi∣nance, by the officers of Christ, gathered together in his Name, to be such as have no right to any Church Ordinance, to have no commu∣nion with any of the Churches of Christ. Now if this judgement be right, are not such persons, or Congregations put out of the Kingdome of Christ, and put under the power of Satan consequently? But thirdly. If some brethren rise to a seventh degree, and others stay at sixe, which have yet such a power over conscience, that if they prevaile not, the seventh is no way likely to prevaile: why should not the Apostles rule quiet us all, Phil. 3.15, 16. Whereto we have already attained, let us walke by the same rule; if in any thing you be other∣wise minded, God will reveale even this unto you; if we have attained
but to sixe, and our Brethren have attained to seven, let us walke to∣gether lovingly to the sixe; if God shall after reveale the seventh (we will promise to pray and study in the mean time) we shall walke with them in that also: why must it needs be now urged with violence, so as to divide else? and although we hold not the seventh, yet there is an ingredient in the sixt, that hath in it the strength of the seventh; for wherein lies the strength of the seventh above the rest? is it not in this, that it is the last meanes Christ hath appointed in his Church to work upon the heart? this consideration hath much terror it it; Now those in the Congregationall way say, that this is fully in the sixth, wherefore that is as terrible to their consciences, as the seventh can be to the consciences of our brethren, and that upon the same ground. If so, what is the difference (for this matter) more then that which hath beene betwixt many godly and Orthodoxe Divines about the division of the Lords Prayer, whether it containe 6. or 7. petitions, when those that are for sixe, have as much matter in those sixe, as those that have seven; and those that have seven, no more then is contained in the sixe? for my part, if this be candidly, and cordially in point of Church Government delivered, and so recei∣ved, and professed by those of his side, I hope such as are adversaries unto both parties, shall not long rejoyce, and prosper by the advan∣tage they make of our mutuall divisions. SECT. XIX. Further grounds and hopes of union in the Churches of the Sister Kingdomes of England and Scotland, with Answers to the Objections that are made against it. I Have the more hope of the Vnion fore-mentioned, because if they (who in respect of the paucitie and noveltie of their party, compared with the Churches of the Presbyterian Government, throughout the Christian World, for number and Seniority are not so considerable as some conceive) will yeeld as farre as they ought, for a pacificall accord, their Presbyterian Brethren will as farre as they may (with securitie to the truth, and reservation of the inte∣rest, and honour of the Reformed Churches) come downe to
them in such a Christian accommodation, as is requisite for a con∣clusion of peace. My ground for this is that which I have observed in the dispo∣sition of the Reverend, Religious, and prudent Commissioners of the Church of Scotland; for though that Church be supposed, and censured by some, as the most rigid in exacting assent to, and ob∣servation of her rules, and customes, as if all must yeeld to her, as the Standard of Discipline, and she would yeeld to none, they have alwaies, in all their debates, and behaviour, even towards the dis∣senting Brethren, carried themselves with a most Christian and Evangelicall sinceritie, and sweetnesse of spirit, and some of them have well witnessed to the world their hopes, desires, and ende∣vours for peace, especially with all the religious and faithfull Prea∣chers, and Professours of the Church of England. For instance, one of them in his Mr. Gillespie his Brotherly examination of some passages of M. C. his prin∣ted Sermon. p. 33. This is repeated in his latter Booke called Nihi Respondes. p. 19. Brotherly examination of some passages in Mr. Colem. his Sermon, to this Question, Where shall the Independents and we meet? returneth this answer, In holding a Church Governmeut jure divino, that is, that the Pastors and El∣ders ought to suspend, or excommunicate, according to the degree of the offence of scandalous sinners; and who can tell but the purging of the Church frō scandals, and the keeping of the Ordinances pure, when it shall be actually seen to be the great worke endevoured on both sides, may wake union betwixt us and the Independents more easie then ma∣ny imagine? and in his Ibid. latter booke (saith he) we will never de∣spaire of an union with such as are sound in the faith, holy in life, and willing to a Church refining and sinne-censuring government, in the hands of Church Officers. And in answer to Mr. C. his relation of news of agreement betwixt Presbyterians and Independents, Lutherans and Calvinists, Papists and Protestants, Turks and Christians; in holding that there is a Religion wherein men ought to walke, he saith: No Sir, they must be united upon the like termes, that is, you must first have Turks to be Christians, Papists to be Protestants, and then you must have them as willing to purge the Church of scandals, and to keep the Ordinances pure, &c. And after a few lines before repeated, quitting Mr. C. his geering report of newes, he replieth (but soberly and seriously) Now will I tell you my news, the Presbyterians and Independents are both equally interested against the Erastian Principles; and which is
more, for degree of assurance, and for more generall concurrence in truth and peace; not this Commissioner, nor these Commis∣sioners onely, but the whole Church of Scotland, is well prepared, and disposed to a Christian, and Brotherly compliance with the Church of England, in the way of reformation; for Mr. Coleman having objected that the Commissioners of Scotland came not to the Assembly at Westminster as Divines, by dispute and disquisition to find out the truth, but at Iudges to censure all different opinions as errours; for so (saith he) come for nine Divines to Dort, Alexander to the Councel of Nice, Cyrill to Ephesus; the Learned Commis∣sioner answereth him thus: Is it not enough to slander us, though he doe not for our sakes slander those worthy Divines that came to the Synod of Dort, Alexander also and Cyrill, prime witnesses for the truth in their dayes? would no lesse content him then to approve the Objections of the Arminians against the Synod at Dort, which I had mentioned, p. 33? but he gets not away so: the strongest instance which I had given he hath are once touched: it was concerning Paul and Barnabas who wore engaged (not in the behalfe of one Nation but of all the Churches of the Gentiles) against the imposition of the Mo∣saicall rites, and had so declared themselves at Antioch, before they came to Ierusalem. Finally, whereas he doubts, though not of our willingnesse to learne more, yet of our permission to receive more: That very paper first given in by we (which I had cited, and unto which he makes this reply) did speake not onely of our learning, but of the Church of Scotlands receiving: And which is more, there is an actuall experiment of it, the last generall Assembly having or∣dered the laying aside of some particular customes in that Church, and that for the neerer uniformitie with this Church of England, as was expressed in their owne Letter to the Reverend Assembly of Di∣vines. And though they thought it necessary to shew their diffe∣rent opinion in one point of the Directory, yet they entred their dissent without any disaffection to us of the Assembly; I will give you their sense in their owne words, which are these: Onely we have thought it necessary to declare, and make knowne, that the Clause in the Directory for the administration of the Lords Supper, which appointeth the Table to be so placed, that the Com∣municants may orderly sit about it, or at it, is not to be interpreted as if in the judgement of our Kirks, it were indifferent for any of the
Communicants not to come to, and receive at the Table, or as if we did approve the distributing of the elements by the Minister to each Communicant, and not by the Communicants among themselves, in which particulars we still conceive and beleeve the order and practise of our owne Kirke to be most agreeable to the word of God, the ex∣ample of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the nature of that heavenly Feast and Table; neverthelesse in other particulars we have resolved, and doe agree to doe as you have desired us in your Letter: This was part of the Letter from the Generall Assembly at Edenborough, signed thus: Subscribed in the name of the Generall Assembly by Mr. Robert Douglas Moderatour. Feb. 13. 1644. Whereby we see they doe not for that difference of opinion take any offence, or shew any dislike of their Brethren at West∣minster, nor any distast at the rest of the Directory for any parti∣cular contained in it. But yet for all this some are so unwilling to beleeve there will be peace, (especially in the point of Government of the Church) that they faine the Parliament and the Assembly of Divines at irre∣conciliable difference about it, the Divines requiring the stampe of Divine right to be set upon it, and the Parliament resolute to yeeld no more authoritie for it, then a meere Civill Sanction can give unto it. Answer. To this we answer: 1. That the Divines doe not affirme the whole frame and fabrick of Church Government to be of Divine right, for it is made up of particulars of different kinds, viz. Sub∣stantials of Government, which have their warrant either by ordi∣nance in his word, or direct inference from it, as that there must be Church Officers, Pastors, and their Ordination, Elders, and Dea∣cons, and Church Offices both of preaching, administration of the Sacraments, and Government; Church censures, admonition, su∣spension, excommunication; and accidentall, or circumstantiall addi∣tions, which are of prudentiall direction, and consideration, as for Pastors, when and in what manner they shall be ordained; whether a Preacher should treat on a Text, or on some Theologicall Theme or Common place, when and how oft, and to how many at once the Sacraments should be administred, how many assisting Elders should be in a Parish, and whether they should be chosen and ad∣mitted
to their office with imposition of hands, and continue in it for a yeare or two, or for terme of life; in what forme of words admonition, suspension, or excommunication should be comprised and pronounced, with divers others of like sort. This distinction the Divines of the Assembly make of the con∣tents of the Directory for the publique worship of God through∣out the three Kingdomes, (and the same hath the like use in the Church Government desired) their words in the last lease of the Preface of the Directory are these: We have, after earnest and fre∣quent calling upon the Name of God, and after much consultation, not with flesh and blood, but with the holy Word, resolved to lay aside the former Leiturgy, with the many rites and Ceremonies for∣merly used in the worship of God: and have agreed upon this following Directory for all the parts of publique worship, at ordinary and ex∣traordinary times. Wherein our care hath beene to hold forth such things as are of Di∣vine Institution in every Ordinance; and other things we have en∣devoured to set forth according to the rules of Christian prudence, agreeable to the generall Rules of the Word of God. 2. Though the Honourable Houses have not yet asserted the constitution of the Church Government as ordained in or derived from, or as agreeable to the Word of God, because, (as some ren∣der the reason) it is not the manner of Law-makers to mingle mat∣ter of Religion with their Civill Sanction; yet when they present it compleat in all the parts thereof, it may be they will at least give intimation of the conformity of it to the Canonicall Scriptures according to the distinction of the parts before proposed; and it is not so strange and unusuall (as some pretend) for Legislative au∣thoritie to borrow a religious reputation for what they inact or ordaine from the Word of God, for we find instance thereof in the Statutes Concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the words of Institution are set downe, and 15. places of Scripture quoted in the Marginewith letters of reference in the Text. Poult. Abridgm. p. 826. of the first yeare of Edward the sixth, c. 1. The Statute of the first of Q. Mery, c. 2. repealed as causing a decay of the honour of God, and the discom∣sort of the professours of the truth of Christs Religion. Ibid. p. 1005. In the first of Eliza. c. 2. For as much as profane swearing and cursing is forbidden by the Word of God. Ibid. p. 1403. In the 21. of K. James, c. 20.
Nothing more acceptable to God then the true and sincere service and worship of him according to his holy will, and that the holy keeping of the Lords Day is 2 principal part of the true service of God. Ibid. p. 1427. In the first of K. Charles. c. 1. & For as much as the Lords Day commonly called Sunday is much broken and profaned by Carryers, &c. to the great dishonour of God, reproch of Religion, &c. Ibid. p. 1434. In the third of K. James. c. 1. Lastly, the present Parliament hath done the like already for some parts of the Reformation authorised, as for the Ordination of Ministers, which is a chiefe part of the Presbyteriall authoritie, of which they say, So in the Ordinance for Ordination ordered to be printed. Octo∣ber 2. 1644. p. 2. Whereas it is manifest by the Word of God, that no man ought to take upon him the office of a Minister untill he be lawfully called and ordained thereunto; and that the worke of Ordination, that is to say, an outward solemne setting apart of persons for the office of the Ministery in the Church by Preaching Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ, and is to be performed with all due care, wisdome, gra∣vitie, and solemnity: It is ordained by the Lords and Commons, &c. And in their Ordinance for the Directory, Jan. 3. 1644. They beginne with these words, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into serious consideration the manifold incenve∣niences that have risen by the Booke of Common Prayer in this King∣dome, and resolving according to their Covenant to reforme Religion according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, have consulted with the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Divines, called together to that purpose; and doe judge it necessary that the said Booke of Common Prayer be abolished, and the Directo∣rie for the publique worship of God, herein after mentioned, be esta∣blished, and observed in all the Churches within this Kingdome, &c. If it be said, that Ordination and Worship are usually distinguished from Power and Government, and that both of them have more expresse warrant from the word of God, then can be found in Scri∣pture for the Presbyteriall Government. I Auswer. 1. That the question is not now whether there be difference betwixt them, but whether there be such difference betwixt a Ci∣vill
Sanction, and Divine ratification, that the one may not well be brought in with the other. 2. That though there were much use made of the distinction of the key of order, and the key of power, or of Iurisdiction in the time of the Prelates, so that they confined that wholly to the Clergie, principally to themselves, while they sold, or trusted out the key of power, or of jurisdiction to Vicars generall, Chancellours, Archdeacons, Commissaries, and rurall Deanes: yet is Ordination one of the principall parts of the Presbyteriall power; and if it be (as it is commonly taken) matter of power, to let into the Church by the Sacrament of Baptisme, as indeed it is; and whom to ad∣mit to, and whom to keep back from participation of the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper, it is a degree of power farre above both, whom to ordaine to, or whom to debarre from the order of Presbyters: for, 1. Whatsoever power or authoritie a Presbyter may claime by the word of God, is virtually included in his Ordination. 2. They that have power to ordaine a Presbyter, have power, upon just cause, to silence and suspend the execution of that power, and to stop his mouth, Tit. 1.11. if it be opened to broach heresie, or blasphemie, or if his conversation be vitious, and scandalous. 3. The Covenant, for the generall heads of it, comprehendeth a perfect enumeration of the maine parts of the desired reformation, under the titles of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government; but Ordination is not to be referred to Doctrine or Worship, but to Discipline or Government; for the ordaining of Governours, and the exercise of Government, properly appertaine to the same To∣pick or Classis. 4. Though Government and Worship be distinguished be∣twixt themselves, yet both agree in this, that their generall grounds and rules are found in the word of God, and in that respect, the one may be set forth in the Civill Sanction with a relish of, and re∣ference to a religious constitution, as well as the other. But in case they will not be pleased to expresse any Divine right, in any part of the Government, in their Civill Sanction, and will in a Parliamentary, and Legislative way, establish that thing which really, and in it selfe, is agreeable to the Word of God; though they doe not declare it to be the will of Iesus Christ, (as is noted
before out of the learned Commissioner of Scotland his Sect. 8. p. 25. Brother∣ly examination, and he hath the like in his p. 32. Nihil Respondes) we must be satisfied. p. 22. SECT. XX. An Appendix to the precedent examination, being an Apologeticall Narrative of the Petitions of the Common Councell of the Citie, and Ministers of London, presented to both the Honourable Houses of Parliament the 19th and 20th dayes of Novem. 1645. with a Vindication of them, and the proceedings in them, from the scandalous aspersions of the weekely Pamphleters, especially of him, who miscals himself by the name of the Moderate Intelligencer. BVt howsoever the hope of union hath gon on hitherto, since the Petitions of the Common Councell, and of the Ministers of the Citie, were presented to the Parliament, there is great like∣lyhood of a dangerous breach betwixt the Parliament and them, which will not easily be cemented up to perfect accord. So haply may some conceive, who know no more of the mat∣ter then they are told by the Moderate Intelligencer, or by his Plagiatie the writer of the continuation of especiall and remarkable Passages, (who repeats his lying and scandalous Relation, word for word) in these termes: This day the Common Councell did present a Petition to the Commons House of Parliament, by divers Alder∣men, and others of that Councell, which seemed to complaine, or take ill the proceedings of the Parliament with the Assembly, in the late businesse past concerning the election of Elders, &c. The Commons sate long about the businesse, and laid it much to heart, that any such thing should come from the Citie, and that they should lend an eare to any, that should in so evill a way represent things unto them; and of what dangerous consequence it was, and gave them an answer to this effect. That they did perceive that they had beene informed; and that they could not but lay it much to heart, that they, who had ever beene so
ready to doe all good offices for the Kingdome, and goe with the Par∣liament, should from any, but the Parliament, take a representation of their proceedings; and intreated them, that herealter they would take satisfaction from themselves: Its true they did beleeve they meant well, and had a good meaning, and intention in it, but they were abused. They had no sooner given answer to this, but there came another from the Clergy, to the same effect, which was more sad then the former, for they conceived this latter was an appeale from the Houses to the people, and of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined; and that it deserved a high censure: and withall they re∣solved, if that was the way intended, they would goe on with their De∣claration, and quickly undeceive the people; and in the interim they referred it to the Committee of examinations, that the first contrivers, and after fomenters of this businesse, may be dealt with according to merit. This is a parcell of their weekly report, but principally his, who miscals himselfe the Moderate Intelligencer, for he is neither In∣telligent, writing what he understands not, nor Moderate, being passionately addicted to a partie, to flatter, either out of an erro∣neous sancie, fondly set upon irregular novelties in opinion, and practice, or out of a covetous affection to the wages of iniquitie, the reward of flatterie or slander, as the bad cause, whereto he hath engaged his Pen, hath need to be served with the one or the other, and in the latter he hath shewed himselfe this last weeke, a very , (that's the word in the Originall for a false accuser) 2 Tim. 3.3. a false accuser of the brethren, Revel. 12.10. not of bre∣thren in evill, as Simeon and Levi, Gen. 49.5. but in good, in most sincere, and zealous desires, and endeavours to be serviceable to the Parliament, in prosecution of the great Cause that is in hand, the through reformation of Church and State. Among whom there are many, who taken single by themselves, might in good manners have been entertained with termes which savour more of reverence, then of contempt; but this three-far∣thing News-monger takes upon him, as if he had beene authorised by the Parliament, to involve all the venerable Magistrates, and prime men of power, and trust, in this Honourable Citie, and a very great number of the most learned, laborious, and consciencious Mi∣nisters of the Province of London, in an unfaithfull and undutifull
association against the Parliament, for their joynt petitioning to the Parliament. And where lyeth the crime, that may make them ly∣able to so loud a clamour? was it for petitioning in generall, or for their petitioning in particular? If we consult with his scandalous paper, we shall find that he layeth an heavie charge upon both: First for the generall, in the precedent page he ushereth it in with an egregious calumny, in these words: p. 203: Now let us come home, and looke about us, and see if while our Army is labouring to subdue the enemy, and end strife, there is not new beginning by those that Fame saith have beene the causes of all the strife; we did intreat them the last weeke they would let the Parliament alone, and waite, and not doubt they would see a good issue, and good content; they need not feare, they may be kept a while from their desires, but in the end they will have content, if their owne earnest pressing for it, doe not hinder. Now let us come home? It would be well Sir, if you would come home, and keepe at home, and take measure of your owne parts, and sit close to your Trade, and not ramble abroad, to busie your selfe in writing Intelligence of matters which are farre above the elevation of your Pole, or the comprehension of your head-piece. But your zeale perhaps (such a zeale as the Apostle taxeth, which is without knowledge, Rom. 10.2. just like a pressing-iron which hath heat without light) stirred you up to complaine of some troublesome spirits, who, while the Army is labouring to end strife, begin it anew; and they are such (say you) as Fame saith have been the causes of all the strife; and who be they? Fame saith, the late Deputie of Ireland, and the little Drelate of Canterburie were prime causes of the Kingdomes, and the Churches disturbance. And are they since their heads were cut off (as Herod thought of John Baptist, Mark 6.16.) raised from the dead, to revive our divisions? Common Fame saith, the Queene and her Faction, that have parted the King and the Parliament, Digby, Hopton, Goring, Greenvile, and other Military male-contents, have caused, and doe still continue the most dangerous contentions, and convulsions in England, as Moutrosse and his party in Scotland; Ormond, and his barbarous and bloody Papists in Ireland. But we must looke for these make bates at home, and find out such as at present doe trou∣ble our peace; and if we doe so, Fame saith, that they are such a∣mong
us, as oppose the settling of an uniforme Government, and breake out communities into severall Sects; such as so divide the husband from the wife, the parents from the children, the master from the servants, that a zealous Ioshua cannot say, I and my house will serve the Lord, Iosh. 24.15. since his family is distracted, and sorted into severall Congregations, and it may be also into hereti∣call conventicles. Fame saith, that such factious journeymen as Mr. D. are pub∣lique Incendiaries, and Trumpeters of Sedition, by taking all oc∣casions, making use of all advantages, casting about for all manner of devices, to increase their divided partie, that they may be able to uphold a faction; and because they cannot hope that their no∣veltie and paucitie should be able to maintaine a publique contest against so many both persons and Churches, as are engaged against their way, they make it their Master-piece, to leaven the most con∣siderable Societies, Cities, Sea-Townes, Armies, but especially the Parliament, with their Independent Principles, and practices; and either to get Independents into places of chiefe power and trust, or to seduce such as are eminent in dignitie, endowments, or autho∣ritie, to their side; and if they cannot obtaine them, they plot how to displace them; and if they cannot doe that, to render them lesse serviceable to the Publique, their way is to weaken their reputa∣tion with reproaches, or cunningly to intimate some matter of su∣spition touching their acts, or intentions; if they be of such inte∣gritie as is of impregnable proofe against their obloquie, then they will, by way of compliance, worke out of them what they can, which may conduce to their designe; and if they can prevaile no further, they will at least by an artificiall sweetnesse of behaviour, by appearances of more then ordinary piety, by a pretended exte∣nuation of difference of opinion, and practice, and by such insinua∣tions, so becalme or becharme the spirits of some Presbyterians of eminent parts, as to make them, if not favourable to their cause, yet so that they may not appeare against them when they should, or but in a very remisse and moderate degree of opposition. Lastly, (to returne to our Intelligencer) they set up weekly Pamphleters, who are wholly of their stampe, or fee them, or by some other ar∣tifices worke upon them, to take all occasions to magnifie their par∣tie, and to vilifie and calumniate those that oppose them; and so
they sometimes hyperbolize a Shrub on that side into a Cedar, and disparage those, who under God are the chiefe pillars, and suppor∣ters of the publique welfare, as if they were of no more worth, or use, then Reeds shaken with the wind; and this is not the least part of the Independent policy, to drive on their designe all over the Kingdome; for most of the common people know little of the progresse of publique affaires, but by such Informers, and they furnish them with weekly lies, to honour those of their owne sect, or sects rather, (for they are many) and to cast reproaches on such as are serious, and resolute in all just, and lawfull meanes of esta∣blishing of truth, and restoring of peace. But it may be he meaneth by Fame, that report which he and his fellowes in loose sheets have dispersed abroad in City, and Countrey; and if so, I say, Famaest malum, his fame is infamous; notoriously false, as he applyeth it, viz. to those who make ad∣dresses to the Parliament by way of Petition. We did intreat (saith he) the last weeke they would let the Parliament alone, and wait, and no doubt they would see a good issue, and good content. We did intreat them to let the Parliament alone? We Sir, who besides your selfe? and why you? and what meane you by letting the Parliament alone? doe you forbid the subject of England to petition the Parliament? if that be your meaning (as a man of Mo∣derate Intelligence may easily perceive it is) do you not mean they should be deprived of the most undoubted Priviledge, and Libertie, which by the Law of Nature, and of Nations, is allowed all over the world? if the Parliament had beene of that mind, since their first Session, they would not have tendred so many Petitions to the King, nor have received so many Petitions from all parts of the Kingdome; nor could they (but by the informations received in them) have knowne so much of the distemper of severall Coun∣ties, nor had so just grounds and causes as they had, for many of their Orders, and Ordinances, which were issued out from that Ho∣nourable Senate: and your selfe say in the next page, that a part of the Parliaments Answer to the Citie Petition was, that the Citi∣zens were intreated hereafter that they would take satisfaction from themselves, that is, satisfaction of their doubts, and desires by im∣mediate recourse to that Honourable Court; and how can that be better, or more acceptably done, then by way of petition?
But he saith, They need not feare, they may be kept a while from their desires, but in the end they will have content, if their own earnest pressing for it, doe not hinder. How knowes he that better then they, who have put up their desires for expediting the difficulties of the Government, by way of petition to the Parliament? The truth is, if he beleeve what he writes, it is but as the Devill be∣leeves there is a God, with a very ill will, and if he do not tremble at it, he is afraid of it; and he would have the Orthodox party but so to beleeve it too, as to make them neglect the best meanes to pro∣cure it; for it hath been another piece of subtilty of these sonnes of Zerviah, 2 Sam. 3, 39. to delay resolution against their way, by pre∣tence that there is no need of speed in it, or no fit season or oppor∣tunity for it, that their opposites may securely sleep, or slacken their endevours, while they with intentive vigilance, and double dili∣gence, worke on their owne webbe towards the period they have projected; and give them but time to prosecute their cause, and they that say now wee need not feare, will say at length perhaps, wee may not hope to enjoy our desires; and it may be they will endevour to See the Epi∣stle Dedicatory to the High end Honoura∣ble Court of Parliament, of Mr. Prinues resh Discovery of some prodigi∣ous new wan∣dring-blazing∣starres and fire∣brands, &c. fol. 3. p. . And Dr. Bast∣wicks Preface to the second part of his Booke against Indepen∣dency, called the Postscript. fol. 14. p. b. & fol. 15. p. 2. affright us that they will have theirs by force of armes. Lastly, he makes as if over earnest pressing for the Government, were the way to hinder it; and abating the word Over, (which is his word of aggravation, for he thinkes all's too much that is done to such a purpose) we doubt not but an earnest, and humble pressing by way of petition, will prevaile; for it is not fit to trouble the Parliament with any matter which is not worthy of pressing im∣portunity; though I confesse there is a prudence to be observed, when, and how, and how farre to prosecute a suite in that most high and Honourable Court: And so from his exception against Petition∣ing in Generall, we will come to what he hath said of the Petitions in Particular, which this weeke were presented to the two Hou∣ses of Parliament, This day (that is, Wednesday the nineteenth of November, &c.) saith he, The Common Councell did present a Peti∣tion to the Commons House of Parliament, — and there came ano∣ther from the Clergie to the same effect, &c. Of these Petitions it will be convenient to consider; 1. How they were framed. 2. How they were presented. 3. How they were accepted.
1. For the first, we shall distinctly observe; 1. The occasion of the Petitions. 2. The contents of them. 3. The consent and concurrence for resolu∣tion about them. SECT. XXI. The occasion of the petitions of the Common Councell and Mini∣sters of London, and the presenting of them to the Honourable Houses of Parliament. THe Occasion is contained in this Declaration following, made by the Ministers of London, and by them presented to the Ho∣nourable Court of Common Councell of the City in this Tenour. Wee the Ministers of London, having heretofore received from the Right Honourable the late Lord Major, A Resolve of the Ho∣nourable House of Commons, of September 23. 1645. for choosing Elders forthwith in the Province of London, with their Order an∣nexed of October 8. 1645. for communicating the same to our respe∣ctive Congregations, did thereupon choose a Committee in our names, both to acquaint the Lord Major how we had obeyed the said Order, and further to signifie unto him some doubts, and difficulties, for pre∣sent obstructing our further progresse therein. Whereupon his Lordship was pleased to impart the same to the Ho∣nourable Court of Common Councell, which the Honourable Court so farre resented, as to appoint a Committee of their owne members to conferre further with the Ministers about the Premisses, October 20. In which conference we declared to the said Committee that some of the former doubts were removed by the Directions of the Lords and Commons of August 19. and the Ordinance of October 20. 1645. but that some were continued, and other new difficulties did rise, by occasion of the Directions and Ordinance. The result of which Conference was represented to this Honourable Court, attested by their owne Committee. Ʋpon which an Order of Court was sent unto us, Dat. Octob. 27. 1645. intreating the Ministers to present their desires and reasons thereof to this Court in writing under their hands. In reference un∣to which Order, wee the Ministers of London (thankfully acknow∣ledging
our selves much obliged both to the Right Honourable the said Lord Maior, and this Honourable Court, for all their loving respects unto us in this matter, so much laid to heart by them) did humbly present both our desires, and the reasons thereof: Their de∣sires are the same which are comprised in their Petition, which in its proper place will offer it selfe to the Reader. The Reasons I thinke it fit to forbeare, for divers reasons, whereof that which I shall mention in the third particular may be sufficient. The second thing is the Contents, which consisted chiefly of re∣quests, and reasons for the establishment of the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment; wherein, though the penning of each Petition was divers in style, and forme of words, yet as I know for the one, which I saw, so I beleeve of the other, which I saw not, that there was nothing in it, which they thought would be offensive to either House of Parliament. This traducing Intelligencer saith, the Citie Petition seemed to complaine, and take ill the proceedings of the Parliament with the Assembly, in the late businesse past concerning the election of Elders. But they did but seeme so, and to such perhaps onely, as were not acquainted how carefull they were (who were composers or perusers of the Petition) to shunne any expression, that might be justly lyable to the exception of the chiefe Sages of the King∣dome. For the third particular, they consented to exhibite the same Schedule of Reasons, (being in number twelve) that were ten∣dered by the Ministers to the Honourable Court of Common Councell; which, because they were pleased to owne, I will not presume to make publique, without their consent; yet their con∣sent I may note (to their great commendation, and for their just vindication from the imputation of Schisme, which hath beene re∣proachfully charged upon the Citizens of London) which was such, that, as I have heard from such as I dare beleeve, the Petition being read in the Common Councell, passed with a nemine contradicente, not one man giving a negative vote against it; which is an assured argument of the soundnesse of the Aldermen, and Common Coun∣cell, (the most Honourable, and considerable part of the Citizens) and of their clearnesse from the taint of hereticall, and schismati∣call Tenets; and this union was well observed as a confutation of
their reports, who had gloried in a pretended generall opposition to the Presbyteriall Government in this Citie. The second thing is the presenting of these Petitions, which was done at the House of Commons, (upon Wednesday the nine∣teenth of November) to whom the Citie Petition was first pre∣sented by a competent number of Aldermen, and of the Common Councell, and afterwards the Petition of the Ministers by many of them; and on the twentieth day was each Petition presented to the House of Peeres, in like manner as the day before to the House of Commons. SECT. XXII. The offensive Acceptance of them by the Parliament, as the weekely News-makers make report of it: Cautions premised before their confutation. FOr the third particular, the acceptance the Petitions had; This Malignant Intelligencer tels his Reader, that the Commons sate long, and laid it much to heart that any such thing should come from the Citie, and that they should lend an eare to any, that should in so evill a way represent things to them, and of what dangerous conse∣quence it was. To which before I make any punctuall Reply, I desire to pre∣mise these particulars. 1. That in nothing that I have said, or shall say, I intend any contradiction to the Honourable House of Commons. 2. I beleeve not this Relater hath truly delivered the fence of that House. 3. That if any worthy Member among them, according to any information received, and beleeved by him, have used his libertie in speaking of his mind, (though his wisdome, as well as others in∣nocencie, may be abused by mis-report) I shall not desire to raise any part of my Reply so high as to him, but to confine my selfe to the report of this Pamphleter, who I am sure hath no Parliamen∣tary priviledge to speake what he pleaseth; (which yet a Parlia∣ment man, that hath it, will not take upon him to use when he is out of Parliament, as when he is in it.) And if any of that grave
and judicious Senate, supposing us faulty, have thought it fit and just that we should be charged, we doubt not but there are many a∣mong them, who, if we be innocent, will be well content to see us cleared; since for many of us, their Honour is in part ingaged for our reputation, in the We have con∣sulted with the Reverend, Pius, and Learned, Di∣vines called to∣gether to that purpose. The Ordinance of Parliament of the third of January, 1644. prefixed before the Directory. p. 1. publique Testimonie they have given of us to three Kingdomes; and the most of us are the same men, and have the same consciences engaged in the desire of a present establishment of Government, so as it may be safely, and profita∣bly practicall, who in confidence of the goodnesse and godlinesse of the Reformation owned, managed, and maintained by the Parlia∣ment; and in hearty and faithfull devotion thereto, and ready and cheerfull obedience to them, have suffered the shipwrack of our estates, and hazarded our lives, and we repent not of any part of our paines, or pressures, or perils, so long as we may be serviceable to so good a Cause, and to such good and gracious Masters, as under Christ they have hitherto approved themselves toward us: and I hope we may without vain-boasting say, by way of Apology, that we have not beene altogether their unprofitable servants, in re∣spect of our Interest in, and endeavours with the people, (with∣out whom the greatest Kings are rather cyphers then figures, and destitute both of honour and safety, Prov. 14.28.) to informe their judgements, and to inflame their zeale, and to oblige their con∣sciences, to fasten their affections in loyaltie, and fidelity to those worthy Ptriots, whom they have in their choice and votes of election intrusted with the Religion, the lives, and the estates of themselves▪ and their posteritie. To which purpose we cannot be of so good use, nor our medi∣ation so effectuall for hereafter, as aforetime, if we be such Pre∣varicators as he hath represented us to the publique view; or, not being such, if we suffer our innocence to be betrayed in mistrust to suspition, by either inconsiderate or cowardly silence. Thus much premised in dutie to the Honourable House of Com∣mons, and in due circumspection and caution to my Reverend Brethren, and my selfe, I shall now make answer to the charge given out, and the answer (so farre as it concerneth us) may be partly made out of the conclusion of the Schedule, (as it was ten∣dered with the reasons of the Ministers to the Court of Common Cuncell in confoitie to their desires made knowne unto us)
which was as that Honorable Assembly can witnesse with us, in these words: These our desires and reasons we humbly present to this Honourable Court, not that we have the least intention of investing our selves and the Ministery with any arbitrarie, unlimited, and exor∣bitant power: For the power is not to be settled upon the Ministers alone, but upon the Presbyteries; in all which it is provided already, that there shall be alwaies two at least of the people for one Minister; And we sincerely professe our desires and intentions to manage this weightie Government, not according to our wils, or wisdomes, but as neere as is possible, according to the will and word of God, the most certaine Rule in the world; nor that we would carry on this work by might and power, for we have good hope that God in due time will pa∣tronize his owne Cause, though men should be wanting; but that we may discharge a good conscience, in our utmost endeavours to advance the Kingdome of Christ, in the puritie of Reformation, to be faithfull to the Church of Christ, wherein we are stewards, and watchmen; and to succeeding posteritie, to maintaine the truth to which we are bound to beare witnesse; to fulfill our solemne League and Covenant with God, from which we cannot goe backe; and as your remembran∣ers, to put you in mind to neglect no pious endeavours, in your places, and callings, for expediting both your selves, and us, out of the former difficulties, and for promoting of such a Reformation of Religion in Discipline and Government, as may have due puritie in it selfe, may bring sweet unitie amongst us, and most conduce to an happy unifor∣mitie in all the three Kingdomes, according to the vowes of God that are upon you in your solemne League and Covenant. He goeth on saying, that the House did perceive that they had beene mis-informed, and that they could not but lay it much to heart that they who had ever beene so ready to doe all good offices for the Kingdome, and goe with the Parliament, should from any but the Parliament take a representation of their proceedings. Mis-informed, wherein? is there any thing untrue in that they presented in their Petition, or Schedule annexed? and by whom mis-informed? by the Ministers of London? that is the meaning, but certainly they that originally made this suggestion are little ac∣quainted with the minds, consciences, intentions, or proceed∣ings of the Ministers who gave in their writing to the Common Councell of the Citie, subscribed with no fewer then fourescore
and nine hands; and they had presented more to the Parlia∣ment if they had not beene strained in time, for the Petition was drawne up but at night, and was to be delivered the next morning. And for the Honourable Court of Common Councell of the Citie, (though their prudence, integritie, dignitie, good affection, and fidelitie to the Parliament, have no need, nor doe desire any defence of so meane or feeble an hand as mine is) I hope it will not be either offensive, or ungratefull to them, if (having had often conference (as well as other of my Brethren) with their Com∣mittee, and being sent with some of them, in the name of the Ministers of London, to the Honourable Court of Common Coun∣cell, on Tuesday, November 18. where the Citie Petition was publiquely read, and ratified by common consent) I make report of some passages, wherein they and we are joyntly concerned; as followeth. There being a Committee of Common Councell chosen by that Councell, to consult with a Committee of Divines, and to con∣sider of our common engagements in the Presbyteriall Govern∣ment, (for some of them, with some of us were already chosen to be Provinciall Tryers of Elders, and the same, and many others of the Citizens were like to be chosen for Parochiall Elders) we saw not how we could be divided in difficulties, if the Directions were not cleared; nor in hazards, if we were not sufficiently au∣thorised to carry on the service, who were in part already, and yet were further to be united in that great (and to this Kingdome al∣together) new undertaking; at our Committees we observed no∣thing in those worthy Citizens of the Committee, nor in those who were partly permitted, and partly requested to be present at our meetings, but what was sutable to piety, prudence, and to af∣fectionate and dutifull observance of the Parliament; and it was our joy, as it may be their glory, that we found so many men of ex∣cellent parts, and spirits, so well composed, and balanced, without any propension to be swayed any way further then the light of truth, and dictate of conscience did dispose them: and yet so farre from over-weening wit, or selfe-conceited wilfulnesse, that while we debated difficulties with them, we saw that of Solomon veri∣fied in them, Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser, teach a just man, and he will increase in learning, Prov. 9.9.
And though they were pleased to entertaine us with much ho∣nour, and favour, we neither tooke upon us to be their guides, in the carriage of this Cause, nor to perswade them to any thing, but what would be the result of their owne judgements, and con∣sciences, upon a due consideration of the matters before them; nor did we know untill Tuesday night, the next night before the morning of their going to Westminster, that they would petition; nor when that was resolved on, did any of us know, or see that Pe∣titionary draught, or so much as a line of it, which they presented to the Parliament; onely when my selfe, with some of my Bre∣thren, were sent from the Divines of London, then Assembled at Sion Colledge, to know their minds, how farro they would ap∣peare in the proposall of requests and reasons, or what part they would assigne or leave to us (who were resolved to make an hum∣ble addresse by our selves to the Parliament, if they would not) being called into the Court of Common Councell, we received from the mouth of the Right Honourable the Lord Maior that now is, some generall words of gracious acceptance of what we had done, and of their concurrence with us, for the establishment of Church Government; but withall, not knowing their purpose in particular, we were left to our owne resolutions, to present our desires to the Parliament, as we conceived to be most convenient for us. In all this what was there which might imply any digression from dutie, or any diversion from their or our due respect unto the Honourable Houses? Object. But they tooke the representation of the Parliaments pro∣ceedings not from the Parliament, as they desired, but from others, viz. the Ministers. The quite contrary is true; The Ministers re∣ceived the representation of the Parliaments proceedings from the Lord Maior, and both Citizens, and Ministers, being in a concur∣rent condition for scruples and dangers, tendred their Petitions, and Reasons unto them, for satisfaction from them; wherein there was as faire and ingenuous dealing, as could be desired; for the Ministers tendred nothing to the Committee, or Common Coun∣cell, but what they were willing should be read, heard, and exa∣mined, and discussed by any of what mind or affection so ever; nor could that possibly be carried in a private way, which came under
the consideration of the Committee so many times, and after∣ward was committed for probation and tryall of the whole Com∣mon Councell; and as openly and plainly to the Ministers dealt with the Citie, so did both the Citie and, Ministery with the Par∣liament, presenting the same Schedule of Reasons, (annexed to each of their Petitions) to their view and censure; which patterne of plaine dealing I commend to the imitation of some of our In∣dependent Brethren, that their waies may not be such Ridles (e∣ven to those who are no lesse wise, but more innocent then they) that they cannot tell where they have beene working, no more then of the Moles of the earth, untill they see the heapes they have cast up, and they glide away so slily in their pace, as if they meant to give occasion for a fifth particular to be added to Solomons Pro∣verbe, There be three things too wonderfull for me, yea foure which I know not; the way of an Eagle in the ayre, the way of a Ser∣pent upon a rocke, the way of a Ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a Man with a maid, Prov. 30. 18, 19. To these as a margi∣nall note, though not as a part of the Text, we may adde, and the way of some Independents in their plots. SECT. XXIII. A Copy of the Ministers Petition, and the Intelli∣gencers slanderous censure of it. HAving done with the Cities Petition, which he makes the Simeon, he brings in the Petition of the Ministers as the Levi, or its Brother in vill, in this sort: But there came another Petition from the Clergy to the same effect, which was more sad then the for∣mer; for they conceived this latter was an appeale to the people, and of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined; and that it de∣served an high consure; and withall they resolved if that was the way intended, they would goe on with their Declaration, and quickly undeceive the people; and in the Interim they referred it to the Committee of Examinations, that the first contrivers, and after f∣tors of the businesse, may be dealt withall according to merit. For answer unto this, it might be sufficient (if I had to doe
with one that were indeed, and not in name onely a Moderate In∣telligencer) to set downe the Petition in Terminis as it was pre∣sented to both Houses of Parliament; but laying that as a ground∣worke, it will be meet to build on to a full confutation. To the Right Honourable the Lords and Commons Assembled in the High Court of Parliament in ENGLAND, The humble Petition of the Ministers of the Gospel, within the Province of London, Humbly sheweth, THat your Petitioners and daily Oratours at the throne of Grace, doe unfainedly blesse our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour, the head over all things to the Church, that in the midst of those many insufferable miseries over flowing, and almost over whel∣ming both this Church and Kingdome, he hath graciously opened for us a door of hope, in raising up, continuing together, and assisting of this Renowned Parliament above our expectations, and against all oppo∣sitions, for the rescuing both of Church and State from their deepe calamities; having to these ends engaged your hearts (and with you the three Kingdomes) unto himselfe, in so Religious a Covenant. And we humbly present our hearty thankes unto the Right Honourable Houses, for all their indefatigable endeavours these five yeares toge∣ther, for the Kingdomes happinesse, and the Churches Reformation; and in particular, for the hopes of a speedy establishment of Church Government, intimated unto us in your Directions of Aug. 19. 1645. Order of September 23. and Ordinance of October 20. 1645. In which Directions and Ordinance notwithstanding divers diffi∣culties appeare both to us, and to our people, hither to obstructing our putting the Presbyteriall Government (therein mentioned) into actu∣all execution, according to our earnest desires; by reason of divers things (as we humbly conceive) partly doubtfull, partly defective therein. Wherefore your Petitioners in pursuance of our solemne Covenant, in zeale to the glory of God, the Kingdome of Jesus Christ, and the compleat establishment of puritie and unitie in the Church of God, for
the satisfaction of our owne and our peoples consciences in this weighty matter of Church Government, and for the generall benefit, not onely of the Province of London, but of all the Provinces in England, both for present and future Ages. Do most humbly and earnestly beseech the Right Honorable Houses, That the Presbyteriall Government in Congregationall, Classicall, Provinciall, and Nationall Assemblies, (agreed upon already by the Right Honourable Houses) may be speedily established, with such fulnesse and sufficiencie of power, upon all the said Elder ships, that they may fully, faithfully, and chearfully, with well satisfied consciences sub∣mit unto, and put in execution the said Government. And that there may be to that end, by your Authoritie, superadded a cleare explana∣tion of things doubtfull, and full supply of things defective, in the said Directions and Ordinance of the Right Honourable Houses, accord∣ing to the Schedule annexed, and herewith humbly presented to your Wisdomes and Piety. And your Petitioners, &c. This being the Petition to a word, pardon mine incredulitie if I beleeve not that you can perswade any Intelligent Reader, that so prudent a Senate as the Honourable House of Commons is, could so mistake the meaning of it, as to put such an odious con∣struction upon it, as an Appeale from them to the people, the people of London; that were to sow sedition, and endeavour dissention be∣twixt the Parliament and the Citie, (whose unanimous consent, and correspondence in counsels, and executions, have been, under God, the strongest suppport of the whole Common-weale) a crime worthy of the reward of Metius Suffetius in Ʋt paulo ante (inquit Tullus) animum inter Fidenatem Ro∣manemque rem ancipitem gessisti, it a jam corpus passim distraben∣dum dabis. Exinde duabus admotis qua∣drigis, in currus earum distentum illigat Metium, deinde in diver∣sum iter equi concitati lacerum in utroque curru corpus, qua inhae∣serant vinculis membra, prtan∣tes, &c. Liv. Dec. 1. lib. 1. p. 14. Livy, who for his double dealing betwixt the Fide∣nates and the Romanes, was so fastened to two Cha∣rets, that the Horses that drew them being forced divers waies into a furious pace, fore him in pieces. But Sir, if those on your partie doe no worse offices to the Citie, by your insinuations into the minds of the worthy Members of the Honourable Houses, then Presbyteriall Ministers doe to the Parliament, by their entercourse with the Citizens, there will be no occa∣sion given for the least shew of suspition, or jealousie
betwixt them; and whosoever shall read your paper and mine An∣swer, will see good cause to conceive, that some of your spirit have too busily bestirred themselves, out of the union betwixt Citizens and Ministers to raise a Division betwixt the Parliament and Citie, (which he that desires to see, I wish rather that the Ravens of the valley pick out his eyes, Prov. 30.17.) But that union doth clearly confute the calumny you cast upon the Ministers Petition; for so farre is it from an appearance of an Appeale from the Parliament to the people, that it plainly representeth both Ministers and people consulting, and concluding, joyntly to make an Appeale to the Parliament, and humbly waiting to be disposed of by their finall Resolutions. This is it sure for which you say, the latter Petition was more sad then the former; for when that came in so conformable to the Citie Petition in matter, (though differing in phrase & style) and in scope, and Intention, and word for word the same in a Schedule of Reasons annexed to it, it was an evidence of so good agreement betwixt the most eminent Citizens, and the forementioned Mini∣sters, as must needs be a great griefe of heart to those, that make great advantage of the divisions of Reuben, yea and of all the Tribes throughout out Israel. He goeth on with a proficiencie from bad to worse; and though he hath no honey at all, he hath a double sting in the taile of his Intel∣ligence; scruing up a charge against the Petitioners to the highest aggravation that may be, and concluding with the commination of a censure, commensurate to their merit. For the Charge these be his words: They (that is, the House of Commons) conceived this latter, (that is, the Petition of the Ministers) was an Appeale from the Houses to the people, and of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined Having answered the former words, I will now speake onely to the latter: But first I must pause and wonder a while at this su∣perlative Slander. How Sir, Was that Petition of as dangerous a consequence as could be imagined? no such matter Sir. For what danger at all can be imagined in it, when all is in effect no more but this, that the Citizens and Ministers upon Petition may clearly un∣derstand the mind of the Parliament, and may be throughly enabled to put in execution their commands, to obey them to the full according
to their engagement in the solemne Covenant. Such fearefull appre∣hensions, even of dangerous consequence, (if they be reall, not fained) may proceed from the selfe-love of your party, who con∣fine the common felicitie to your owne particular Interests; and thinke the world will be in a very ill condition, if the Presbytery should be set up, and should set bounds to your ambitious, or co∣vetous encroachments upon the rights of Ministers and people: and it may be (because you are no Ionasses, to be willing to be cast into the Sea to save the Ship and passengers in it) you may have in your thoughts some Military commotion of your owne making; for you know, or may know, that bloody words, lyable to such a sence, and tending to the like effect, have beene more then once laid to the charge of some of your side, as hath beene noted, pag. 76. And if your dangerous consequence be but a fiction and pretence, (which I rather imagine) it must be supposed to be but a cast of your subtilty, to make the simple afraid of, and to beget a mistrust of some dangerous designe in the Ministers, that they may desert them, and adhere unto you, as men of prudent insight into immi∣nent mischieves, and of provident forecast to secure them from danger who betake themselves to your cause and complices for succour and safety. Which of these conjectures is true, (or whether any other, any worse, for a plaine Presbyterian is too shallow to sound the depth of a projecting Independent) I will not determine; but I will confidently resolve, that such an imagination of transcendent dan∣ger in the Petition of the Ministers, was no part of the mind of the major part of the House of Commons; (which must give deno∣mination to the whole) for they can never be so much mistaken, as to put such an exuberant expression of offence upon so inoffensive a Petition; who very well know, and cannot but as well remem∣ber, your Brother Lilburnes businesse, and what seditious papers he, and his faction sent abroad; which if you had forgotten (for I doubt not but such a schismaticall polypragmn, as those that know you report you to be, if not wise enough to be of his coun∣sell, may be busie enough to be active in his desperate designe) I would helpe your memory with a repetition of some such passages out of them, as might be worthy of your now misapplied aggra∣vation,
[of as dangerous consequence as may be imagined] but that I thinke them fitter to be burned by the common Hangman, or bu∣ried in everlasting oblivion, then now to be mentioned, especially in a Discourse of defence of the Innocent. And truly Sir next unto Lilburnes Libels, we may say of your malevolent Intelligence of this weeke, that it is a matter of as dangerous consequence as may be imagined: For doo not you, as farre as your credit will carry a mischievous suggestion, disperse all about a suspition of the Cities and Ministers combination against the two Houses of Parliament? who have hitherto with honour and safetie very much confided in their affection, and fidelitie, (as I doubt not they will ever have cause so to doe) though such malignant medlers as you say and doe what they can to the contrary. SECT. XXIV. Britanicus taxed for traducing the Petitioners. YOur Athenian Colleague, Britanicus, (though they that reade you both, will haply take you to be rather a Boeotion in crasso jurares aere natum. Horat. Beotian) hath a conceit of some disparagement to the Parliament, by a supposed di∣vision, though he lay his action wrong, mistaking an occasion for a cause, and one person for another: whom, though I first mention him in way of opposition to you, I must take for an adversary to us, I meane to the City and Ministry in this businesse of Petition; and when I have given him an animadversion by the way, I shall return unto, and proceed with you. It may prove (saith he) a train to blow up the reputation of the renowned Parliament, and harden the enemy in their courses, if they should see a doore of hope opened through any supposed divisions; the common Adversary will take heart againe, and those which favour them (whether at home or abroad) will dare again to shew themselves, as not doubting to perfect their designe, if we dis∣joynt our selves, and contribute to our owne ruine. Divisions among us divulged by you, may animate the common Enemy to a greater height of hopes, and attempts, so much his ob∣servation implyeth, and that's your fault, Mr. Intelligencer, but he applyeth it to the Petitioners, and that's his calumny, as well as yours. It may prove, saith hee, a traine &c. What is that that may
prove so? the Petition? the Petition a traine to blow up the reputation of the Parliament? Reade it, Sir, and you will see it is not a train, but a Trumpet to blow up their reputation with a loud sound, and melodious accent, with humble thankes acknowledging, and high∣ly extolling them by the name of A renowned Parliament, for their indefatigable endevours for five years together, for the Kingdoms hap∣pinesse, and the Churches Reformation. And can the Petition be charged to open a doore of hope to the enemies, through supposed divisions from the Parliament, when it expresly maketh the Par∣liament a doore of hope of much happinesse to the Kingdome? It is an easie matter to turne the most innocent action, or businesse, into an occasion of exception; but they are the causes (for the particular in question) both of disturbance to the Parliament, and of danger from the common enemy, who proclaime unkindnesse betwixt the Parliament, and their most faithfull, and serviceable Votaries, the Common Councell, and Ministers of the City of London. This Retortion, as by a kind of partnership, belongeth to both these false Brethren, but taking Britannicus by himselfe, he begin∣neth at the beginning of the weeke, by the figure Anticipation, for the Petitions were not presented to the Honourable Houses untill two o three dayes after; and so he cometh over the matter againe upon Wednesday and Thursday: In the first place he findeth fault with Petitioning, as out of season, and so indiscreet, and as imputing neglect to the Parliament, and implying distrust of the Indgment & care of those whom we acknowledge the wisest and supreme Councell, and so undutifull; but neither so nor so, for the purpose of Petition∣ing was so fanned and sifted, by the free and impartiall debates of divers wise and worthy Citizens, and by learned and well advised Ministers, that if there had been any folly or indiscretion, it would have vanished into nothing; but, Sir, I can assure you of my know∣ledge, the more it was weighed and examined, the more it was approved by the prudent, as well as the pious of both Societies, not only as necessary, but as seasonable also. And if the Honourable Houses were intentively imployd to perfect the Government, and did set themselves in a constant course, and chose set dayes for that purpose, and the day of presenting the Petition was one of them, (all which I beleeve, and cannot thinke of it without thankes to them, nor without praises of them, and prayers for them) yet
was it not unseasonable to petition them, because the concurrent desires of so many, so considerable Petitioners might be a meanes to remove some obstructions, Qui monet u facias qud jam facis de moven∣do and to facilitate and expedite the bu∣sinesse they had in hand. Nor was it any distrust, or impeachment of the high praise of their prudence, for you know the old and ever true Aphorisme, when the Acts of goodnesse doe anticipate admo∣nitions, Laudat, & hortatu compre∣bat acta suo. Ovid. (and we may say the like of Petitions) they are so far from reprofes, that they are the praises of the Actors. Nor is there any more cause to impute undutifulnesse, or ill man∣ners unto the Petitioners, then there is to accuse them of want of policie, or prudence, for this particular; nor any ground to straine up the charge so high, as if that which they did were preju∣diciall, and derogatorie to the Majesty of Parliament, in forestalling their counsels with any particular desires. So say you Mr. Br. in your Wednesdayes accompt: But I pray you, Sir, by what dialect doe you call those Petitions particular desires, which were concluded in a full Common Councell, (the representative body of this fa∣mous, and never more then since our late and unhappy warres, renowned City) not one man (as I have been credibly informed) appearing against it at the passing of the Vote; and that not for any particular person, or purpose, but for the generall good of three King∣domes, both for the generation present, and for posterity in the ages to come? And what prohibition I pray you lyes against parti∣cular Citizens and Ministers, that they may not Petition the Parlia∣ment with particular desires, as well as you? Did not you when you were confined, for shewing your selfe rather an over-nimble Mercury, then a sober paced Britannicus, petition them your selfe for your enlargement? And when you did so, did you do any thing prejudiciall and derogatory to the Majesty and Dignity of Parlia∣ment, and as it were forestall their counsels with your particular de∣sires? If not, shew us your priviledge, which may make it no fault in you, and an indiscretion, or undutifulnesse, or ill manners in others. I shall need to proceed no further in answer to your Criticismes, I see you are ingenious in your apprehensions, and ingenuous in confession of your owne misprisions; and since I perceive you so punctuall in rectifying your Reader to a title, (for you acknow∣ledge a mistake in honouring Sir The Aston (with whom I have
had much, and some perillous opposition in the Cause of the Parlia∣ment) with the Title of a Lord) doubt not but you will be as ready to retract an undeserved traducement of the Parliaments friends, (especially so many, and of so great reputation) as to recall an unde∣served advancement of the Parliaments enemy. I will take leave of you with a word of advice, which is but this, take heed of engaging your selfe any further in this cause, see first how the Immoderate Intelligencer speeds with his precipi∣tated reproaches against the City, and Ministers of London; to whom now I will returne, and take leave of him, though not in such a manner as I doe of you; and having answered his crimina∣tion, I shall now enter a defence against his commination of censure. SECT. XXV. An answer to the Intelligencers Commination of the Petitioners. HAving set the suspition of guilt up to the height, not onely of reality but of imagination, he scrueth up the censure to a pro∣portionable elevation, saying, in the name of the Honourable House of Commons, (but without any warrant from them) that it de∣served an high censure, and withall that they resolved, if that were the way intended, they would goe on with their Declaration, and quickly undeceive the people, and in the Interim they referred it to the Committee of Examinations, that the first contrivers, and after fomenters of that businesse, may be dealt with according to merit. These words may sound some terrour to him, —Hic mur abeneus esto, Nil conseire sibi, &c. Horat. that hath but a brasen face, but he that hath a wall of brasse, a cleare conscience from the guilt objected, may be bold as a Lion, when such as you may flee when no man pursueth, Prov. 28.1. For more particular Reply, Sr. we cannot be put into fear of an high censure, while we are assured of our owne innocence, and the Houses of Parliaments both prudence and justice; and therefore we shall willingly submit our selves to examination, when, and where they please to call us to our answer; and if our accusers would meet us at the barre, upon
such just and equall termes as lege talionis by the Divine law is or∣dained, Deut. 19.16, &c. we would petition them againe for a tryall, and punishment, (upon conviction) as before for the esta∣blishment of the Presbyteriall Discipline. For the Declaration you speake of, there be two things which will secure us from all danger of it; the one is, that whatsoever it is, it is but conditionall, viz [if this be the way] that is, the way of seditious appeale from the Parliament to the people, and we are sure that's no way of ours: how neere the Independent by-path coasts upon, or bends towards that way, may appeare by their ma∣king combinations with the people, and setting up a popular Go∣vernment in the Church, without any authoritie from the State. The other securitie we have is both from the Parliament, and our selves, as we have professed before, and in confidence of both, neither Parliamentary Examinations, Declarations, no nor Visita∣tions shall trouble us; for if we be guilty, let them visit our trans∣gression with the rod, and our iniquitie with stripes, Psal. 89.32. and (if we deserve it) let them chastise us not onely with Solomons whips, but with Reboboams scorpions, 1 King. 12.14. There is one thing more in his minatory report, which, though he tell it as a threat, I would take it for a promise, if he could make it good in the right sense of it, that is, quickly to undeceive the peo∣ple, for they are shamefully deceived many waies, especially by such impudent Impostors as this weekly Newes-maker; with whom I have now done. And in confutation of Britannicus and him, I have confuted others, who concurr with them in the same calumnies against the Common Councell, and Ministers of London. SECT. XXVI. The misreport of the Diurnall and Weekely Account confuted, and the Perfect Passages con∣vinced of absurdity and sedition. YEt I must bestow a few words on the Perfect Diurnall, and Weekely Account, and a few lines on the Perfect Passages: For the first, omitting what is virtually or formally answered be∣fore,
under the Titles forementioned, I shall note but one parti∣cular, which is, that it was ordered as a part of the answer to the Ministers, that they should returne home, and looke after and attend the charges of their severall Congregations; so saith the Perfect Di∣urnall; and the Weekly Account, saith, the Ministers were desired to looke diligently to their owne flocks, with this addition of the Wri∣ter, a neighty charge, and worke enough; by which is implied that they were negligent in their Calling, and too busie out of it; but as there was no ground for such an implicit reproofe, so there was no such message given in the Name of the House to the Mi∣nisters, as he that presented the Petition confidently averreth, to whom other Ministers that accompanied him doe give atte∣station. Now for the Perfect Passages (as the Authour cals his Pamph∣let) it is in one particular most seditious and scandalous: viz. this, What may be thought of those that goe about to disparage Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, and the Independent Army that have done so much good in reducing the Kingdome, and brought the Warres so neere to an end? What may be thought of this Questionist? He cals his sheet of Newes Perfect Passages, by the same figure, be∣like, that the Furies are called Eumenides, for never did I read such imperfect passages in any printed paper. The Title is, Perfect Pas∣sages of each dayes proceedings in Parliament; and the day he be∣gins withall is the 19. of November; and he begins that day with a poore piece of Sycophanticall Rhetorick, in praise of the Parlia∣ment, and presently passeth from palpable flattery (the shallowest and silliest that ever was bestowed on so profound and prudent a Senate) to pernitious calumnie, in answer to the Question he hath proposed; and thats all he hath for that day; and what is that to the proceedings in Parliament that day? if he had given in that account for some day about the middle of Midsummer moneths, his absurdities had beene more seasonable, more sutable to the tem∣per of that Luatick Quarter, and so it might have beene some ex∣cuse, or extenuation of his fault in moving such a fditious and dan∣gerous Question, wherein he seemeth zealous for the honour of Lieutenan Generall Cromwell, and with him magnifieth the Ar∣my under the Title of Independent. Now for Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, I , no man that
goeth about to disparage him, and I doubt many take occasion to commend him otherwise then his wisdome will approve of; for my part, whether he be an Independent or no, I know not; but if he be, I can be content to give him, and any other of that way, all the praise that is due unto them; and though I much mislike projecting Independents, who idolize their owne fancies, and pretending the publique welfare, care for nothing else, or nothing more then to carry on their owne concernments by the Foxes pate, or Lions paw, by fraud, or force, as either of them may be serviceable to their selfe seeking designe, yet I doubt not but there be many goe under that name, who are rather passive then active in deceit, who truly feare God, and sincerely desire, according to the song of the Angel, That glory may be to God on high, good will towards men, and peace upon earth, Luk. 2.14. And to speake more particularly of him, I beleeve, (as I have heard of him by those to whom he is well knowne, as they are to me) that he is a wise man, a well advised and valiant Commander, and so good and sincere a Christian, so true a lover of his Countrey, that he would not have the peace of it disturbed, for any difference betwixt Presbyterians and Independents. And upon such pre∣mises I dare presume to inferre, that the gallant Lieutenant Ge∣nerall will not be well pleased with such a Question, or Answer, as this Novell Catechiser hath set forth; for whatsoever affinitie (or it may be identity) is betwixt him and an Independent, there is no congruitie betwixt the termes Independent and Army in our State; for doth not the Army depend upon the Parliament, who give di∣rections, and commands to it for their service? and doe not the chiefe Commanders in it professe themselves to be dispo∣sed of onely by the determinations of Parliament? in this respect a man might say, an Independent wife, or an Independent servant, as well as an Independent Army. And if we consider the Army with∣in it selfe, is it (as they would have the Church) composed, or made up of Independent Congregations? so that every Captaine and his company are free to attempt, or act, as they can agree a∣mong themselves, without subordination to superiour Comman∣ders; if so, the Army would not be an Army, that is, an entire and well compacted systeme, or body of souldiers united, and regu∣lated by prudence, and authoritie in a graduall series of Martiall
command and government, but would breake in pieces into petty parties, as it is upon a rout made by the enemy, and so would be of little use, or force, either for conflict, or conquest, much lesse would it be terrible as an armie with banners should be, and the Church is compared to such an Army, Cant. 6.4. This onely by the way: But he meanes it perhaps an Indepen∣dent Army materially (not formally) as consisting of Comman∣ders and common souldiers, addicted to Independencie: If he take Independents as distinguished from the Orthodoxe party on the one side, and from the heterodoxe party of Anabaptists, Brownists, Antinomians, and other such erroneous dogmatists on the other side, (with whom if they be true to the Principles of Religion they cannot finally close in accord against the Presbyte∣rians) they are much too few to denominate the Army; and I doubt not but the ingenuous, and consciencious Independents will con∣fesse, that there have beene since our wofull warre begunne, and yet are many both skilfull, faithfull, and couragious Commanders, and common souldiers, who have done very great and successefull service towards the finishing of the warre, and yet never came under the name or notion of Independents, unlesse by mistake, or imposture, as this fellow would cousen the Kingdome, and afright the Presbyterians with a conceit of the puissance and prevalence of Independencie in the Army, and by the Army, as if that were the life-blood that maintained the spirits of our Military forces, and made all the souldiers valorous and victorious, and so the Indepen∣dent Army as Independent, reduplicative (for so he would have his Reader deluded) had reduced the Kingdome, and brought the warre so neere an end; here an end of his Question. His Answer is, They, that is, they that goe about to disparage Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, and the Independent Army, are un∣christian, and uncharitable, and either very envious, or ill affected; either they know not what that Party have done for us, or else envy that they have done so much: For Lieutenant Generall Cromwell his detractors I know none such, therefore I know none who therein is unchristian, and uncharitable towards him. For your In∣dependent Army, it is (as Schollers use to terme such an unsutable conjunction) a Bull, a meere contradiction in adjecto, there is no such thing. It may be if you should passe uncontrould with such
absurd inconsistences, we should shortly heare of an Independent Parliament (not because it is the supreme and Independent judi∣catory in the Kingdome) but because of the members who favour that way, though they be very few in comparison of those who have voted the Presbytery, an Independent Synod or Assembly, be∣cause there are some Independents mingled with many Pres∣byterian Divines; and if the Common Councell of the Citie had not generally concurred to petition for Presbyterie, I doubt not but this Nicknaming Newes-maker would, in some of his pa∣pers, make London (though already divided into Classicall Presby∣teries, and united into a Province) an Independent City. Last of all he saith, they daily adventure their lives, and many of them have spilt their blood to save our lives, and estates, and it not  hate them for the good they have done, and still doe for us. As ma∣ny as have exposed themselves to such perill, and for such a purpose, ashere is specified, God forbid, their zeale, and love, and courage should be answered with envy, or hatred: but here is one fallacie in view, they that are so kind to their brethren as to shed their own blood, that they might sleepe in a whole skinne, did not this as In∣dependents, but as Christians, for many lost their lives before ever Independents were dreamed of, it was a rule of Religion, that we ought to lay downe our lives for the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.16. And there may be another fallacie lurking under those indefinite expressions, they daily adventure, &c. to save our lives and estates; for it is not true of all, it may be not of most, that those be the mo∣tives or ends of their engagements. So much for this Question and Answer: Now I could wish this Questionist were questioned, and that we might know the mind of such as have Authoritie to examine him whether they thought him worthy of Bedlam, foe his witlesse rashnesse, or of Newgate, for his seditious wicked∣nesse. Conclusion. For Conclusion of this Apologetick Reply to these popular Im∣postors, I shall fairely admonish them to be better advised hereaf∣ter,
(then hitherto they have been) that they doe not traduce the Innocence of worthy, and well deserving Citizens, or Ministers, to gratifie a party, and to abuse the credulity of the Vulgar with untruths, as opprobrious to the one side, as vain-glorious to the other. For since they are discovered to be weekely journey men in the service of a schismaticall designe, and to carry it on with in∣tolerable contumely to venerable Societies, and with insinuations, and incentives to sedition against the Government intended, and partly established by Authoritie of Parliament, it will not be their priviledge for time to come, to passe without such chastisement as is due to their demerits: whereat if any be displeased, it will be onely the faulty, and the offence they take will be like the quarrell of Cum ab eo quaereretur quid tandem accusa∣turus esset eum, quem pro digni∣tate ne laudare quidem quis∣quam satis com∣mode posset; aiunt hominem (ut erat furio∣sus) respondiss, qud non totum telum corpore recepisset. Cicer. Orat. 2. pro Sex. Roscio Amerino. Fimbria against Scevola, for that the noble Senator would not take his dagger so deepe into his body as he would have thrust it. And in such a case, to forbeare a necessary defence of a mans selfe, or his Associates, in a matter so just and so generall, so ingenuously and uprightly managed, as that of the Petitioners, lest an enemy should be offended at it without a cause, were in any indifferent judgement a grand iniquitie, a crime composed of a very high de∣gree of cowardice, and treachery.
A Postscript, or after-reckoning with the Moderate Intelligencer, and Mer∣curius Britanicus. THe pace of a Booke at the Presse, proceeding flowly, (as Guicciardine saith of the Italian Ordinance drawn with oxen,) hath afforded this advantage to these posting News-men, that they have had a second turne to tell their owne tale unto the people, be∣fore the confutation of their calumnies against the Petitions of the Common Councell, and Ministers of London, be once presented to publique acceptance; which Inconvenience hath yet brought with it this recompence; I am by the delay somewhat better ac∣quainted with their spirits, and thence find cause to conceive more hope of the one, and to observe lesse ingenuitie in the other, then I did apprehend, when I put in my defensive plea for the Peti∣tioners, against their traducements; and in this Postscript or after∣reckoning I shall entertaine them accordingly. 1. For the Intelligencer, wee have from him some previous dis∣positions to repentance for his printed reproaches, somewhat to∣wards attrition, though farre short of such Christian contrition as is a necessary preparative for the obtainment of a pardon. His words in his Thursdayes accompt are these; There past us last weeke some∣thing that was displeasing both to the Common Councell, and likewise to the Clergie; to neither of which we intended the least displènsure; what was inserted, we received, and conceived from a good Author; and finding the House of Commons to be very much affected with what came from both, as that which might be of evill consequence; we therefore were the readyer to believe it might amount to so much as we were told, but understanding now from others, that the Petitions had no such words, nor contained any such thing as was expressed; we are heartily sory, and doe freely acknowledge the same, professing that we hold it an high offence to wrong the porest particular man, ye, if  enemie; nor ever durst wee publish that against the Parliament
and Kingdomes present enemie (much more against their Friends) which we did not receive from any good hands, as truth. Whereby we may perceive the perplexity of his mind, which makes him recant, and recant, in both senses of this ambiguous terme; for he recants, that is, he confesseth his errour thus, Ʋnder∣standing now from others that the Petitions had no such words, ner contained any such thing as was expressed, we are heartily sory, and do freely acknowledge the same: where is one kind of recantation; and withall he recants in another kind, that is, he sings over againe the same harsh note, wherein he was far out of time from the tenour of truth, telling the Reader thus much in way of Iustification, What was inserted we received from a good Author, and studing the House of Commons to be  affected with what came from both, as that which might be of evill consequence, w therefore were the readier to believe it might amount to so much as we were told; which is to make your sder of the petitioners the sense of the House of Commons, and the hand that brought that sense a good hand; and if so, you have handled the matter very ill, both in respect of conscience and disre∣tion; for either the House of Comm thought so ill of the Peti∣tioners, as you have now the second time asserted, or not; if they did not, (as no wise man will believe that so many wise men as should denominate the whole House, could so much mis-judge so humble, and faire dealing an addresse nto them) then you wrong them as well as the Petitioners, in calling that a good hd, which brought you such a scandalous mismerpretation of them both; and so in stead of clearing your owne conscience, you corrupt i a∣gaine with a new guilt. If the House of Commons did so conceive of the Petitioners, as you have published before, you have indiscretly deserted the true information you had from them by a good hand, as you call it twice, (but how good soever you take it to be, there be some false fingers in it, i it wrote that to you, which you have written to others) and have m your self an offender above the degree of your  for though the tale you were told were matrially an untruth, it was not fomally a slander in you, while you did but publish it, not as a∣ny thing made or  by you, ot as received by report from an  with yourselfe of much  for his trusty Intelli∣gence.
And yet I conceive it had been a part of good manners, to have forborne the divulging of such newes, of so great moment, wherein not only the integy of the Common Councell, and Mi∣nisters of London, but the prudence of the Honourable House of Commons, was highly concerned, unlesse they had given you war∣rant to proclaim to the world, that which in such cases is, or should be kept within the compasse of their owne walls. You conclude, as you began, with commendation of your selfe, for the innocency of your intentions, and charitablenesse of your af∣fection; saying in your first lines, There past us the last weeke some∣thing that was displeasing both to the Common Councell, and like∣wise to the Clergie, to neither of which we intended the least displea∣sure; and you end with the same selfe conceit wherein you be∣gan, for you tell us in the close of your speech that you hold it  high offence to wrong the poorest particular man, yea, if an enemy; nor durst we (say you) ever publish that against the Parliaments and Kingdomes present enemie, much more (much lesse you should say) against their friends, which we did not receive from very good hands as truth. If you say this in sinceritie, we shall see some clearer evidence of your conscientious acknowledgement (then that contradictory confession can be accompted, which is like an Iliaca passie in the belly, and bowels of your retractation, though the head and loot of it be sutably qualified) of your wronging, not of a single, or a pri∣vate enemy, but of a numerous society of the most publique, Ho∣nourable, and venerable Friends and Votaries of the Parliament in the Kingdome; which if you seriously consider, you cannot satisfie your selfe, much lesse can you expect that they should rest satisfied with such a recanting recantation, as you have now made; if o∣ther wise, this Paper will assure the Intelligent Reader, that as Bel∣shazzars government, so your repentance, is weighted in the ballane, and found wanting, Dan. 5.27. But untill I know the worst, my charitie disposeth me to hope the best, and my hope is that you are on the mending hand, and so fare you well. Now for the bold Britain, who brags of his daring spirit, and would have every man to turne coward in a good Cause, for  of his courage in a ; yet it seemeth some body  the
to tell him of his miscarriage towards the Magistrates, and Mini∣sters of the Citie, in such sort, that (as Salust said to Cicero) Si quam vo∣luptatem male dicendo cepisti, eam male audi∣end amittas. Orat. Salust. in Ciceron. Cicer. Orat. p. 671. If he tooke any delight in speaking what he ought not, he may lose it againe by hearing what he would not; and I must now doe it the second time, by giving him another check for his vanitie in mag∣nifying himselfe, and his injurie in vilifying such as he cannot suffi∣ciently honour. For himselfe, he makes as if he were a man of such high ele∣vation, that it is a stooping below his genius. to have any thing to doe (though by way of reproofe) with such a despicable company, as the Court of Common Councell, and the Ministers of the City; whom he would not meddle with, were it not to serve the Par∣liament; and serve them I dare, saith he, in as high a nature as any man, and shall in all things comply with their proceedings, and endea∣vour to make this compliance universall. Were it not to serve the Parliament? For your service to the Parliament, Mr. Brit. I would not have you to be confident either in your owne performances, or of their acceptance, or of the good effects it hath brought forth among the people of the Kingdome; there are some, who (though they doe not bragge of wit as you doe) have a great deale more wisdome then you have, and they say, you have begotten much malignitie in many against the Par∣liament, and confirmed it in others, and have much weakened the hands of their most conscionable friends, by the licentious extra∣vangancie of your Pen beyond all bounds of grace, or modesty; and they further adde, (which honest men will lay hold on as a promise, but you perhaps will take as a threatning) that they will trace your irregular steps from the first page of your first Pamphlet, to this present of the number 945. and represent you so in one entire deli∣neation, and discovery, as (if you be not a man of impenetrable im∣pudence) will make you ashamed of your owne resemblance. And for your particular service you pretend to doe unto the Parliament, in abusing the Petitioners. I beleeve they will have lit∣tle cause to give you thanks, much lesse any reall reward for your painer; since it will scarce lye in your power to doe them a greater dishonour, then to make good men beleeve, and Malignants insult, that their most potent, and beneficent, I may say munificent Assi∣stants,
the Citizens, and their most faithfull (and not altogether impotent or unusefull servants) the Ministers of the Citie of Lon∣don, either give, or take such offence at each other, as may tend to a rupture; but the hope is there will be present helpe, and an effe∣ctuall Antidote against this scandall, in the Apologeticall Narrative of the Petitions, as now it is presented to publique view; which will be the more expedite and prevalent in its operation, by the little credit you have with all such as read your papers as the dictates of a Poet, not of an Historian; and you are like Sir to have lesse credit hereafter, and to doe the Parliament lesse service then you have done (if ever you did any worthy acceptance) because you professe you will in all things comply with their proceedings: For, 1. No body will beleeve you will be so regular in you writing, as they are in their Parliamentary passages. 2. When you say, you will in all things comply with their pro∣ceedings, you must either suppose that they cannot erre (which is farre from their thoughts, for they know it is a pitifull, and peril∣lous ignorance, or perversenesse, not to acknowledge their huma∣nitie, Psal. 9.20. and that it is the presumption of the Papall Con∣clave, not a Priviledge of Parliament, to assume an infallible gui∣dance in their determinations) or that they may erre, and then we must think, that though they doe so, you resolve to be on their side, be it right or wrong; if so, doe you not tell the world that your complyance with them, hath more of policy in it, then of con∣science? and will it not readily follow, that such a Mercurius at Westminster, would easily turne to an Aulicus at Oxford, if (which God forbid) the Royall Prerogative should so farre advance, as to plunder the Parliament of their ancient and Honourable Privi∣ledges. The other Animadversion upon Britanicus this weeke concern∣eth the vilifying of the Petitioners, whom Lucian like he fals upon in this scornfull and jeering manner: It is a fine humour in any to cry, We will have this, we will have that done, Come let's petition, he should have said, we would have this or that done; for we will have this or that done are termes rather of the Imperative, then the Optative Mood, fitter for Commanders, then Petitioners. Besides
Sir, you know there be a sort of men, who have taken upon them, without petitioning to the Parliament, or Authoritie from the Parliament, to set up a Government of themselves; which the Petitioners dare not attempt without warrant from the Parlia∣ment; this is a humour indeed, a fine humour of a new impression; but when did you bestow a jeere or a taunt upon them? in this sure∣ly you bewray your partialitie, and somewhat worse which you may heare of hereafter; but say on. Yes I warrant you we are wise Statesmen, know the due times and seasons well enough, and though we lye under the decke, are able to discerne as well as they that sit at the sterne. Did the Petitioners take upon them to be Statesmen? did they not professedly dis∣claime so vaine a conceit, when in a modest and humble way they came to the Parliament, as to Statesmen, the Fathers and Physi∣cians of the State, to receive from their prudent resolutions pre∣sent remedies against the maladies wherewith the Citie is dan∣gerously infected, and infested? and was it not time to complain, when they perceived the subtle insinuations of Schisme creepe in∣to their families, and found it had stolne their wives from their bosomes, their children and servants from Oeconomicall commu∣nion in their families, and from hearing Orthodoxe Divines in the publique Churches of the Citie, to sort themselves under erro∣neous, and hereticall Teachers in private Conventicles? And whereas you would degrade the Petitioners sitting at the strne to lying under the dcke, though you (for feare or shame) may have occasion to play least in sight, and to lurke under the hatches to secure your selfe, the Petitioners are (for the chiefe pt of them) eminently conspicuous; divers of the one sort sit upon the Tribunall of Authoritie, and all of the other weekly appeare visible to common view in their Pulpits; and have so much advan∣tage ground for discovery of the evils of the times, and places they live in, that it can be no disparagement to the Parliaments pru∣dence, in many particulars to receive informations from them. But they goe beyond their bounds, as Britanicus chargeth them, for their duty leads them  further (saith he) then to present matter of grievance in things already established, not to demand the establisment of any thing ; this must be left in the Parliament,
who (it is presumed, and we must hold to this maime) will neglect nothing necessary or convenient. Now he takes upon him to play the Casuist, and to resolve both positively, and negatively, how farre men may proceed to peti∣tion, how farre not; they may (saith he) present matter of grie∣vance in things already established, not demand the establishment of any new thing: This Aphorisme is framed of purpose for the pul∣ling downe of the Prelacy, and against the setting up of the Pres∣bytery, that Independencie (and under that Title all Sects of what sort soever) may be set up, and spread abroad without restraint; but a man would think it more reasonable, that when things are esta∣blished, they should command either assent or silence, but in the want of necessary things, the presenting of requests for supply to those that are able to grant them, hath no affinitie with a fault, but rather hath the nature of a dutie, and therefore they who petition∣ed the Parliament for Ordination of Ministers in a new way, with∣out Bishops, (new to this State, though most ancient in the Church of Christ) were never blamed, but approved by the Parliament, and accordingly an Ordinance passed both the Honourable Houses, for enabling a certaine number of Divines to put it in practise; much more cause is there to approve the Petitioners, who received a command for the choice of Church Governours, whereto with∣out further direction, and warrant, they could not performe com∣pleat obedience as they desired. And for that he saith of leaving all to the Parliament, in confi∣dence of their universall care, neglecting nothing which may be ne∣cessary and convenient, it hath a pretence of respect to the Parlia∣ment, but the drift of it is to make all those (who desire a deliver∣ance out of dangerous confusion, by a setting up, and settling a regular Government) remisse in their mediation for it, while In∣dependents intentively bestirre themselves in severall Counties to make choice of such for Knights and Burgesses, as favour their faction, and quicken their Patrons with uncessant importunitie to expedite their designe in Parliament, in Committees, in the Army; and some of them are such ubiquitaries, within the Kingdome, and without, (to worke themselves up to a capitulating partie) that none but that great Peripatetick, 1 Pet. 5.8. goeth beyond them
for sedulitie in prosecution of a plot. And yet whatsoever he aimeth at in this diversion or prohibition of Petitions, the Parlia∣ment may have need of them and may make good use of them, (yea and as some Antipresbyterians bragge, The most and best things that ever this Parlia∣ment did, were first mtioned by private men, and then autho∣rised and esta∣blished by them. The Postscript of the Libellous Pamphlet cal∣led Lilburnes Englands birth∣right. have done so) and may be very well pleased therewith. For instance, having a purpose to ordaine the Presbyteriall Go∣vernment which (as the The Copy of the Remon∣strance lately delivered to the Assembly by T.G.I.B. &c. Independents confesse) they have voted already, it may be matter of much incouragement to them to per∣fect their purpose in that behalfe, since they see such a generall ac∣cord of the Common Councell, and Ministery of the Citie petiti∣oning together for the establishment thereof. This may suffice for the second Edition of this scandalous con∣tumely against the Petitions, and Petitioners of London; for whose sakes (they being so many in number, and so eminent in ranke, and order,) and for the good Cause wherein they, and many more are so much engaged, I have taken the opportunity that was cast in my way to make this Apologie, otherwise I should not think it meete to bestow my most idle minutes upon so meane an imployment, as a conflict, or contestation with such Antagonists as now I have answered. Who if they appeare againe with any degree of folly, or offence in this Cause, above that which discretion may disdaine, or Religion must pardon, though I be silent (which yet I doe not promise) there will be a course taken to make some more sensible of their unsufferable excesses, and others more circumspect, and cautelous, then to runne the hazard of their deserved reward. FINIS.
