M2844 E62_18 E93_11 99872887 130899
THE NECESSITY OF Christian Subjection. Demonstrated, and proved by the Do∣ctrine of Christ, and the Apostles; the practice of Primitive Christians, the rules of Reli∣gion, cases of conscience, and consent of latter Orthodox Divines, That the power of the King is not of Humane, but of Divine Right; and that God onely is the efficient cause thereof. Whereunto is added, An Appendix of all the chief Objections that malice it selfe could lay upon His Majestie, with a full Answer to every parti∣cular Objection. Also a Tract intituled, CHRISTVS DEI, Wherein is proved that our Soveraign Lord the King is not onely Major singulis, but Major universis. 1 PET. 2.17. Feare God, Honour the King. OXFORD Printed in the Yeere. 1643.
THE NECESSITY OF CHRISTIAN SUBJECTION. ROM▪ 13.5▪ Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not onely for wrath, but also for conscience sake. WOuld men but meditate, or were they perswaded of the truth of the Prophets speech, (1 Sam. 15.22.23.) Behold to obey is better then Sacrifice, & to hear∣ken then the fat of Rams; for Rebellion is as the sinne of Witchcraft, and stubbornnesse is as Iniquity and Ido∣latry. (Were they I say perswaded of this truth) there would not be so little hearkening to the commands of Authority, nor so little obeying what they heare; nor would men runne so fiercely into the fearefull sin of Rebellion, onely to maintaine and justifie their owne sacrifice of fooles;Eccle. 5.1. Olympio. do. in lo. which is indeed no other then their foolish imaginations have devised, and their vaine thoughts have set up as an Idoll to themselves. Or were wee not fallen into those last and worst of times prophecied of by the Apostle (2 Tim. 3.1.5.) wherein men that make shew of godlinesse (yea many that most shew of it) have onely a shew, but deny the power of it, being proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents: Proud in∣deed, when they dare exalt themselves against Gods Vicegerent;His Maje∣sties large Declarati∣on, p. 12. 13 225. 256. 257. &c. Cursed speakers, when they dare libell and slander Prince and Prelate; Disobedient to Parents, Naturall, Ecclesiasticall, and Politicall were we not I say fallen into such times, I should not need to  the Apostles inference, which the unseasonable sins of these seasons make so seasonable: [Wherefore ye must needs be subject, &c.] In which words, Infert conclusionem Principaliter intentam, Aq. wherein; Concludit Paraenesin subjectionis ejusque necessitatem, Rol. shewing that we must obey the Magistrate, not onely for feare of punishment, but much more because that (although the
Magistrate hath no power over the conscience of man, yet seeing he is Gods Minister) he cannot be resisted by any good consci∣ence, Gen: Notes, ex Calv, & Bez. In qua duas potissimum urget causas ob quas potestatibus necessariò obediendum, Marlor. First their power to cause feare of wrath. Secondly our conscience to obey Gods ordinance; In respect of both which we must be sub∣ject not onely for wrath, but also for conscience sake: Wherein I shall consider these 5 particulars. 1. The Illation, [Wherefore,] 2. The Duty, [subject] 3. The Necessity, [must needs] 4. The persons obliged, [Ye] 5. The Reasons perswading, and those twofold: 1. From feare of wrath, although [not onely for wrath.] 2. For conscience, [But also for conscience sake.] Aquin. Lyr. Calv. Bez. Marlor. Rolloc.1. The Illation and inference in this word [Wherefore] being a conclusion, wherein Quod initio praeceperat de praestandâ Magi∣stratibus obedientiâ, nunc per modum collectionis repetit, sed cum ex∣positione: Calv. It will be convenient for conceiving fully the Apostles meaning, and the force of his Arguments, and the drift of this conclusion, that we reflict back as farre as the beginning of this Chapter; where (besides those two mentioned, verse. 4. Of 1. Terror to the ill, which I reserve to be handled under that of wrath. 2. And Reward to the good, which I referre to that of conscience.) We shall finde foure Reasons premised to inforce this conclusion, [Wherefore ye must needs be subject, &c.] 1. First, , (v. 1.) for there is no power but of God. How much soever we may perhaps dislike them, and how ill soever they may sometimes use their power; As Pi∣late did his,Jo. 19.20. Matth. 27.26. in crucifying him whom he should have closed, and loosing him whom he should have crucified, yet our Saviour himself acknowledgeth, that even this abused power was , given him from above; (Ioh. 19.11.) For misery comes not out of the dust, neither doth affliction spring out of the earth: (Iob. 5.6.) But as Omne bonum desuper,August. de Civitat. Dei, l. 5. c. 21. Every good gift is from above, (Iam. 1.17.) so is there no evil in the City, and the Lord hath not done it, (Amos 3.6.) (i.e.) Majum poena, no evil of pun∣ishment.
Per me Reges regnant, By me Kings raigne, is the generall ground of the Charter, both of good and evil Princes, and No∣bles, and all the Judges of the earth, (Prov. 8.15.16.) He it is that raiseth unto David a righteous branch, a King who shal raigne & prosper, and execute judgement and justice upon the earth,Jer. 33.5, 6. Hos. 13.11. in whose dayes the people shal be safe; And he it is that gives an evil King in his anger, & takes a good King away in his wrath: Qui regnare facit hominem hypocritam propter peccata populi. (Iob. 34.30.) vulg. So that whether they be good or evil, we must be sub∣ject, sithence there is no power but of God; , lest we will be found fighters against God,Act. 5.39. whose power none is able to resist, whether it bee for protecting or for punishing; [Wherefore we must needs be subject.] 2. Secondly, they are not onely not without God, ,Citat. and so of him permissivè; but they are the ordinance of God him∣self, and so of him positivè, , ordained of God (v. 1.) whereupon they worthily use in their stile, not onely Permis∣sione Divinâ, or Providentiâ Divinâ, although those be good titles taken in a good sense; (yet they imply some intermediate meanes betwixt God and those who beare them:) But Princes write Dei Gratiâ: for by the Grace of God (no favour of man) they are what they are; so that I may say of their government,Gal. 1.1. as Saint Paul said of his Apostleship, It is not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, & God the Father, For, Cujus jussu homines nascun∣tar, hujus jussu & Reges constituuntur; apti his, qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regantur. (Iren. lib 5 cap. 24.) Which may be demonstrative∣ly evidenced, if we shall take a survey of the Series, and successi∣on of Governours, from the first man that was placed upon the earth, whom we finde created with an intention to make him Gods Vicegerent; (Gen. 1.26.) and at his very first setting foot upon the earth, actually invested with Monarchicall government; (ver. 27.28.) That government being indeed the speciall forme,Boet. de unit. & uno. Apoc. 4.11. Rom. 11.36. whereby he could resemble the image of God who is in Heaven, as he made him upon Earth the sole unequalled Monarch, from whom alone Quicquid est ab uno est, & est id quod est; and there∣fore he is worthy to receive glory, and honour, and power, for of him, and for him, and through him are all things. Nor was it his intention that hee should onely governe the Beasts already created, But also he made him to be the Monarch,
And confirmed his Authority Iure naturali, Potestate patrià, over all mankinde,Teophil. l. 2. Chrysost. Hom. 34. in 1 Co. which should be propagated after him; who as the Angels and those of Heaven, had their beginning from God by Creation, and therefore were subject to him; so all the Armies upon earth were to deduce their off-spring from that one Adam by Generation, and so to owe to him subjection; whereas had not God intended to have Principality, depended onely upon his own institution and not upon the subordinate Nobles, nor the multitudes of popular election, It had beene as easie for him, to have Created a Company, a Colony, a Countrey, a Nation, a World of men upon earth, with his own faciamus, As it was, and as he did, so many Legions of Angels in the Heavens; that so out of those choice Colonies themselves might have made choice of a Commander. But he, who found the Heavens not free from mu∣tiny, when he produced a multitude of inhabitants there, although all were his off-spring,Apoc. 12. would not give the least colour to conten∣tion, for superiority or equality, nor pretext of disobedience against his Monarch upon earth, whilst he suffers no Subject to be set by him but such as owed the Subjection and duty of a Sonne in De∣scending from him; Thereby teaching all posterity, how the po∣wer of a Prince over his Subjects is, and ought to bee acknow∣ledged, as naturall, as the power of a Father is over his sonne; yea and also thereby signifying, That as Naturally there can bee but one Father of one Childe,Theophil. Chrysost. ubi supr. So Politiquely there should be but one Prince and Monarch of one People and Nation. Whereupon God did not create two men (no nor Eve, but out of the rib of Adam) that so from them all others should issue, and they might rule promiscuously, or that each of them should rule such as would make choice to be under his government, rather then under the others,Gen 10.9, 10. (although perhaps propagated of the other) Nor that the mightiest Hunter, he, that could get most, should governe most, as afterwards it fell out in the degenerating dayes of Nymrod. But he created onely one,Dan. A∣phoas, Po∣lit. p. 402. 24. thereby to intimate, How far Monar∣chicall government is to be preferred before any other, Aristocra∣ticall, Democraticall, Oligarchicall, or the like. This and this a∣lone of man on earth, being an Idea or resemblance of Gods go∣vernment in Heaven; and we pray daily, that his will may bee done on earth as it is in heaven; And how can it be so, if we reject or resist that forme of government?Marth. 6.10. As also, thereby he implies,
that all other formes of government are against the course of na∣ture, different from the patterne of heaven, diverse from divine institution, and indeed punishments rather then blest govern∣ments, If they be compared with Monarchie; Which made the wisest of Kings affirme, that many Princes are imposed for the transgression of a Land, But that Realme onely indures long which is ruled by one man of understanding and knowledge (Prov. 28.2.) Which Doctrine seemes to bee squared to Gods own practice throughout all ages, whensoever he designed any government over his people the Jews (after they were taken no∣tice of for his peculiar) although for a long time he retained the royall supreame Title of King to himselfe, (during which time,1 Sam. 8. he oft times immediately delivered his Regall mandates by Urlm, Thummim, Visions, Oracles, Prophesies. &c.) Yet hee appointed one Supreme Vicegerent over them, and not many (for as for the Sanhedrine they were but as Moses or the High priests Privie Councell, Or as delegated Judges because of the multiplicity of businesses) One I say and not many,Judg. c. 10 c. 15. witnesse Moses 40. yeares betwixt Egypt and Canaan, Ioshua neere 60. yeeres settling them in Canaan, after them Iudah, after him Oth∣niell, then Ehud, then Shamgar, then Deborah, then Gideon, then Tolah, then Iair, then Iephthah, then Sampson, But never above one at one time. And how lamentable the times were when there was not one Supreame, but the multitude tooke power into their own hands; that hideous story of the licentious Danites,Judg. 19, & 20. and the ravished Levites wife, and the revenge of one upon ano∣ther may serve to astonish all posterity, and affright them from affecting Anarchie; yea & when God, after that he had in mercie looked upon their misery, sent them new Judges, Holy, and Sa∣muel successively, and they not therewith satisfied would have a King like other Nations, he doth not set several Kings over them,2 Sam. 8.5 Josh. 12. as Ioshua found 31. over the land at their enterance, but hee ap∣pointed them onely one King (1 Sam. 8.22.) As being safest for his people, best resembling his government and most agreeable to his Ordinance; Wherefore wee must needes bee subject to such form of government, for it is the Ordinance of God. Oh! how much therefore are those too blame who goe about to alter this forme of government, and to introduce a new defor∣med device of their own ambitious invention, wherein they are
not agreed, whether they shall be stiled, 1. The States of England as some of their Preachers (forgetting the King in their praiers) have sycophantically phrased them; 2. Or whether they shall be entituled, The perpetuall Senate, or Assessours of the kingdom, as some have endeavoured to derive their stile, as the Impresse of a Republick; 3. Or whether they shall be dignified with the Princely Attribute of Gentlemen of the Crowne of England (to which should be annexed the power of electing their King al∣though hereditary) as some of themselves have ambitiously ex∣pressed their affectation in assimilation to that of Poland; onely to the end that themselves might be sharers in Supremacy. A Government which admitting a Monarch whom yet they dare not deny, is neither Monarchie, Aristocracy, Democracy, nor O∣ligarchie; and Anarchie, I dare say, they would not have it intitu∣led; A Government which if Aristotle himself were to sit in Councel at their close Committees, he could not yet resolve what to cal it, a government never grounded on the Ordinance of God, nor practised in any established Common-weale. And what fear∣full effects must necessarily follow it, Besides, that it is to conje∣cture when men leave the fountaines of the living waters, and take themselves to Cisterns of their own digging. It may also be apparent to any indifferent understanding who reads or heares the story of Hen. 3. when there was an attempt of 24. Assessours and a trayterous appointing Les Douze Piers,Speed H. 3. p. 635. ex. Mat. Westmo∣nast. Mar∣tin. H. 3. p. 66, 67, 70, 71, 73, 74. far short of this confused insolency, what Robberies, what Rapes, what Murthers, what Burglaries, what Extortions, what Exactions followed, (every one shrouding himself under that Assessour, which he fol∣lowed, yea and every one of the Assessours after a little time, ban∣dying himself against another, either for their own faction, or fa∣vouring of their followers) is rather to be imagined then reported, yet those times too really felt it, and all must necessarily taste the like bitter fruit, who wil plant & nurse the tree of popular faction. Vpon the Lords Prayer.And alas how foolish and fond of flitting (to use King Iames his Scottish Proverbe in another case) are those people which will be bewitched to follow these many-headed Hydra's, before the voice of the Lambe, and never consider that old Adage Citius impletur unus saccus, quàm plures? hath there been so much paines bestowed in vaine, if it be in vain, (As the Apostle speaks in ano∣ther case) to bring this Kingdome from an Heptarchie to a Mo∣narchie;
that now one part of this Island should be turned from a Monarchiy to a Roman Decemvirate, a Venetian Senate, a Low-countrey State, nay to the government without a name, God for∣bid: Vis unita fortior, but a Kingdome divided cannot stand.Mat. 12.25. I beseech you therefore brethren marke them diligently which cause divisions amongst you, and avoid them: (Rom. 16.17.) for those who at first cause divisions, in Opinion, in Doctrine, and in Religion, wil at the length attempt divisions in Govern∣ment, in Policie, in Countries and Kingdomes. Let us in the feare of God consider with our selves, That if there be no power but of God, even the punishing and persecuting power, and if we must be subject even to that, lest we should fight against God,Esay 49.23. Oh how much more then, where Kings are nursing fathers, ought we to shew our subjection with all readinesse and chearfulnesse? If Saint Paul inforce obedience to the Prince with so many forci∣ble arguments, when that Tyrant Nero (who devoured Christi∣ans like a Lyon) raigned and raged. Oh how should we urge & presse this point, when a Constantine, a Patron of the Church, and pattern of piety is our president in religious exercises,2 Tim. 4.17. as well as president over us with righteous government: for certainely, [They that resist, Resist the Ordinance of God] which is the third reason whereupon our Apostle grounds this inference, Wherefore ye must needes be subject. For as in his Church Christ gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints,Ephes. 4.11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.13. ver. 14. and for the worke of the Mini∣stery: so God in the Common-weale appointed some to bee Kings , most eminent and excellent above all other, some to be Governours under them , sent by Commission from them: Amongst whom some are Nobles, some Judges, (Prov. 8.16.) some Priests (for those howsoe∣ver some conceive of them, were not incapable of government in the Common-weale:) yea,Exod. 40.1.5. Heb. 7.8. some things there are which could not be decided without them. (Deu. 17.8. to 12.) some are Governours of Cities, (Deut. 21.3, 4.) some Rulers of thousands, some of hun∣dreds, some of tens, (Exod. 18.25, 26.) and some live meere∣ly in subjection, as the inferior poore servant,Polit. l. 1. c. 3.4. &c. whom Aristo∣tle that Linceus of Nature affirmeth, Nature it selfe framed one∣ly to that use; and every man bound in conscience by the law of
God to abide in that state wherein God hath placed him, and to be contented, with his Vocation, Degree, and calling, (1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 22.) unlesse hee will bee as guilty of confusion in the body politique, or Ecclesiasticall, as the members should bee in the body naturall, if one should strive to usurpe anothers place;1 Cor. 14.12. to 31. The foote the head, the eare the eye; and unlesse we will be as guilty in resisting the ordinance of God, as they should bee of deforming the act of his Creation. 1 Pet. 2.13. to 17. Mat. 20.14Submit your selves therefore to all manner of ordinance of man for the Lords sake, , Take that which is thine own and goe thy way. If thou beest a Ruler, do it with diligence: If an Officer, wait on thy office: If a Teacher, attend to teaching: If but a servant, doe that without slothfulnesse, (Rom. 12.7. to 11.) If a Judge,Deut. 17.9. to 13. be learned, (Psal. 2.11.) yea, and upright too, (Psal. 58.1.) If thou art to be judged, be obedient, or else thou must be cut off, both for thine owne sin, and also for others example. Nor must thou be obedient onely when Superiours be good and cour∣teous, but even when they are cruel and froward: Nor onely when they punish thee justly for ill doing, but even when thou sufferest wrongfully, yet must thou endure for conscience sake, (1 Pet. 2.18, 19.) which the Apostle confirmes by the example of our Saviour Christ, to (vers. 25.) who when he suffered resist∣ed not, no nor so much as threatned, (vers. 23.) although he could have had more then twelve Legions of Angels, (Mat. 26.53.) teaching us, that we must not resist Authority, although unjustly oppressing: (muchlesse iustly ruling although punishing.) First, Neither offending it, (Mat. 17.27.) Secondly nor defending our selves against it, (Mat. 26.52.) what specious pretences soever we may make for it. For who might have pretended faier in that kinde, than the Primitive Christians against Idolatrous Persecutors?Ambros. yet they professe, that Armasunt preces & lachri∣mae; so that nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur, reluctatur; nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestrum, quamvis nimius, & copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur: Cyprian. Who might have pretended more rightly the defence of himself, of his fellow Disciples, of his Master, yea of Religion, than Saint Peter? Yet heare our Saviours mandate and his menace, his mandate: [Put up thy sword into thy sheath:] His menace, [For all they which strike with the sword, shall perish with the sword.] [All] whosoever Clergie or Laity,
strike against authority, or without the licence of it, in what case soever without exception of 1, Se defendend,Aug. l. 22. cont. Faust. c. 75. or 2. Maintenance of a Covenant, or 3. Defence of Religion. And what manner of Christians those men are who dare resist their rightfull, righ∣teous, religious Sovereigne: Or what manner of Religion that is, which they pretend gives priviledge to such rebellious practi∣ses, I leave to every good Christian to consider: Onely give me leave to tell you, sure I am, it is not such as was known to Pri∣mitive Christians: It is not such as was allowed by our Saviour to his Apostles, nor is it such as the Apostles taught the People of their times: for they without any cloake,His Maje∣sties Pro∣clamation and Decla∣ration, &c. Sub moderamine in∣culpatae tutelae (which indeed never can be by Arms but onely by Laws) Howsoever Pontificians and Consistorians conspire: as Buchanan laboured to beguile his Nation, and some of our Coun∣trey-men have beguiled themselves, and Jesuites would have beguiled the whole world, and without any distinction so offen∣sive and defensive disobedience, the Apostles taught the Church of God, That he which resists, (be it how it will) resists the Ordi∣nance of God. [And he that resists purchaseth to himself damnation.] which is the fourth reason to inforce this [Wherefore, &c.] and beares a threefold reading, 1. Iudicium, Judgement: Tremel. 2. Condem∣nationem, Condemnation: Beza & Tompson. 3. Damnationem, Dam∣nation: Vulgar & Kings Bible. All which are but the Graduati∣ons of the punishments, implied by the originall, ; for not onely , (Matth. 5.22.) they shall be in danger of the judgement of censure and condemnation of the censorious: Although this be a punishment which an ingenious spirit would willingly escape, which made David pray, (Psal. 39.8.) Let me not be made a rebuke unto the foolish, whilest they censure, re∣prove, condemne my actions in their Assemblies, much more a man that is shot through the head with popularity, as His Maje∣stie saith of the then revolted Rolloc,Larger Declarati∣on. p. 25.405. as indeed all factious persons in Church and Common-weale are, especially if they aspire by, or adhere to the popular faction; For such, like the Camelion, which turnes to all colours save white, lives onely by the aire, and delights rather in breath then other, Ac si mallet coctam quam cru∣dam; so they who apply to popularity, and suit themselves to all company, saving the innocent, can live no longer (at least not
with delight) then they sucke the breath of applause from the multitude.Ps. 69.12. But behold, not onely those which sit in the gate (the Rulers) speak against such disobedient persons, but if they escape the songs of the Drunkards (who perhaps may whoop on their sides) yet shal verybabes and sucklings chant their disloyalty, and the Vipers tongue shall slay them, (Iob. 20.16.) Thus an evil condemnation shall fall upon them,Prov. 10.7 whereby their name shall rot, and their memoriall shall stinck, even , under the censure of those who are as censorious as themselves: Nor onely so, but , They shall receive Judgement, and Con∣demnation:Ps. 41.8. Ps. 109.6. Ps. 1.15. 1. Both Judgement before the Tribunall of men, where the sentence of guiltinesse shall proceed against them; and when sentence is given upon them, they shall be condemned, for such ungodly persons shall not be able to stand in Judgement, nei∣ther these sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. 2. And also they shall receive Condemnation from the Justice of God, who stands in the Congregation of Princes,Ps. 82.1. (as to survey, so to assist) and is a Judge amongst the earthly gods, yea even of those whom they sometimes cannot come by to judge according to their deservings;Vers. 8. who when he shal arise (as he will arise) to judge the earth, he will recompence such wicked persons after their de∣servings;Ps 50.21. he will reprove them, and set before them, even in Or∣der, the things that they have done: As first their Pride, next their Covetousnesse to maintaine it, after that their rebellion to declare it, then their Hypocrisie and counterfeiting Religion to vaile and defend it,Ps. 55.16. & at the length he will bring Death hastily upon them, and they shall go down into hell, sithence such wickednesse is in their dwellings and amongst them; and is not this a fearefull Judgement and Condemnation? so fearefull, as what can be con∣ceived to be added? And yet behold, 3. , Rom. 14.23. , the Judgment, Condemnation, yea, Damnation of an accusing conscience shall consummate their misery, even such as drave Iudas to be his own Executioner upon earth;Matth. 27.3, 4, 5. This shall do continuall execution of Gods just judgement upon them in hell, by that worme that never dies, and that fire which never shall be quenched, where their rebellious carkasses shall be an abhorring to all flesh;Esay. 66.24. wherefore for the escaping such fearfull 1. Judge∣ment. 2. Condemnation, 3. Damnation here, and hereafter from God and man; We must needs be subject.
2. [Subject] Which is the duty; That as the Devil overcame man by his disobedience to God,Matth. 20.27, 28. Philip. 2.4 Vers. 5. to 9. Rom. 12.10. Matth. 18.2. so man may return to God and overcome the Devil, by obedience to man for the Lords sake. Chri∣stianity is a Schoole of Humility, and we must not look every one upon our own excellencies, but upon other mens; having the same minde in us, which was in Christ Jesus, in giving (not in taking) honour, preferring one before another, , humbling our selves as little children; As they submit to their Parents, so must we be subject to our Prince, for he is the Person to whom principally the Apostle presseth this subjection; as Aquin. Dion. Carth. Bruno. and Claud. glosse it. The subjection to others be∣ing for his sake, as the subjection to him is for the Lords sake; which that we may performe aright, let us consider these three particulars: 1. Qualibus, To what manner of Princes we must be sub∣ject. 2. In quibus, In what things we must be subject. 3. Quomodo, How we must expresse our subjection. 1. Qualibus, To what manner of Princes we must be subject. As the Apostle injoynes Servants concerning obedience to their Masters, so say I to Subjects concerning their Soveraignes;1 Tim. 6.1, 2. Let as many as are under the yoke count their Governours worthy of all honour, (Sive fideles, sive infideles, whether they be gentle, or whether they be cruell) that the name of God and his Doctrine be not ill spoken of: 1. And if they be believing, let us not de∣spise them because they are faithfull and beloved, and partakers of the benefit, to wit redemption. 2. Or if they be unbelievers, let us not rebell, nor resist them; because although, 1. Quidam illo∣rum dantur ad timorem & poenam, & increpationem, Some of them are sent meerely for a terrour and a punishment. 2. Yea, Quidam ad illusionem & contumeliam, & superbiam; Some of them set up themselves in pride, meerely to contemne, and scorne, and scoffe at their Subjects, as the persecuting Emperours did, when they exposed the Christians naked to fight with beasts and beastly Heathens. 3. Aswell as Quidam ad correctionem & uti∣litatem subjectorum, & conservationem Iustitiae; For a fatherly re∣formation of offendors, a loveing protection of the obedient, and the preservation of Justice for both: Yet we must consider and confesse, that Ad utilitatem Gentilium terrenum Regnum positum
est à Deo, non à Diabolo, qui nunquam omnino quietus est; Imo qui nec ipsas quidem gentes vult in tranquill agere, ut timentes regnum humanum: Earthly Kingdomes are erected by God, not by the Divel, who as he is never quiet himself, so would he not have the people live in peace, (as appeares by his late practices) which government is the meanes to procure and preserve, preventing men from devouring those that are more righteous then them∣selves:Hab. 1.13.14. And for being like the fishes of the Sea, or the creeping things who have no Ruler over them: for, Per legum positiones re∣percutiant multiplicem gentilium injustitiam, Kings and Princes by their Laws restraine and bridle the fury and violence of our na∣turall corruptions: yea, and the worst of Princes is never worse then Quemadmodum populi digni sunt Dei justo judicio in omnibus aliqualiter superveniente: Iren. l. 5. c. 24. such as the people have provoked God to set to afflict them, whose just judgement al∣wayes interposeth it self in such weighty cases. Although some∣times we know it not, oft-times we will not acknowledge it: which being so, may oblige every one of us to be subject to all powers, of all qualities, conditions, dispositions, tempers, religi∣ons, under whom the Lord hath placed us: Sive 1. Nutriciis, sive 2. Hypocritis, sive 3. Haereticis, sive 4. Tyrannis: Whether they be noursing fathers, for whom we must praise God: or dis∣sembling Hypocrites, or obstinate Heretickes, or bloudy Tyrants, for all which we must pray to God: Whatsoever Sanders, Allen, Stapleton, Parsons, Mariana, Boucherius, Santarellus, &c. on the Romish part: And Knoxe, Buchanan, Gilbey, Goodman, and Dane∣us, on the other extreame have formerly taught, Calderwood hath followed, and some too fiery spirits of late have seditiously and scandalously put in practice, of whom I may say in the Apostles language,1. Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. If any man teach otherwise (then what I have affirmed) he consenteth not to the wholsome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to godlinesse: but is puffed up & knoweth nothing as he ought to know, but doateth about questions and strife of words, whereof commeth envy, strife, railings, evil surmiseings, froward disputations of men of corrupt mindes, and destitute of the truth, which think that gaine is godlinesse, (howsoever they pretend godlinesse rather then gaine) from such separate thy selfe: For howsoever we must per∣forme active obedience to such Princes onely so far as lawfully
we may, Calv. Bez. Marl. Roloc. Genev. usque adaras, so long as Cum Deo non comparabuntur,Scorpias. they are not set in competition with God: Tertul. Yet we must performe passive obedience and absolute subjection, suffering without resistance,Act. 4.19. being sub∣ject without rebellion, even if they should command the most unjust superstitious, idolatrous, prophane, or irreligious things which can be imagined; yet I say we must not rebell, unlesse we will renounce Christianity,Gloss. in∣telin. but we must let this be Probatio sub∣jectionis, the touch-stone of our subjection, even our patient and constant sufferings: For, Quae passos Apostolos scimus manifesta est Doctrina,Tertul. ubi spr. The truth of this Doctrine is sealed by the Apostles sufferings, who indured of Heathen Princes, and for not renouncing Christianity, Carceres, Vincula, Flagella, Saxa, Gladios, Impetus Indaeorum, Coe∣tus Nationum, & Tribunorum Elogia, & Regum auditoria, & Pro∣consulum Tribunalia, & Caesaris nomen interpretem non habent: Imprisonment, Bonds, Stripes, Stoning, Wounds, Violence of the Jews, Conventing before the Gentiles, Questioning in the Courts of Tribunes, Examinations and Answers before Kings, Arraign∣ments at the Tribunals of Proconsuls, yea and could not find an Appeale to the Emperour, any protection for their innocencie; yet they not onely submitted themselves, and possessed their own soules with patience, but also taught all pious people so to doe; as here our Apostle makes it apparent, and (Titus 3.1, 2.) pres∣seth it to all posterity: Put them in remembrance (for indeed we are too apt to forget) that they be subject to the Principalities & Powers, and that they be obedient, & ready to every good work; that they speak evill of no man,His Maje∣sties De∣claration ubi supra. (much lesse of Princes and Pre∣lates, as some of late have done) That they be no fighters, (much lesse Armed Rebels) but soft, lowly, gentle, shewing all meek∣nesse to all men, much more to Rulers; yea, and such effect did this Doctrine produce, that Sanguis Martyrem semen Ecclesiae, Cypr. The blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church. The bloud, not the sword, that were too Turkish. And however, Circa majestatem Imperatoris infamemur, Tert. ad Scap. l. 2. They were slandred as disloyall to the Emperour; yet, Nunquam Albiniani, vel Nigriani, vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani: Never a∣ny Nigrian, who made Religion the stalking-horse for Rebelli∣on; Nor never any Cassian who assaulted his Soveraign by As∣sassination,
could be found amongst the Christians: Christianus nullus est hostis nimirum Imperatoris, quem sciens à Deo suo consti∣tui, necesse est ut & ipsum diligat, & revereatur, & honoret, & sal∣vum velit, cum toto Romano Imperio, quousque seculum stabit, tam diu enim stabit: Colimus ergo Imperatorem, sic quomodo & nobis licet, & ipsi expedit, ut hominem à Deo secundum, & quicquid est à Deo consecutum, & solo Deo minorem: For no true Christian can be an enemie to his King or Emperour, whom he knows to be placed over him by God, and therefore upon necessity must love him, reverence him, honour him, pray for him, and desire and in∣deavour his safety as the safety of the Kingdome; as being next to God, lesser onely then God, and endowed with the power which he hath from God, over all the men in his Dominions. Hereupon was it that the Christians fought so many valiant bat∣tels, and obtained so many glorious victories, even for Heathen and persecuting Emperours, yea even for Iulian the Apostata himselfe: but never did they fight any battel, pitched any Field, arrayed any Army, armed any Legions, or so much as entred into consultation against their Emperour. And thus you see, Qualibus, to what manner of Princes we must be subject. And I think all will willingly conclude, Si parendum est magistratui prophano, certè multo magis obedire oportet Sancto & Christiano,In Matth. 22.21. Bez. If Heathens were thus obeyed, much more should Christians; If persecuting, much more pious Princes, such as our Gracious So∣veraigne, whose clemencie may challenge our love, as wel as his power command our duty, whom God preserve, and prosper long over us in honour and felicity, and give us the grace and grati∣tude to be subject, not onely for feare, but even for conscience sake. And so I come to consider 2. In Quibus? In what things we must be subject? Wherein the true stating of the Question is much differenced from the mi∣staken and mistaking Tenents of many of these times, who con∣ceive and would beare the world in hand. 1. That they are bound no further to Subjection, then with a Rightly Regulated Conscience, they may performe Active Obe∣dience to all their Superiours Edicts and Commands. 2. That they are not bound to Active Obedience, where they have a doubting conscience, although not fully informed by the right rule of Reason, or expresse authority of Gods word.
3. That the Supreame Magistrate, must have expresse affirma∣tive warrant in the word of God for all his injunctions, or else the Subject needs not obey them. Whereas the truth is, 1. Concerning the first, That although Active Obedience binds onely in the Lord, yet absolute subjection is due without any resistance for the Lords sake, ,Ephes. 6.. To humane Ordi∣nances (1 Pet. 2.13.) Even when man ordaines; not the Load (1 Cor. 7.12.) yet such a man as is ordained of the Lord, and so presumed to ordain according to the Lord, wee may not in any wise resist. 2. And as concerning the second, Although when man is left to his own liberty, The rule is to be observed, Quod dubitas ne feceris, because he that doubteth is condemned of his own Con∣science, yet when we are Commanded by Authority,Rom. 14.23. and wee onely doubt in our selves whether that bee good and lawfull which is comanded, or not, The Rule of Saint Augustine must be observed Si dubitas feceris, If you onely doubt doe it, except you have expresse warrant out of Gods word, or the Analogie of faith, and undeniable necessary Consequence to the contrary; Authority must turne the scale of thy doubting conscience, and weigh downe thy Judgement to Active obedience, so that 3. The Magistrate is not bound to expresse Text for warrant of each of his particular edicts; It is sufficient that it is contain∣ed in his generall Commission Dixi Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods. (Psal. 82.6.) and therefore have committed my delegated power to you, Per me Reges Regnant, By me Kings Raigne (Pro. 8.15.) And therefore by my authority may lay injunctions up∣on their Subjects, and they are obliged to Active Obedience, ex∣cept they can produce a negative Act of Parliament out of the high Court of Heaven; for Princes are not onely instead of God by representation (Exodus 4.16.) but they have the power of God over those to whom they have commission (Exod. 7.1.) I have made thee Pharoahs God, yea and put case the Subject could produce a contradictory command of God to that of his King, yet is not his passive obedience dispensed withall, nor any part of his absolute subjection dissolved or cancelled,Ambros. To. 3. Epis. l. 5. Orat. But wee must needes be Subject, (at least by suffering if not by doing) in all things, even against the dictate of a doubting, yea, or a dis∣cerning conscience.
3. But then in the next place it remains to be resolved by what meanes, or in what manner this subjection is to be expressed, which must be by these seven meanes following; where there are not Iura Regni by mutuall consent of Prince and people to super∣sede them, or dispence with any of them. 1. First by praying for them (1 Tim. 2.1.10.4.) I exhort therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessi∣ons, and giving of thankes, be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, who wil have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Where observe we must pray, 1. To the end that we may live godly and peace∣ably, when we did not live so before: 2. That they may come to the knowledg of the truth, when they knew it not before: 3. And that they may be saved, when they were not in that state before. None so bad then, to and for whom we are not to expresse our subjection by this duty. . Tit. 3.1, 2. Citat.2. Secondly, we must speake no evill of them; (Exod. 22.28.) Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of the people. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked; and to Princes ye are ungodly? (Iob. 34.18) No certainly, nothing lesse, and there∣fore follow the counsel of Martialis, who lived in the Primi∣tive times, learned of the Apostles, and taught to succession A murmuratione custodite corda vestra; Keepe not onely your hands from mutiny, and your tongues from muttering, but even your hearts from repining. 3. Thirdly, we must not dispute their Commands, for where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what doest thou? (Eccles. 8.4.) (i. e.) Not publikely and illegally to raise opposition against him, onely we may privately informe our own judgement, to prepare as peaceably either for active obedience or for Martyrdome. Josh. 1.16, 174. Fourthly, we must expresse our subjection by doing all their commands which are not directly against God, resolving with the Israelites, All that thou commandest us we wil do, and whi∣thersoever thou sendest us we will goe, onely the Lord thy God be with thee. Fiftly, we must expresse it by suffering all punishments pati∣ently
without any resistance; for those things which we dare not do when they command them, because they appeare (not seem) to be directly against God, (as hath been before demonstrated;) imitating S. Chrysostome, (Epist. ad Cyriacum) Cum à civitate fu∣garer, dicebam intra meipsum, si quidem vult Regina me exulem a∣gere, agat in exilium; Domini est Terra & plenitudo ejus; & si vult secare, secet; idem passus est Isaias, &c. Et si substantiam auferre, au∣ferat, nudus exivi ex utero matris meae, nudus etiam revertar; If the Queene will have me go into banishment, let her banish me; The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. If she will have me sawen in sunder, I submit my self; Isaias suffered so before me.Apoc. 13.10. If she will confiscate my goods, I am contented; Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked must I returne again. Behold, this must be the patience of the Saints. Sixtly, by supplying meanes, Ad necessaria secundum statûs sui conditionem; Lyr. paying due tribute to our Princes; for this is the manner, Quomodo velit te subjici protestatibus, redere jubens cui Tributum, Tributum: cui Vectigal, Vectigal; (i. e.) quae sunt Cae∣faris, Caesari, & quae Dei Deo. Tertul. Which tribute must be paid without limitation of the quantity before, or accompt of the dis∣posing of it after payment, Gloss. Ordinar, If Calvin understand it aright, (which I dare not assure, nor will I dispute) for,Calvan ver. 6. Neque nostrum est vel Principibus praescribere, quantum in res singulas im∣pendant, vel eos ad calculum vocare: We have no power to pre∣scribe to Princes what they shall expend upon occasions, nor to call them to accompt for their imployment of what is expended which I conceive to be intended where there are not Pacta inter Principem & Populum: nor fundamentall Lawes of the Land to the contrary. Seaventhly, we must expresse our subjection by guarding of the Princes person, fighting for him upon occasion,2 Sam. 8.11, 12. Et 10.26. 2 Sam . 2 Sam. 11.11. and sparing him from going out with us to battell, lest he should quench the light of Israel, (2 Sam. 21.17.) And what kind of consciences those men have, who can let their leige Lord go out to battell without them, (they being required) or who can leave him in his Tents in the field, when they return to their own houses, I leave both to men experienced in the Word, and practiced in the sword to consider: and so proceed. 3. To the third part of my Text, which is the necessity of this
duty of subjection, implyed in these words [must needs.] Must is for the King, and so it is indeed: and so is this: And therefore im∣plies a double duty by these two words [must] and [needs] termes of double necessity;Matth. 21.3. Dominus opus habet, Our Lord the King, the Lord of us and all we have hath need, and who will not then let all go presently? He must have it: in case of true absolute, immi∣nent necessity, to save our selves and the publique, according to the Laws of the Land:Luke 10 42. The supporting of His State is that Vnum necessarium for our safeties, and the safety of the whole Kingdom; and therefore the Apostle doth doth not onely say, 1. It is con∣venient that we be subject, (i. e.) for ornament sake. 2. Or it is fit that we be subject (i. e.) for order sake. 3. Or it is profitable that we be subject (i. e.) for providence and discretion sake. 4. Or it is contenting that we may be subject (i. e.) for peace and quiet sake. 5. But , It is necessary Obligationes juris & propter vim coactivam superioris, viz. quia tenemini & potestis ad hoc compelli ad profitendam veram subjectionem. [We must needs be subject] for absolute necessity sake:Dion: Carth: Necessitate salutis, Aq. even for the necessity of our salvation in Heaven, and of our safety up∣on earth. What is it but subjection which continues the blessed Harmony in Heaven amongst the Angels? What is it but Rebel∣lion which bred that confusion in Hell amongst the damned spi∣rits? What is it but subjection which can continue Peace, Plen∣ty, Piety, Order, and Unanimity amongst men upon earth, Whereas Rebellion brings forth War, Waste, Wickednesse, Con∣fusion; Desolation, and Destruction: wherefore for avoiding these, and preserving those, We must needs be subject. And so I come 4. To the persons obliged, which is the fourth thing proposed in my Text, in this word [Ye] , Theoph. And so Saint Chrysostome before him, . With whom consent Theodoret and Oecumenius amongst the Greeks, and Greg. Mag. and S. Bernard amongst the Latines, expresse them∣selves both in opinion and phrase to the selfe same purpose; we the Clegy, ye the Laity; we the Priests, ye the people; or ye the mighty Peeres,al. Inst. l. 4. c. 20. we the many multitude. 1. For neither are Peers excepted and reserved like the Lacedemonian Ephori, Romane Tribunes, or Athenian Demarchi, to restraine the insolencies or exorbitances of Princes oppressions. 2. Nor are the Priests ex∣empted
like the Roman Hierarchie, to be insolent and exorbitant in the Common-weale. 3. Nor are the people priviledged (as is pretended by some schismaticall Demagogi) to carry all by force of their collective body; But we and ye, 1. Peers, 2. Priests,Buchan. 3. Peo∣ple, must all needs be subject: And that 5. [Not onely for feare, but even for conscience sake.] Which is the last member proposed for prosecution. [Not onely for feare] And yet we must be subject for feare too, which, Cogit vel invi∣tos, Marlorat. Compels those that have no Conscience;Theophy∣lact. Lombard. Imo & possunt potestates etiam sine causa irasci, Hieron. And yet we must feare and be subject too (though they oppresse our tender consci∣ence) for feare of punishment from God, and from the Prince. 1. From God, who will not suffer his Ordinance to be con∣temned; Non enim privati est hominis abrogare imperium ei quem Dominus cum potestate nobis praefecit. Calv. 2. From the Prince; for, Vltionem reposcere possunt magistratus ob dignitatis suae contemptum. Idem. They may justly avenge the contempt of their authority, 1. Either by their Laws, by which In legum transgressores & inobedientes severiter animadvertunt: Marlorat. Or else by Armes; for, Portat gladium, He bears the sword, (vers. 4.) And if He draw it against Schismatiques, Here∣tiques, or Rebellious persons, Magistratus justè punit gladio,Lib. 1. & Parmon. c. 7. Aug. They must not cast off feare, and incourage themselves and their company against his commands, as if resisting for the cause of God (as they pretend) they were to be accounted Mar∣tyrs; for they are no more capable of Martyrdome, dying in con∣tempt of lawfull Magistracie, then the Idol Priests, or the devils themselves were by the subversion of their Temples, or ceasing of their Oracles, by vertue of our Saviours Incarnation; or by the command of the Emperour, converted to Christianity: Aug. ubi supra. But on the contrary it may be verified, that they who under the royall command of a rightfull King, obediently, con∣scionably, zealously, and couragiously fight against a Schismati∣call, or Hereticall Rebellious people, (who make Religion the pretext for Rebellion) if they die, they dye Martyrs, if they live, they live Confessors: and therefore we must feare even the Princes sword. That I may not insist upon losse of favour, friends, honour, credit, and the like;Prov. 20.2. Although a wise man will consider even in this, that the indignation of a King is as the roaring of a
Lion;A   and if this Lion roare, who can but be afraid? for he that provoketh him to anger, sins against his owne soule; and what then shall become of his body? Or if any be so fool-hardy as not to feare, yet must he be subject neverthelesse, Not onely for feare, [But even for conscience sake.] Non solùm, quia resistere poten∣tioribus & armatis impunè non liceret, quemadmodum tolerari so∣lent injuriae quae propulsri nequeunt: Sed sponte docet obeundam hanc submissionem, ad quam verbo Dei obstringitur conscientia: Cal. Not onely because they are armed and can over-master us, for so men suffer injuries from private men, because they cannot with∣stand them: but the Apostle teacheth, that a Christian is bound to subjection to his Soveraigne by the Word of God; and the tye of conscience more firme and close, then by a Souldiers Belt, or Jaylors Bolts and Manacles:Ambros. Theophy∣lact. So that, Etiamsi certò constaret nos manus illorum (alioqui valde longas) posse effugere: Marlorat. Al∣though we were assured that we could scape their reach, or op∣pose their power: Yea, Etiamsi exarmatus esset magistratus quem impune lacescere,Calv. & contemnere liceret, nihilo magis id tentandum quàm si poenam statim imminere cerneremus. Although the Magi∣strate had neither Armes, nor Armies, so that men might provoke and contemne his power in respect of punishment, must we not presume to neglect him any more, then if we did see Armes and Armies, Racks and Gibbets, and all engines for execution prepa∣red before us: Quia nisi omnino subjiciamini Principi polluta esset conscientia vestra obvians divinae ordintioni, Bruno. Because un∣lesse we be absolutely subject to our Prince (pretend what purity we will) our conscience is defiled, and every step wee march a∣gainst him, we set our selves in battell array against the Ordi∣nance of God: And indeede I cannot but wonder what hard hearts and cauterized consciences those men have, who doe not presently smite themselves, and their hearts die within them like Nabals when they find themselves guilty of subtracting subjecti∣on from their Prince,1 Sam. 25.37. (a greater ingratitude then which cannot be excogitated, and ingratitude is one of the greatest sinnes;) for Subjects are obliged. 1. By the rule of right Reason, to obey him, without whom we cannot be safe; but without the King the Common-weale cannot bee safe, no more then a ship without a Pilot in a stor∣my
my Ocean; And therefore by the rule of right reason we must obey him. 2. By naturall equity, which bindes to do good to them which do good to us, but Kings and Princes do good to us, for by their meanes we obtaine great quietnesse, and by their providence many worthy things are done to our Nation:Act. 24.2. By them we receive honour, enjoy riches, peace, plenty, and freely professe and pra∣ctice piety: and therefore even for naturall equity, We must needs be subject, which is the least good we can doe to them. 3. By morall civility we are bound to be subject to him who protects us: But Kings and Princes protect us from evill doers, who would violently take away our lives, insolently usurpe our lands, prodigally mispend our goods, laciviously deflowr and ra∣vish our wives, & mercilesly slave our children, yea, they are the Protectors and defenders of our faith, and therefore we are bound at least not to rebell sithence all these mischiefes have been, are, & will be the effects of such disobedience, from which Good Lord deliver us. 4. By Christian Religion and conscience, which enjoyns, that we must not resist the Ordinance of God: but Kings and Princes are the Ordinance of God, and therefore we must not resist them. vers. 1, 2. And doe 1. Right reason, 2. Naturall equity, 3. Morall civility, 4. Christian Religion and conscience oblige us to subjection? Oh then take heed, and never trust any (though never so faire Profes∣sors) who pretend conscience to countenance disobedience, at least to cast off subjection, as it is hard to disobey and not to rebel. Yet such alwayes have been the faire pretence of the foulest pra∣ctises. Thus the colour of the common good to free the people from Subsidies, Taxes, and Oppressions (which then seemed by their Governours to lye upon them) led the people of the Iews, yea and some Romans too, to follow Theudas, Iudas of Galile,Iosep. An∣tiq. Iudai. l. 18. c. 1. & l. 20. c 6. Salust. con¦jurat. Ca∣tilin. Speed. Catiline, and their companions. Thus the Rebels of elder times in this Island, christned their Insurrections, the Army of God & the holy Church, making Religion the Patronesse of their impie∣ty. Iack Straw, Iack Cade, Wat Tyler, Fryer Ball, alias Wall, and such others, made 1. The oppression of the Commons, 2. The in∣solencie of the Nobility, 3. The covetousnesse of the Priests, and the inequality of men of equall merit, the vail of all their violence
and villany.Hollinshed Rich. 2. p. 429. Graston p. 330, 331. Thus the Rebellion in the North, Lincolnshire, and Norfolke, were raised under pretence of 1. Reforming Religion, 2. Freedome of Conscience, and 3. Bettering the Common∣weale, yea, and they are alwayes masked under the vizard of, 1. Pro Lege, 2. Pro Grege, 3. Pro Rege; whereas indeed they are against the King,L. 2. de Bello Iu∣daic. c. 16. break the Laws, and make spoile of the people, as Iosephus relates the story of the Rebellious Iews, pretending onely against Florus harsh, unjust, and cruell usage, and not a∣gainst the Romanes:Naucler. But as King Agrippa cleares it by his Re∣monstrance, They did but onely say so; for their actions were such as worse could not have beene done by the greatest Enemies of the Romane Empire, for they sacked the Townes, robbed the Trea∣suries, burnt the Houses, wasted the Fields; neither were they the Townes, the Treasuries, the Houses, the Fields of Florus, but of the Roman Empire. I will not make Application, but sit hence these things have ever beene so,Prov. 24.21, 22. I will onely conclude with Solomons Admonition: My son, feare God and the King, and meddle not with them that are seditious; for suddenly shall their destruction come, and who knoweth the ruine of them? Yet certaine it is that ruined they shall be, and perhaps when themselves least suspect it, suddenly as with the Arrow of Lightning shot from the Bow of God, which may serve as a Corollary to our Apostles premises to in∣force this conclusion, [Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not onely for wrath, but even for conscience sake.] Which God grant us all grace to be, for Jesus Christs sake, the Patterne and Patron of perfect obedience; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honour, glory, power, might, majesty, and dominion, from this time forth for evermore. Amen. FJNJS.
CHRISTVS DEI, The LORDS Annoynted. OR, A Theologicall Discourse, wherein is proved, that the Regall or Monar∣chicall power of Our Soveraigne Lord KING CHARLES Is not of Humane, but of divine Right, and that GOD is the sole Efficient cause thereof, and not the people. Also that every MONARCH is above the whole Common-wealth, and is not onely Major Singulis, but Major Vniversis. Written in Answer to a late Printed Pamphlet intitu∣led, Observations upon some of His MAIESTIES late Answers and Expresses. 1 Pet. 2.13. Subjecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Dominum, sive Regi quasi Praecellenti. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as supreme. Printed by HS MAIESTIES Command AT OXFORD. 1643.
CHRISTVS DEI, OR, A Theologicall Discourse, wherein is proved, that Regall Power is not of Humane, but of Divine Right, and that God only is the Efficient cause thereof, and not the People. Preface. 1 THere is a Book come forth of late, barely intituled, Observations upon some of His Majesties late An∣swers and Expresses, without any name of the Au∣thor or place where it was printed. Wherein the Ob∣server (so I must call him not knowing him by any other name) aimes chiefly and directly to prove, that the Heredita∣ry, Regall, and Monarchicall power of our now present dread So∣veraigne King Charles, is inferiour and subject to the power of the now present Parliament. 2 Which to evince he undertakes to lay down the originall foun∣dation of all Regall power whatsoever, according to the efficient & finall causes thereof. And having made the finall cause to be the sa∣fety of the people, together with their Civill or Politicall happi∣nesse; he also makes the efficient cause to be, not God, but only the
people, and the instrumentall cause of conveying and deriving this Regall Power to be, not any divine law, nor nothing else (amongst Christians) but the meere humane pactions and Agreements of the Politick body of the people. And then arguing by a rule in nature; that quicquid efficit tale est magis tale, he issueth out this just infe∣ence (as he calleth it) that though the King be singulis major, yet he is universis minor, and therefore inferior and subject in power to the Parliament. 3 Having perused this discourse, and finding it to be most inju∣rious to Regall Power or Monarchy, contrary to the true princi∣ples of State and Divinity, or Orthodox Christian Doctrine: I thought I might do my King and Country good service, to con∣fute these desperate and more than dangerous Positions, by decla∣ring and proving the true Originall foundation, according to the fi∣nall and efficient causes of Regall or Monarchicall Power: which (with Gods good helpe) I hope to do perspicuosly in the few en∣suing Paragraphes. SECT. 1. Of the Primary Finall cause; as also of the efficient cause of all Civill Societies or Republiques. Because whatsoever is done, is done for some end or purpose, without which it should not have been done, nor had a being: ther∣fore it is the constant Doctrine of all Philosophers, that the end is the chief and Principall of all causes: and therefore, for methods sake I will begin with it. Now to find out the Primary end of all Civill Societies or Commonwealths, we, that are Christians, must reflect attentively upon those words of the holy Ghost. Pro. 16.4. Universa propter semet ipsum operatus est Dominus. By which we are ascertained, that God Almighty created not only all other Crea∣tures; but all man-kind also, as for their Primary end, for himselfe, and his own Praise and glory. And as for man in particular, God created him to his owne i∣mage and likeness, endowing him with an understanding and a wil, that he might know how to honour and love his Creator, and by such love & honour might finally become happy in the fruition of
his eternall, unspeakable and inestimable glory in heaven: for means whereto, first God dictated certaine Divine precepts and prin∣ciples unto man, & imprinted them with his very creation upon his natural reason (for which cause they are called divine natural Laws written in every mans heart, saith St. Paul. Rom. 2.15.) that every man might be equally capable to know them, and equally obliged to obey them. Secondly, God infused into him Faith, hope, and Charity, and other supernaturall virtues, all tending to this conduce∣ment, that man following them as his guides, might, through his obedience to God, attain to his owne salvation. Thirdly, to binde man more strongly to his subjection, and to make it appeare more illustriously unto him, that therein principally consisted his Wel∣fare, as the very End and Center, for and to which he was created, He gave him an expresse divine Law, not to eate of the tree in the midst of Paradise upon pain of death. Fourthly, by Revelation he instructed him in many particular sacred formes and Rites of exte∣riour divine worship, as sacrifice and other; for though we read not any where in holy Writ, that Adam offered Sacrifice, no more than we doe of Isaac; yet we read there that Cain and Abel did, and that Abraham and Iacob did. But it cnnot be imagined that Cain and Abel were the first Inventors of this most, religious and divine worship, (no more than that Isaac dd neglect it) but by Pa∣ternall tradition and example they received it from Adam. 3. All which duely considered, it will appeare evidently, that the primary end for which all men are created, is to serve, honour, love, obey, and worship God. From whence it followes, that this being mans highest and principallest concerne, it ought al∣so to be his highest and pincipallest care to attend to it. But most certaine it is, that men, living divided and scattered over the face of the world without the instruction and assistance one of another cannot possibly performe this for every particular mans behoofe, as is requisite. And therefore from this finall cause arose primarily a necessity amongst men to unite and combine themselves into ci∣vill Societies and Common-wealths. This end could not be pre∣fixed by men; but men were created for this end by God. And therefore this is the primary, spirituall, supernaturall, and divine fi∣nall cause of all Republikes, to which every other end must be but secondary, subordinate, and subservient.
4 And from hence it followeth further, that since on the one side no naturall agent can by it's naturall power compasse the attain∣ing of a supernaturall end; and on the other side Civill Societies ought not to be instituted in vaine: we must needs conclude, that the Primary efficient cause of all Common-wealths is only God. PARAGR. 2. Of the Secondary finall Cause, and also the only Efficient Cause of all Civill Societies and Republiques. 1 Every Creature in the world strives to preserve its own kind. We see what paines and Care Beasts and Birds take to reare their younglings. Trees and Plants beare fruits and seeds to produce the like when they are perished. Yea, the inanimate Creatures (accor∣ding to their predominant Element and mixture) strive every one to obtaine and enjoy their Center. And all this not only for their own particular, but also for the harmonious Accommodation and pre∣servation of the Vniverse, the great and most excellent work of na∣ture, wherein she doth nothing in vaine. But in vaine had man been, if he also had not been provided of necessary meanes towards the Preservation of his kind. For which cause God said it was not good for man to be alone: and therefore gave him a Woman to be his Helper, that so by meanes of generation he might propagate his of∣spring to the worlds end. 2 This Preservation then of mankind, is the maine naturall and secondary end of man. And to ths end God gave him his blessing to increase and multiply, from whence ariseth, that of necessity there must be at least private families. But man and Woman finding (by wofull experience) most true what God said to Adam and Eve; that he should eate his bread in the sweat of his browes, that she should bring forth her children in paine, found also presently, that every private family is not sufficient of it self to maintaine ths work of Preservation, without the help of one another. For first, to say no∣thing of womens deliveries in chld-birth, which cannot possibly alwayes and every where be performed requisitely by themselves and their families, without the help of some other, or others: and
yet even upon this preservation of mankind holds a most necessa∣ry and principall dependance. I will onely speak of mans part, who with the sweat of his browes, with extream toyle and labour must provide food and cloathing, and all other necessary supports and sustentations for his family. But to doe this he must of necessity (I speak not of barbarous inhumane people) have some certaine place of aboad; and in this he must have some peculiar right, some propriety of possession, by vertue whereof he may reap the fruits of the earth, and maintaine his Cattel. And how shall every private family be able to doe this with security? will not every one strive for the best possession? will not the shepheards of Abraham and Lot, and of Isaac and Gerera fall to contention for water and pastures, & such like other necessary elbow roome? And in these uncivill and unsociable quarrells, must not all private families be made like to the fishes of the sea. Hab. 11.13.14. where the stronger must de∣vour the weaker? 3. Secondly, God endowed man in in his creation with an under∣standing and a will. This understanding is of that infinite capacity, that it hath for its Adaequate Object omne ens as it is verum And man therefore is in perpetuall and restlesse search of knowledge, to perfect his understanding by experience and learning, The wil also hath for her Adaequate Object omne ens as it is bonum. And man therefore is in perpetuall pursuit of Reciprocall love to perfect his will by friendship and justice. Over and above these, God gave to man the faculty of speech, to be the reciprocall conveyance of learning and friendship. So as for this very reason Aristotle sayd ex∣cellently wel, that man is by nature a sociable creature, for neyther warning nor friendship, nor justice (in which consists essentially mans Civill or Politicall happinesse) nor safety or security (which is the only preservation of every mans being) can possibly be acqui∣red & maintayned in the division of men in their priviate families. And therefore for this very end it was naturally necessary for men to unite and associate themselves into Civill Societies and Commu∣nities, that so they might preserve thir Kind. From the learning, experience and Industery of the understand¦ing proceed all Arts, Tillage, Manufactures, Trade, and Traffique,
which bring in Gaine, and that brings plenty, from the friendship and justice of the will proceed Peace and security: in which secure peace and plenty consisteth perfect salus populi. Now since this cannot be had in divided private families, & without this there can be no preservation of Man-kind, it followes; that Civill Socie∣ties or Commonwealths are naturally necessary. Whose naturall finall cause is truely and onely (in the manner as I have explicated) Salus populi. Now furthermore, seeing that Common-wealth is not the designe of Art and Invention of particular men, nor of any positive law of theirs, but proceeds from the Common necessity of all man-kind, intimated unto them by the Law of nature, of which God is the sole cause and Author: it followeth that the efficient cause of all Republiques is onely God. SECT 3. Of the Finall and Efficient cause of Civill Power in a Commonwealth. 1. As for the finall cause there is little or no difficulty; for seeing that the finall cause of every thing must needs be that, which that thing necessarily refers unto, as to its end for which it is done or hath its being: it is manifest, that since civill societies have for their naturall and secondary finall cause Salus populi; the power also which must not be ad destructionem, but ad aedificationem, to main∣taine those civill societies, can have no other finall cause, but that whereunto they direct and are directed, which is Salus Populi. 2. The materiall cause in whch this power originall, resides and inheres; as the former to make up a compleat Body of a Common-wealth, is the people. And so the Observer sayth ve∣rie well in this kind of cause, power is originally inherent in the people: most certaine then it is, that even at the very first uni∣ting themselves into a Civill society, there is an inherent power in the people to governe themselves, and by such Govern∣ment to preserve themselves in safety. For this is the onely necessary naturall end for which they met (as I have very briefely shewene before) that they might bee able and
powerfull to secure themselves, and preserve their kind. But this meeting would have been in vaine, and this preservation wholly made frustrate, if there were not this power inherent in them. 3. If in the naturall body of man there were not an interiour Directive Governing Power to guide every particular member in the operative use of its function, and to contrive those operations to the mutuall good of one another, and the conservation of the whole man; that body could not possibly but suddenly perish. For if the teeth will not chew, nor the throat swallow, nor the hands reach, nor the feet stirre, nor the eyes look out, when nature re∣quires her necessary food, she and they and all must starve. So in a politicall Body; if all members should do what they list, and should not be compelled by some absolute power to contribute their strengths and endevours to the preservation of one another, and the whole Community, it would be but Regnum in se divisum, that of necessity must fall to desolation, as the holy Ghost confirms also else where, saying Prov. 11.14 Ubi non est Gubernator dssipa∣bitur Populus. 4 The maine difficulty is: who is the efficient cause of this power, Wherein, not to be tedious to my Reader, but to yield him the satisfaction of his expectation in a briefe and resolute answer, I present unto him this Decretory Assertion. This power is not a humane but a divine Right; and God onely is the immediate effi∣cient cause thereof. This I prove by five Arguments. 5. Arg. 1. There is a rule in nature (to use the Observers owne words) Quod dat esse dat consequentia ad esse. But the esse of a Republike cannot have a simpliciter esse without the esse of this power. Therefore he that is the efficient cause of the Repub∣lique, is also the efficient cause of this power. But (as I have prov'd before SECT. 2. n. 5.) God is the sole efficient cause of all Re∣publiques, therfore he is also the sole efficient cause of this power. 6 Arg. 2. The Primary finall cause of Civill Societies (as I have prov'd SECT. 1.) is divine worship, which man could not prefix to himselfe as his end, but he was created by God for and to that end, and onely God prefixed that end to man. Therefore this is a divine end which cannot be atchieved without a divine
Power (as I have also proved in the same Section, n. 4.) onely God then is the immediate Efficient cause of this power. 7. And from thence it proceeds, that Kings, acknowledging themselves to have received this divine power, principally for this primary end, their Oathes at their Coronation are (as the Obser∣ver very grutchingly granteth) more precise in the care of Cano∣nicall Priviledges, and of Bishops and Clergy men, than of the Commonalty: and not from the reason which he gives. viz. be∣cause they were penned by Popish Bishops. For whether the Bi∣shops were Popish or Protestant, surely they are not to be blamed ex hoc capite, but most highly to be reverenced, that according to their profession and duty they put Kings in mind, in the first place, of divine worship, and their owne and their peoples eternall salva∣tion depending thereupon. And I cannot understand why the Ob∣server should give that reason, but onely to seduce the Vulgar into a base and profane misconceiving and vilifying of the royal pow∣er of Kings, and their sacred Oathes. For Popish without all doubt in his Dictionary signifieth superstitious at least, if not Idolatrous. But, if it be superstition for a man to be more precise in the care of Divine Worship, and his soules everlasting salvation, than of a∣ny other his temporall end or affaire (see Section 1. n. 3.) in vaine then have all Christians hitherto believed that they were in a true Religion. Let the Observer consider what censure he deserves for thus finding fault with Kings Oathes, and whether hee gives not just cause of suspicion, that he is rather an Atheist than a Christi∣an. It is well knowne to all Christians, that Quaerite primùm Reg∣num Dei & justitiam ejus is no invention of Popish Bishops, but our Blessed Saviours owne Doctrine and Rule, not only to Bishops, but to all Kings and people whatsoever, as the principall, to which as an Accessorium followes, & haec omnia adjicientur vobis. Mat. 6.33. 8. Arg. 3 When private families first joyned themselves in∣to a Common body of society, before any Condictum, Paction, or Agreement amongst themselves, to enact positive Lawes for their government, there was an inherent power in them to enact such Lawes. For who can make a Law without a power? But this power, not being the effect, but the most necessary cause of
all humane pactions, or positive Lawes, cannot have its origen from man, but onely from God. Ergo God is the sole Efficient cause of this power. 9. Arg. 4. When men first associated themselves into a Com∣mon-wealth, they were all of equall Right and Power, so that none (I speake of severall families still as before) could challenge su∣periority the one over the other. For, this divine naturall power, viz. Se defendere, & vim vi repellere, was inherent in every one of them, and obligeing them. The power then which accrewed to to the aggregation of the whole society, was not made but brought, as being no other than what was in all and every particular Mem∣ber of that society before. But that is a Divine power, and the immediate effect of God. Ergo. And indeed in the due mnnaging or excercising of this divine naturall law of se defendendo, and vim vi repellendo consists totally the security and Salus Populi, and the power of the Common-wealth to maintain it. 10. Arg. 5. God Almighty is so solely the Legislator and Author of his owne Lawes, without the concurrence or consent of any other Councell, (quis enim consiliariuus fuit, aut quis pri∣or dedit ei? Rom, 11.33.) That they have their establishment onely in and by his own will. So that no power whatsoever of his Creatures, can by any contraition against him, invalid or annull those Lawes. But non occides is a Divine naturall Law and precept expressed in the Decalogue. Therefore no Pactions or agree∣ments of men can give this power of putting a man to death, no more than Cain could kill Abel. But on the other side it is ma∣nifest, that Republikes have a lawfull power of putting men to death, without which they could not preserve their owne safety. Therefore they have it from God. And how soon God gave this power to men I know not, nor cannot find, untill after the floud; when Gen. 9.6▪ we read this expresse positive divine Law and precept given to the Civill Magistrate. Quicunque effuderit hu∣manum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius.
SECT. 4. 1. The Finall Cause of Regall power must of necessity be the same that is of the Common-wealth, because the King is the ad∣ministrator of the power of the Common-wealth, to the same end no doubt, for which it was first ordained: of which having spoken largely before, I have no need to say any thing here. 2. The maine question is, who is the efficient cause of Regall or Monarchicall power? Which the Observer boldly averres to be, not God, but the people. And upon this false ground he vents all those swarmes of false inferences throughout his whole discourse. 3. But before I lay down the true Resolution of this question, I must desire my reader to mark with good heed the great difference that is between the power it selfe of a Common-wealth, and the authority to administer that power: for the people may be the Ef∣ficient Cause of this second, though not of the first. As for ex∣ample, the Aldermen of London may elect, nominate, and consti∣tute such or such a man to be their Lord Major to administer the power that belongs to the Corporation of that City; and herein they may be the Efficient cause of his Authority to administer the power of the City, but not of his power; because that is the gift of the King by his Charter, of which his Majesty therefore is the onely efficient cause, and not the Aldermen, nor all the people of that Corporation whatsoever. 4. I have proved all along in the precedent Sections, that the Ci∣vill power of a Common-wealth, is not a humane, but divine pow∣er, of which, not the people, but God onely is the Efficient cause. It is true indeed, that it is in the voluntary election of the people to authorize one, or few, or more with the administration of this power. And as long as this Authority is still elective in the people, they may by consent of the major part alter their forme of Guber∣nation into Democraticall Oligarchicall, Aristocraticall, or Mo∣narchicall, as they please. And herein the Observer saith truely, that God is no more the Author of Regall, than of Aristocraticall power: for whether this power be in many, or in one, it is still the
same divine power of the Common-wealth, though diversly ad∣ministred, of which God onely is the efficient cause. But when the people have once resigned up all their authority into the hands of one, and his heires for ever, so that now it is not any longer ele∣ctive in them, but hereditary in him: then not onely the power, but the authority also to administer that power is solely inherent in him and his heires, unalterably and irrevocably for ever. 5. This then is my first Assertion. The Efficient cause of Re∣gall or Monarchicall power, is not the people, but onely God. I speak in this Assertion, not of conditionall Princes, but onely of absolute Kings and Monarchs. My first proofe then is. When the people create a King, they elect his person, and authorize him with the administration of the absolute power which is inherent in the whole Common-wealth to governe it selfe: otherwise he is no absolute King, of whom onely I speak, and so doth the observer also. But this power (as I have proved) is not an humane, but a divine power, of which God onely is the Efficient Cause. Therefore God onely, and not the people is the Efficient Cause of Regall power. 6. My second proofe, God saith expressely, Prov. 8.15. Per me Reges regnant, &c. Then their Dominion or power by which they reigne is immediately from God. Christ saith to Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Non haberes potestatem, &c. nisi tibi datum esset desuper. Then this power is not from below from men; but from above, from God. St. Paul saith, Rom, 13.1. Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisi à Deo. And qui resistit Potestati, Dei Ordinationi resistit. And, non sine causa gladium portat. For what cause? Dei enim minister est, vndex in iram, &c. Then Regall Po∣wer is Divine power and the Ordinance of God, wherein the King is not the peoples, but Gods Minister, as being invested and annoynted interiorly in his person by him with a Divine power; of which the exteriour Vnction is a sacred, Ceremonous, Com∣monefactive and solemne Testimony. And for this cause Gyrus though a Heathen King is called by God himselfe. Isay 45.1. Christus meus, Gods own annoynted. The holy King Josaphat saith to those whom he had constituted Judge. 2. Paralip. 19.6. Non
hominis exercetis judiciam, sed Domini. Then it is not a humane pow∣er, but a divine power by which the King doth judge and rule his people. From hence I infer two Corollaries. 7. The first: That there is a two-fold trust in the King. The one of his power. The other of the administration of his power. The first is Gods trust unto him▪ to exercise his divine judgements. The second, is the peoples, to administer it Propter salutem populi. But if he swerve herein; seeing that the power is divine and residing and inhering onely in him, and not in the people, he is not liable to the people, but onely to God. 8. The second Corollarie. As God is the sole efficient cause of Regall power; so the instrumentall cause which conveighes this power, is the divine naturall Law obliging men to unite themselves into Civil societies. For God gives a power to men to govern them∣selves by obliging them to unite themselves. And consequently the election of the people (with all the Observers pactions and a∣greements) is but Causa sine qua non, by way of approximation, that this divine power may reside in those few, or more, or one rather than in any other. As in my former example n. 3. The efficient cause of the Lord Majors power is onely the King. The instru∣mental cause by which this power is derived unto him, is the Char∣ter of the City, granted to them at pleasure, more strictly or more largely by the King. And the Aldermens election of this or that particular man, is but the approximation, that the Kings power may reside in him to governe the City, rather than in any other. 9, My second Assertion. Every absolute King (invested and an∣nointed with a divine power by God himself to exercise his judge∣ments through the election of the people to be sole administrator therof) is in power super totam Rempublicam; Superiour absolutely over the whole Common-wealth. And therefore is not only Ma∣jor singulis, but Major Vniversis, and super omnes simul. This Asser∣tion is evident out of the former. For the power that was inherent in the whole Common-wealth to exercise Gods judgements, and to governe and preserve it selfe, was a divine power, not only super singulos, but super omnes simul, and therefore Major Universis. But this
power is now totally and absolutely inherent in the King only. Er∣go he is super totam Rempublicam: and Major Universis. 10. In confirmation of this argument, I argue thus. Either the whole power of the Common-wealth is in one, or no. If no, then he is no absolute King or Monarch, contrary to our supposition. But if he be a Monarch, I aske againe; if there be a powet in the Common-wealth, which is not in him, is it subordinate to his pow∣er, or no? if it be subordinate, then his power is above that pow∣er, and so super totam Rempublicam, and Major Universis. If it be not, then there are simul & semel two supream Civill powers in a Com∣mon-wealth, two supream contrary Masters at once to be obeyed, one and the same individuall Kingdom and Gubernation, and yet divided against it selfe, which are most absurd and impossible. 11. From hence it is evident, that his Majesty sayd most truely, and most learnedly; that the administration of the whole power of the Common-wealth being committed in trust absolutely and irrevocably to him and his heires for ever, it is impossible that a power above that trust should be committed to others. 12. This the Observer in effect plainly confesseth. But relapsing in∣to his wonted Paroxismes of strong malice against Regall Power, he labours (by his most false erroneous Principle Rex est minor U∣niversis) and tires himselfe in vaine to answer it. And because the strength of all his long tedious and farraginous discourse depends wholly upon these two false grounds, viZ. that the people is the efficient cause of Regall power; And that Rex est minor Universis; and I have manifestly confuted them both: I presume I have also sufficiently confuted all the rest; and therefore conclude in those sacred words, Data est a Domino Potestas Regibus, & virtus ab Altis∣simo. Power is given to Kings of the Lord, and Soveraignty from the highest. Sapient. 6.3. FINIS.
