M2719 E1565_1 99860394 112514
The Doctors' Dispensatory. he Art of Phisick restored to practise. a doctor studies liquid in a glass vial in his shop. Two women, a lady and nurse, with a baby stand in front of his bookshelf. The Apothecarys' Shop opened. an apothecary accepts a prescription from a man in his shop. Around them are his ingredients and instruments. Dispensatory Sold by N; Brooke at ye Angell in Cornhill.
The Expert DOCTORS Dispensatory. The whole Art of Physick Restored to Practice. The Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgions Closet open'd; wherein all safe and honest practices are maintained, and dangerous mistakes discovered; and what out of subtilty for their own profits they have indeavoured to reserve to themselves, now at last impartially divulged and made common. Together with a strict survey of the Dispensatories of the most renow∣ned Colledges of the World, which being corrected, are here epi∣tomized, and drawn into an easie and usefull method for Practice. Containing, First, the Latine Names of all Simples and Compounds English'd. Secondly, The Vertues, Qualities, Properties, Quantities, and uses of all Simples and Compounds. Thirdly, The way of prescribing remedies; together with the Forms and Rules for the making of all manner of medicines daily used by our English Physicians, Chyrurgians, and Apothecaries. Fourthly, The Nature, Qualities, and Symptomes of all diseases. Fifthly, Cautions for the applying all both internal and external me∣dicines. To which is added by Jacob a Brunn, publick Professor of Physick in Basil, a Compendium of the Body of physick; wherein all the Medicaments Vniversal and Particular, Simple and Compound, are fitted to the practice of Physick; and these forms of remedies now before prescribed by the famous P. Morellus, chief Physitian to the King of France, and Chancellour of the Vniversity of Monpellier. Dedicated to that excellent Anatomist VESLINGIƲS. London, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhil neer the Royal Exchange, 1657.
NICHOLAS CULPEPPERS Approbation, OR Rather his Wish after his perusal of that Famous, Morellus his Dispensatory. WHereas I was put upon the de∣signe of the London Dispensa∣tory, which with good success I translated, and published, a Friend of mine, not long after, sent me the more refined Work of Morellus, that most knowing Physitian to the King of France, whole method and plain directions for the making of all manner of Physick, set forth with the Annotations of Jacob a Brun Pro∣fessor of Physick in the Colledge of Basil, I so honoured and admired, that had I been before acquainted with his Work, I had
made it my businesse to have translated it, and presented it to my Country-men, as the most useful, compendious, and exact Dispensatory that in all my reading I ever met with. Thine, N. Culpepper.
The Epistle of JOHN WINAND Doctor of PHYSICK of the University of MONTPELIER. To John Jacob a Brunn, sometimes his beloved Chamber-follow, in praise of that excellent piece of Morellus's Dispensatory. IT was truly and judiciously spo∣ken by
Herophilus, (most excellent Doctor) that Reme∣dies are the hand of God if rightly applyed; but if other∣wise by an unskilful and em∣perical hand, nothing is more prejudicial. Now seeing that in all earthly enjoyments no∣thing is more desirable then health, without which the whole Series or length of life is an heavy and unsupportable burthen of miseries depressing of the most heroick and noblest spi∣rits; Therefore there is nothing more profita∣ble and excellent then those things which do either preserve the present life, or restore the same anew when brought almost to the last act on the Theater of Mortality. Those Re∣medies which do restore or renew nature, whose benefits if once discerned by the Patient, how can he chuse but to affirm, that in them he hath found the immediate acting hand of a Deity? Hence is that most antient preroga∣tive of Physitians, not onely acquired by ad∣mission, and their function, but also rendred illustrious, and noted by a regal benevolence, and affection, by how much the greater pru∣dence, experience, and happy and succesful ap∣plications hath equalized them to the God of Nature. This felicity or happy application of Remedies being erected on the foundation of Science, and receiving its rise from the same, is absolutely necessary for a judicious Physi∣tian; wherefore having found out the enemies to Nature, industriously and artificially di∣gested and compounded Remedies, which lie on derivative or transient efficacy and vertue, penetrate the most secret parts of the body, ex∣pelling the enemies to Nature from their for∣tresses, and strong holds, and strengthening the inward parts against a second onset, by repressing and excluding of their Wiles. Such a Physitian is Morellus (if I may so say without prejudice) or was at the least, as no under∣standing man can safely deny, whom for to commend, is out of my sphere; his genius, learning, indefatiable pen, and excellent ac∣complishments now above the vein of my pen, as the stellified Heavens, and planetary Orbs are above the meteors, the stile, and fruit, and benefit of the same sufficiently speak of him: for a Tree doth not feed without Apples, though it do boast with spreading branches, and vainly delude with blossomes; should I go about to express the sublimeness of the work, the weakness of my Genius would fail in ex∣pressing of the same; how should I elevate, or exalt its perfection which is apparently ma∣nifestly to all? yet though the confession of two or three, yea all may take place, and testifie an undubitable probation, removing all scruple, or contradicting that vanity or presumption which may cast scurrillous aspersions by an approved testimony, I shall here make known to the Reader, that this Tract published and sent into the world was compiled by the illu∣strious and famous man Peter Morellus, in the most famous and antient Ʋniversity of Montpelier, being first privately communi∣cated to me, and by me divulged, neither shall I acknowledge any other Author but
Morel∣lus, it being the chief Dispensatory from whence others have borrowed, as Renodeus witnesses, and in one word all the Tumultuary Dispensatories, who have washt off tenement but from him; vnd the Reader, in having Mo∣rellus, hath Homers Works in one Nutshel, the quintessence of practical Physick, and A∣pothecaries Art, so that he may desist from buying others of the like nature. Now I shall evidence as much as in me lyeth why you should be moved to publication of the same, as I have discerned by your Letters to me; first for the good of the Aesculapian practitioners, and laborious Initiates in the Art of Physick, shewing the way, and assisting their endea∣vours by the light of your admirable method for the ascension of the Muses mount. Also to animate such who though they have taken their degrees, yet never as yet have conflicted with an adversary, or else being unskilful lea∣ders, both in order, time, and place, fear him as wanting those armes, and Auxiliary helps which should elude and nonplus his stratagems and designs, of which sort of men when you perceived and understood many adorned with the Title triumphantly, and in a bravado, though inglorious, yet vainly to glory, great in name, but smal and bare in knowledg, bor∣rowing formes of Remedies from learned men, or else confounding of the balsome with Assa Faetida, Aloes with Sugar, Pils with Electua∣ries, and Potions with Decoctions, and so transcending the doses, or never arriving at the same, either by no examination of the Ingredients, or else to the prejudice and great danger of the party affected; you have there∣fore resolved to eject them from the society of Physitians and skilful Apothecaries, and also to have a respect to the Publick good and wel∣fare. Oh the worthy praise of a generous spi∣rit! thus to mind the publick safety, and parti∣cular worth of such a master, in recollecting those favours received from him, and commemori∣sing them with a large encomium of his insig∣nal deserts. My last request Sir is, that you would eternize his memory both with tongue and Pen, from the gulfe and shiprack of oblivi∣on, in asserting him from the injury of a sur∣reptious honour; for my own part, seeing this Treatise intituled by one to whom I did com∣municate the same, who toucht with an itch of fame, hath sought a diserving from the en∣deavours of another in setting forth this Book, and wholly changing of the method, you present∣ly judged such an arrogancy worthy of suppres∣sion, and the whole work without fucation, or violation by a proposterous method, to be di∣vulged and communicated to the world in the name of the right Author, who for his great paines and study employed in Physick his sin∣gular affection towards the Germane Nations his candideness, and lastly The great Emolu∣ment conferd by him on the Family of the Muses and all Man-kind, doth deserve an eternal honour and name, freed from the dust and inclosure of the Sepulchre, well knowing how unjust a thing it is for one to be elated with the paines of another man, and to deprive the right owner of his deserved praise, according to that admonition of the acute and noble Scaliger, Exercitation
160. Section 3. where he saith, I shall willingly leave, dimis∣sively grant, and liberally bestow on every one the praise and reward of his labour, not like to some drones and ungrateful persons who are so impudent as to usurp the Titles which are de∣servedly bestowed and placed upon others, dis∣sembling of the gratitude which they do owe, by their malitiousness abolishing the memory of the right Author, that they may ascribe the same to themselves; hut these new Ʋpstarts, new Judges of Causes shall have their Consci∣ences for an accuser, and posterity for their Judges. If this had been throughly considered by this new seeker of Honour, the very shadow of such a man would have deterred him from ever claiming of the Book of Morellus for his own. At first I happily admired at the in∣considerateness of the man; may be he supposed that the fraud of an ignoble planet might ob∣scure and counterfeit the beames and light of the sun, or else when the sun is once set, that it shall never rise again, or at last never dissipate those thick clouds and mists which do labour to ecclipse his rays and brightness; or lastly, that none of the other stars would attest the derivation of the light; so let him go and as∣sume the reward assigned him by Scalger. Fi∣nally, in this you have evidenced that the Ʋniversity of Montpelier, as in former Ages, so also in this of ours hath by a naturall pronity and felicity been productive in learned men, (as Ophir is of Gold, India of Gemmes,
Pactolus and Tagus of Gold oar, Gallia Narbonensis of the graine Kermes, Rosema∣ry, and other wholsome herbes; and therefore in other things giving place to none, he that shall undertake to number them all in one con∣tinued Series for the space of six hundred years, and following, may with the like pre∣sumption attempt the calculation of the stars. Certainly he can hardly collect these of the first magnitude, those Men I mean who have gloriously shone forth in this Olympus of A∣pollo for learning and writing; let the flower of this Academy suffice for an instance, Ber∣nard Gordonius, Arnoldus Villanovanus, Stephen Arnoldus, Gerard de solo, An∣selm de Janua, Guido de Cauliaco, Va∣lescus de Taranta, John de Tornamira, Fal∣co Schyron, Dionysius Fontanius, An∣tonius Sapporta, William Rondolet, John Bocand, Andreas Laurentius, and in my time the great Francis Ranchinus Chancel∣lor of the Ʋniversity; he having adorned me with the Docteral Laurel, John Varrandeus, Jacob Pradillius, and the rest of the regious professors, and illustrious Councellors, noble for their deserts; Lastly, famous Morellus which shall give a testimony of the rest, which I have not mentioned, who either through the default of time, or envy of the destines, have sustained a suppression of their Names. So that it shall be a step to Virtue and Eternity of fame to be admitted into this Temple of Aescu. lapius, to admire and adore these bright and shining lights, to be rendred illustrious by them, and exhaust ful Springs of Science from them, and in the end immortall honour shall be the Crown of their endeavours, seeing that I have nought else to say of Morellus, he as I said before, being above the Elegies of my Pen, his Works do sufficiently testifie his praise, and you your self understand wel enough. Go on in your laudible enterprise, and spin out the whole thred you have begun in opening of the Morellion fount, from whence you derive your Name, replenish the sublime wits of the Studient, with the plentiful flowing waters of his braine. Fare-well, happily follow the foot∣steps of those illustrious Physitians of Basil, Plater, Bauhine, Stupom, so that you may live long to the good of the Common-wealth of Aesculapius.
The BOOK-SELLER To all ingenious PRACTITIONERS IN PHYSICK. LEARNED READERS, NExt to my happiness of having this Author so carefully Tran∣slated for the publick benefit, I thought it not the least part of my Duty to dedicate his Labours to your ingenuous perusals more especially, as I know that it could not but be accepta∣ble in respect of the Authors preheminence and esteem amongst the best Writers of his time; for these and some other more weighty considerations I could not enter∣taine
a higher ambition then to pre∣sent you with his Dispensatory, as I knew you the most equal Judges in these studies, and as you have ever been the continual and indefatigable preservers of my Country-men; I do acknowledge it is grown too much a custome to have physical Authors englisht, more especially as some of them have been surreptitiously, ad∣venterously, and dangerously set forth, whereas if civil approaches had been made to you for your safe and more learned approbations, I dare with con∣fidence affirm it, that the Nations had been preserved from so many to be lamented Empericall destructions, under which without your timely and future preventions, they are still like∣ly to groane. This Volumne with all its accomplishments onely waits and attends on you as a servant and fathfull testimonial of that I shall ever cordi∣ally wish, that the best endeavou∣rers for the publick good would ad∣dresse themselves to you honestly, and modestly making known to the World,
that it conduceth to their Reputations to be subservient to your censures, on such, and no other termes this volumn is presented to you by.
Prolegomena.
THe Composition of Medicines may be considered two ways; first, ac∣cording to their external form; Secondly, according to their in∣ternal, which doth wholly belong to the method of Physick. This again may be considered two manner of ways; for either it doth shew on what basis a compounded Medicine doth consist, whe∣ther it be Convective, Preservative, or decoctive, wholly to be taken from the nature of the Indi∣cation; or an Alterative Medicament; as for example, such a one which is heating in the se∣cond degree, consisting of divers simples, and those hot in the first, second, or third degree; or else cold in the same degrees, according to the indications, which do shew many or few must be used in a dosis, that the end may adae∣quately result, I shall not discourse of this inter∣nal Medicine, considered according to its inter∣nal form, but rather of the former, which doth per∣spicuously teach after what manner. The Medicinal may be concinnated into divers and convenient forms, either as the desire of the sick, which is not always the same, or the affections, or Morbi∣fical causes, or the various constitution of the part affected doth require, according to that Phi∣losopher in the last book of his Analyticks. Learn∣ing & every discipline proceedeth from apermitted cognition. Wherefore I shal premise those things which are necessary to be known; so that the Prologomena, may be reduced to four heads; the first of Medicinal weights and Measures. The se∣cond of the Notes and abbreviations of Physitians; the third is a Tractate of the differences and distributions of forms; & the Fourth what things are to be observed in every form. 1. Of the Weights and Measures used in Physick. SEeing that the whole manner of Composition doth depend on the proportion of simples, which are estimated by Weight, Measure, Num∣ber, and bulk: I shall therefore necessarily insist on them. First dry things are generally expended by weight; which having divers differences in the Monuments of the Antients, the more used are to be followed by our Physitians in their pre∣scriptions. A grain is the basis and foundati∣tion of the weight (as the unite of numbers, ad∣equate in weight to a white Peppercorn. A scruple, which according to the Antients should
contain 24 grains, yet according to an ill recei∣ved use hath now but twenty. Drachma, a dram hath three scruples. Ʋncia, an ounce hath eight drams; where note by the way, that when three are prescribed by the Name of a Measure, they are termed quarta∣rium, or a quarter of a pound. Libra, a pound hath twelve ounces. Mensurae, or Measures are for liquids, designed by vessels and ounces; for the modern Physiti∣ans do not measure in certain hollow vessels as the Antients were wont, but estimate the mea∣sures by weight, so that every meafure may be an∣swerable exactly to the weights: now seeing that the same weight of Liquids is not correspondent to the weight of Arids. The quantity of Medicines in magnitude is prescribed by handfuls, Fasciculi, and Pugils. Manipulus, is that quantity which may be held in the hand, answerable to half an ounce. Fasciculus, as much as one can hold, or in∣close within the arm. Pugillus, a Pugilis either greater or lesse; the greater is as much as may be taken in all the five fingers; the lesser Pugil as much as may be taken in three fingers; the greater in weight a whole dram, the lesser half a dram. In number also the quantity of Medicines is considered, and that either equally, or unequally as for example by three or four Lupines. In species, the orders of Medicaments are con∣sidered; Roots, Barks, and Wood are weighed. Leaves are measured by Manipulus; but if pre∣scribed
for baths by Fasciculs; for leaves observe that in purging potions they are used to the third part of a Manipule. The doses of seeds are for the most part ex∣pressed, yet Barley and Rife are measured by the Pugil. Flowers are also defined by the Pugil. Fruits are either greater or less; if less, as Co∣rans and Raisins, are exhibited by weight or num∣ber; if greater, as Apples, Prunes, and Figgs, they are presented in number. Aromaticks, Gums, and Rosins are difined by weight. Efficatious, and pretious Liquors, and distilled oyls by drops. 2. Of Physical abbrevations, and Notes. PHysitians with less difficulty, and loss of time have certain letters by which either weights in the place of words are expressed in their forms, or else certain abbreviations do design the beginning or end of the form.
The Notes of Weights used by Physitians and Apothecaries. Gr. gr. Noteth A Grain. ℈ ss Noteth Half a scruple. ℈ j Noteth A scruple. ʒ j Noteth A dram. ʒ ss Noteth Half a dram. ℥ j Noteth An ounce. ℥ ss Noteth Half an ounce. lb j Noteth A pound. lb ss Noteth Half a pound. M j Noteth Manipule, or handful. M ss Noteth Half a Manipule. P Noteth A pugil. quart. Noteth A quartary, or 3 ounc. ana Noteth Ana. i. e. an equal pound or measure of two or more Medi∣cines. an. part. aeq. Noteth The equal parts of eve∣ry one of them. q. s. Noteth What suffiseth, or a suf∣ficient quantity. Ʋnder one general Title are sometimes comprehen∣ded Simples. The five greater opening Roots. Parsley, Fennel, Asparagus, Petroselinum, and Ruscus.
The five lesser opening Roots. Guajacum, Rubia, Elecampany, Capparis, and Ononidis. The five mollifying Herbs. Mallows, Althea, Violet leaves, Mercury, Acanthus, or Brancha Ursina. To the same add Wall-flowers, Bettony, and Atriplex. The five Capillary Herbs. Adianthum, or Venus hair. Adianthum Mirum album, or Ruta murar. Polytrichon Aureum. Trichomanes, Asplenium, or Ceterach, The four great hot Seeds. Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Carraway-seeds, Cummin-seeds. The four lesser hot Seeds. Of Parsley, Of Ammonium, Of Daucus, Of Ammeos. The four greater cold Seeds. Cowcumber-seeds, Gord-seeds,
Citrual seeds, Melon seeds. The four lesser cold Seeds. Endive-seeds, Scariol-seeds, Lettice-seeds, Marjoram-seeds. The four Cordial Flowers. Bugloss-flowers. Borage flowers, Rose flowers, Violet flowers. The fragments of fine pretious Stones. Of Saphires, Of Granat, Of Smaragd, Of Hyacinth, Of Sardus. The four waters for the Pleuresie. Carduus Mariae, Taraxacon Carduus Benedictus, Scabious. The three Stomack Oyls. Wormwood Oyl, Cydonia, or Oyl of Oranges, Oyl of Mastick. The four hot Unguents. Aragon, Martiatum, Althea, and Agrippa's Oyntment.
The four cold Oyntments. Album Camphoratum, Rosatum Mesuae, Populeon, Infridans Galeni. 3. Of the differences of forms and distributions of this Tractate. IN way of a foundation, by the word form, I here understand a compounded Magisterial Medicine, which is such an one as is prescribed by the Physitian for the present occasion; to dif∣ference the same from the Apothecaries, of which I shal not here largely or purposely treat; but on∣ly by the way for the affinity of the Argument. This Tractate is divided into two Books, wherof the first is of internal medicines, the latter of ex∣ternal. The first book again hath three Secti∣ons; the first for the Forms and Compositions of Liquid Medicines; the second of Soft Medi∣cines; and the third and last of Solid Medicines. The heads and forms of this Section. CHAP. I. 1 Of an Apozeme 1 2 Of a Julip 24 3 Of a Potion 30 4 Of a Syrrup 51 5 Of a Vomitory 72
6 Of Medicated Wines 81 7 Of an Emulsion 8 Of Ammygdalate 9 Of Hordeatum 10 Of Milk and Whey 11 Of Hydromel 12 Of Water and Sugar with Barley Water 13 Of the Diet 14 Of Dragon-broth 15 Of a Restorative Distillation 16 Of Broths and Potages The Chapters and Forms of the second Section. CHAP. I. 1 Of the Bolus 129 2 Of Opiates 134 3 Of Comfits and Conserves 143 4 Of Preserves 146 The Chapters and Forms of the third Section. CHAP. I. 1 Of Pasta Regna 148 2 Of Pandaleon 150 4 Of Poineolate 4 Of Tablets 5 Of Pills 6 Of Powders
The Second Book hath two Sections, the first of common Remedies in divers parts, the second of proper Remedies. CHAP. I. 1 Of an Epitheme 169 2 Of a Lotion 173 3 Of a Fotion 176 4 Of a Bath 181 5 Of a stove or Sudatory 183 6 Of Embrocation 185 7 Of the Liniment 188 8 Of Unguents 190 9 Of a Cerecloth 194 10 Of an Emplaster 196 11 Of the Spanadrap 198 12 Of a Cataplasm 200 13 Of Rubisicating medicines The Dropax, 203 14 Of Physical baggs The Vesicatory. 205 The Chapters and Forms of the Second Section, the Remedies proper to certain parts. CHAP. I. 1 Of Frontal 2 Of Oxyrrhodinum 3 Of Cucupha 4 Of a Gargarism. For the Nose. 3 Of a liquid Unguent 6 Of a Phlegmatick Purgation
7 Of a Dentrifice or Medicine for the cleansing of the Teeth 8 Of an Errhinum or Medicine for the Nostrils 9 Of a Suffiment. 10 Of an Odoriferous Medicine. For the Stomach. A Scutum or Releeving Medicine. For the Womb. Pessarum or a Medicine for the Womb. For the Arse-hole. Of a Suppository. Of a Glyster. Of a Nascale. Also divers injections. What Heads are to be observed in the Com∣position of every Medicine. In the Composition of every Medicine three things must be observed. The Form or Composition, the Use, and the Pro∣fit. In the Composition on the Material part we shall observe in our prescriptions quantity, quali∣ty, and order; where generally note that qua∣lity must be noted in single; and those first most Appropriate and Efficacious, that in as much as possible may be, the party affected may be resto∣red to health very suddenly. Secondly, They must be Safe, that if they do not remedy, they may no wise prejudice the par∣ty, though in desperate Diseases, desperate Me∣dicines may be used with an exquisite Judge∣ment.
Thirdly, They must be Pleasant and Jucund, in colour, smel, and tast, yet contrary and resist∣ant to the disease, and in so doing, you may happily put a gloss on nature.
Fourthly, such Remedies as are experienced and approved; for these will more safely cure then those which are newly found out by a Phy∣sitian, though of the greatest judgement; for the quantity in a continuity they must all be mode∣rate, not commending the use of an ounce when a dram is sufficient. More specifically, those Medicines which are bitter or nauseating, neither in taste or smell, not being easily retain∣ed or taken by the Patient, must therefore be compounded in a less dosis; for the discreete quantity or number of the ingredients, those compositions must not be used where their simples are sufficient. Also in the compositions of simples avoid much a vast and high bulk made like a theriacal Medicine; these kind of Medi∣cines causing a loathing in the sick who taketh the same, and a trouble to the Apothecary, in compounding or forming of the Paste on that account, causing an omission, depriving the Physitian of his hope, and the sick of the operation of the Medicine, with the losse of his health. For the order of the prescrip∣tion, though nought of the strength of the me∣dicine do sink after what sort soever the Simples are prescribed, so they are rightly prepared, yet it is far better, and more ele∣gantly to observe such an order in the pre∣scription, as I have described in every form, so that in the general I have nothing more worthy of animadversion in the use of the prescribed form; First consider the quantity, or dosis, then the time, and lastly the use; hence the words adnected, in which the form is con∣ceived. In the Utility I shall shortly and plain∣ly demonstrate the universal fruit which doth e∣merge from the form of every medicine in the Genus and the Species.
These two Physical Phrases are fit to be known by all English Men; Printed for N. Brooke, at the Angel in Cornhill. ADAM in EDEN, or the Paradise of Plants; a compleat Hi∣story of Plants, Fruits, Herbs and Flowers. With their time of Flourishing and decreasing. Together with their Physical Vertues; a Work fit to be known by all English men, by W.C. M: D. and others,
THE DOCTORS DISPENSATORY: OR THE APOTHECARY HIS SHOP OPENED. SECTION 1. OF LIQƲID MEDICINES. CHAP. 1. Of Apozems and Decoctions. THat which the Latines cal Decocti∣on, the Greeks cal Apozem, proper∣ly derived from  which signifies to heat or boyl.
But now an Apozem is onely that liquid form of a Medicine which is made of a Liquor saturated with the vertues of divers ingredients, relished with Su∣gar or Honey clarified, and spiced, repared in a sufficient quantity for four or five doses, either to purge or alter. Apozems are two-fold one of the antients, now out of use; another of modern Writers, of which I here write; and from the general effect of it, it is two-fold, altering and purging. Altering Apozems, or Decoctions. THat is called an altering Apozem or Decocti∣on which hath a vertue to alter the body, and things contained in it, especially the Humours, without that visible evacuation which is usually called purging. Such altering Apozems either alter the body in the qualities only, and these are properly called alterers in general, or else as they are made of divers simples relating to each particular part, they are termed cephalical, cordial, hepatical, &c. and these deserve to be accounted specifical alter∣ers. Or else (and that usually) they are given to make way for a succeeding purge, and free the bo∣dy from obstructions, and these are called opening Apozems.
They alter humors either in the first or second qualities, and that either without intention of purging, and these are called simply altering apo∣zems, as heating, &c. or else also in the second qualities, and with intention of future purging, and these are generally called preparers; or else as they have relation to particular humors, they are specially termed preparers of phlegme, Chol∣er, &c. To these Apozems are to be referred divers de∣coctions, which are used to provoke the courses, Urine, & sweat, as those water-wasting Medicines hereafter to be mentioned. But enough of them; in an altering Apozem these three things (as most relating to a method of Physick) are to be chiefly considered, viz. 1. Composition: 2. Use or manner of prescribing. 3. Benefit gained by them. In Composition six things are diligently to be considered. 1. The matter out of which the vertues are to be drawn. 2. The Liquor into which it is to be convey∣ed, and the ingredients to be put thereinto. 3. The decoction, both in boyling and after. 4. What things are to be dissolved in it. 5. The clarifying of it. 6. The aromatizing or seasoning it with spi∣ces, &c. to make it grateful. In the Matter these three things are to be regard∣ed: 1. The Quality. 2. The Quantity. 3. The rea∣son and order in the prescription. Concerning the quality: the matter or ingre∣dients, prescribed in Apozems or other decocti∣ons, are chiefly roots, barks, woods, leaves, seeds, fruits, flowers, spices. The quantity or Dose in which the afore∣said things are prescribed are thus to be mode∣rated. Roots are not to exceed 4 ounces, or six at the most.
Barks (if they go into the compsition) one ounce, o 2 ounces at most. Woods in the same quantity. Leaves are to be not above 8 large handfuls, or 10 at most. Seeds to one ounce, or an ounce and half, seldom to 2 ounces. Fruits are either the lesser sort, as Raisins &c. which are prescribed two several wayes, either in weight, as from one ounce to two ounces, or else in number, and that usually by pairs, as to 4.6.10.20 pair. Or the greater, & then they are prescribed on∣ly in number, either even or odd, if they be of the greatest sort, (as Apples sliced, &c.) then 1, 2, 3, &c. but if they are less, as Figgs, &c. they are prescri∣bed by pairs, a ♃ ficuum ping-paria 20, &c. Flowers, from Pugil. 4 to 6. Spices are better added in the seasoning then in the boyling; yet if it seem requisite, in purging Apozems you may prescribe them from two drams to half an ounce at most. Concerning the order of the prescription: as they are to be prepared by the Apothecary, so ought they to be prescribed by the Physitian, viz: first roots, (then barks and woods, if any be ad∣ded.) 2 Leaves. 3 Seeds. 4 Fruits. 5. Flowers, and with them the spices last of all. The Liquor in which these are to be boyled is to be considered, either in quality or quanti∣ty. In relation to the quality, it is varied according to the intention of the physitian; but gener∣ally fountain, or the best wel water is prescribed to the decoction of most Apozems. Yet oftentimes
when the intention is to cool and cleanse (as in cholerick affections) they prescribe barly water; but if to attenuate, cut, and cleanse, and heat, as in phlegmatick affections, then the smaller sort of Mead; in Melancholick distempers Whey, and sometimes in obstructions of the Intrals chalibe∣ated water: and sometimes the decoctions are prescribed by Physitians to be made in Wine and Water, of each like quantities; but it is better to add wine only in the latter end. The Quantity of the Liquor is seldom prescrib∣ed by the Physitian, onely by q. s. or as much as is sufficient: yet it vvere to be lookt to, that by adding too much Liquor the things might not be over-boyled, to reduce it to a reasonable pro∣portion, or by taking too little, the vertues not sufficiently extracted &c. DECOCTION: The ingredients being recited, and ordered how to be managed, are prescribed to be made into a decoction by a fiat Decoct: &c. to wit, in the Liquor afore mentioned, which is commonly singly set down without determining to what quantity the Liquor ought to be wasted; yet usually it is prescribed to vvhat quantity it should be consum'd, as fiat decoct. &c. to one pint, or one pint and a half, &c: either way is allowa∣ble, so that the Decoction being finished it be pre∣scribed to take of the decoction strained, a pint, or a pint and a half, &c. for Apozems are usual∣ly intended for four Doses; and if you take one pint and a half, there wil be for every Dose about 4 ounces and a half more or less; but if you intend it for five Doses, prescribe 20 ounces and no more, for else it is apt to corrupt or mould before it be spent.
Things to be dissolved in these Decoctions are either to help them to keep the longer, or to give them the better relish, or to add strength and effi∣cacy to them; and in all these we must consider both quality and quantity. In respect of their quality, either it is 1. some syrup only, and that such as is proper both for the disease and part affected, and this should always be added, both because it helps to sweeten the de∣coction, and imparts its own virtues to it; by which means are also helped the defects of the Apozem it self; and other faults which may arise, either by the carelesnes, covetousness, or malice of the Apothecary, are much prevented. 2. Sugar alone in some affections, and humors as wel hot as cold. 3. Syrup and Sugar together. 4ly. Or Honey, which is profitable in all cold affections of the Head and breast, and in the vvin∣ter; and this is used either simply, or Medicat∣ed: i: e: altered by the infusion of some simples or other, as honey of Roses, honey of Rosemary flowers, &c. in affections of the head proceeding from abundance of slimy flegm. 5ly. Besides these sweetners, one or two of which are alwayes to be mixt with every apo∣zem, there are oftentimes very commodious∣ly (to make it the more effectual) mixed with them; Either the juyces of divers herbs, according to the several intentions of the Physician: as the juyces of Fumitory and Hops, in Melancholy; of Borage and Bugloss, if choler be mixed with it; as also the juyces of Sorrel or Mercury in divers affe∣ctions of the Womb, and suppression of the Termes &c.
Or the juyces of fruits, and those for the most part acid, as the juyce of Limons, in cholerick; the juyce of Pippins, in Melancholick; and of Pome∣granats, in cholerick distempers where Urine is also to be provoked; Or juyces in more vulgar use, as 1 Vinegar in ho and cholerick affections, which powerfully extinguisheth heat, or else to open obstructions, though cold ones; and also to cut and make thin gross humors; yet because it is hurtful to the Womb, in Women you must abstain from the use of it. 2. Wine in cold affections and tempers, in gross and clammy humors, obstructions, or when you would have the vertue of the Medicine penetrate far into the body. 3. Aqua vitae, &c. to the same intention that Wine is added. Note that when juyces or other Liquors are to be dissolved in your Apozems, then sugar alone is usually chosen to sweeten it, very seldom sy∣rups. The quantity of things to be dissolved dif∣fers according to the nature of them. Sweetners are usually dissolved from 4 ounces to six oun∣ces at most; so that every dose of the Apozem may have between an ounce, and an ounce and half in every Dose, which is the common quan∣tity for doses. But where syrup and sugar are mixed together, the quantity of the syrup is for the most part a∣bout three ounces, and the sugar prescribed only with a q.s. is left to the palate of the Patient to de∣termine.
Juyces and other strong Liquors, as Vinegar, A∣qua vitae, &c. are prescribed from one ounce to two ounces at the most; these also may first be dissolved with the quantity of your sweet∣ners. Clarifying, and Aromatizing. THese are usually prescribed thus, Fiat Apo∣zema clarificatum & aromatizatum pro qua∣tuor dosibus, i: e: let your apozem be clarified, a∣romatized, and prepared for four doses. Of clarification see hereafter. IN the Aromatizing or spicing two things are to be considered, the quality and quantity of your spices. In relation to the quantity, either it is done with some simple spice, as in a cooling Apozem with yellow, or red Saunders; in a heating Apozem, usually with Cinnamom, (you may also add Gin∣ger and Saffron, in Melancholy affections, or where the Termes are to be provoked) but in cold affections of the breast, powder of the root of Ireos Florentine is much used. Or else with some compound powder of the shops; as in hot distempers, with the spices of Diatrion Santalon; and in cold diseases the spices of Aromaticum Ro∣satum, &c. The quantity of spices for aromatizing your A∣pozem, is, if it be a simple spice, from one dram to two drams; but if it be with the compound spices, from one dram to a dram and a half wil suffice.
The use or form of prescribing is this. ℞. i: e: Take &c. (viz. the matter or ingredi∣ents) make a decoction in s. q. of the Liquor be∣fore-mentioned, take of the decoction strained, &c. make an Apozem clarified and aromatized with, &c. for four doses in several mornings, or for evenings two hours before meat. The utility or benefit of this form of Medicine is evident; for being liquid the humors that are to be altered (or purged, as hereafter) or other af¦fections deeply rooted in the body are by this form easier penetrated unto, and by the virtue of the Medicine, and fluidness of its form dissol∣ved, and made more obedient; besides the drought of the body is tempered, Melancholy obstructions the easier melted and dissolved, and the body made fitter to receive the vertue of succeeding Medicines. But more especially an altering Apozem serves chiefly for
1. Preparation, to render the succeeding purging easie and succesful, which consists in two things, the preparation of the humors, and the body; for they are prescribed for the concoction of the hu∣mors, or preparation of them in the first and se∣cond qualities, by heating cold humors, attenu∣ating and cutting gross humors, by cleansing the clammy and viscid, tempering theservent, incras∣sating those which are too thin, that by the Coope∣ration of the purge attracting, and nature expel∣ling, they may be the easier exterminated; as to the preparation of the body, by opening obstru∣ctions, and making the body it self permeable, and passable, that the humor may have an easie course, it renders the following purge prosperous, to the commodity and ease of the sick party. 2ly. For alteration either of the humors or bo∣dy, without regard to any purge, when the parts are to be reduced to their former temper divers wayes, but chiefly by heating and cooling; and the humors also, especially hot & boyling Choler; or the other humors also by other reasons with these instead of Juleps may be fitly altered. 3ly. In opening Obstructions, if they proceed from gross adust humors; else if they rise from cold humours, let your Apozem be purging 4ly: For moving Ʋrines, cleansing the Reins, and clearing them from gravel. 5ly. For provoking the Termes although two pur∣gers conducing to the same purpose are usually mixed with them. Here is to be noted, that of late amongst modern practisers, tis usual to make all Apozems both pur∣ging and altering at once, as shal be said, and in the place of altering Apozems, Juleps, or broths are for the most part used; but simply altering Apozems in continual Fevers, hot distempers of the parts and hu∣mors; and also in moving of Ʋrine, in extinguishing the fervency of the Reins, and other parts, and consuming the relicks of the Morbifical causes which in the decli∣nation of Fevers is most usually done by Ʋrines. But Apozems are for the most part prescribed in the Spring and Fal; as also in the summer, be∣cause at these times Herbs flourish, and are ready at hand: they may also be prepared in winter of the parts of Herbs dryed, with greater efficacy if they may be had; else we must use syrups and Juleps, which are instead of Apozems, though not so efficacious.
A purging Apozem. A Purging Apozem which is now most in use and not unknown of old to Mesues, is so called because at once it both prepares the hu∣mours, and empties those which are already con∣cocted, and this at divers times, (viz: 4 or 5) sensibly, by that operation which is called Epicra∣sis, by the virtue of those Medicines which are properly called purgers, and is most agreeable in long diseases, arising from copious and stubborn humors. And this Apozem according to the several na∣ture of the humour it is appropriated to, is either Phlegmagogum, Melanagogum, Cholagogum, or Hy∣dragogum. In this sort of Apozems three things are to be considered, the Composition, the Ʋse, and the Pro∣fit. In the Composition two things are to be re∣garded. 1. The ingredients by which it is made purgative. 2. Those things that are to be dissol∣ved in it. The matter or ingredients by which it is made purging, are simple purgers with their corre∣ctives, according to the variety of the humour they are intended for, either boyled together with the matter of the decoction, or boyled in the decoction, or else only infused in it.
In these three things are to be regarded the qua∣lity, quantity, and order of prescription either for boyling or mixing. In relation to the Quality note that those pur∣ging simples which are only boyled are these, Senna, Polypody, Carthamus, Turbith, Hermodactils, Agarick Epithymum, Hellebor, Spurge, and the seeds of dwarf Elder. But those which use only to be infused, or very little boyled, are RHEUBARB, Myrobolans, Tamar∣inds, and sometimes Cassia. Concerning their quantity, they ought to be pre∣scribed in such a proportion that it may serve for four or five doses, but in general because the purging vertue by boyling either may vanish, or not be sufficiently extracted, every purging sim∣ple ought to be prescribed in much greater quan∣tity then otherwise, viz: double to the quantity they are given in substance, if they are the strong∣er sort; or treble, or quadruple, if they are of the middle sort of purgers; or a fix-fold proportion in the gentlest sort: yet are they so to be prescribed that to two parts of the gentlest sort of purgers you must add but one part of the strongest, and al∣most in every purging Apozem let these three be prescribed as the basis of the decoction in a plen∣tiful proportion, viz: Senna, Polipody, and
Cartha∣mus: let others be added according to the diver∣fity of the humor; but in a lesser proportion, from one ounce to an ounce and half at most, in the in∣terim having regard to the nature of the humor, as also its distemper, either in first or second qua∣lities; and lastly, its quantity, in like manner, to the temper and constitution of the body, the cu∣tom of purging, natural inclination, condition of the country, time of the year, weather, sex and age, and al other things limiting a Legitimate purging, and to those things that may make easie or difficult the succeeding purgation; and accor∣dingly the stronger or weaker purgers are to be given in the greater or less quantity. More specially therefore these three are to be cho∣sen for the fundamentals of almost every purg∣ing Apozem, (for they are convenient in Apo∣zems that purge, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and waterish humors, and that purge Choler also, where Senna is chiefly necessary) which things are wont to be prescribed thus at Mompelier. Take the leaves of Oriental Senna, The pith of the seed of Carthamus, Polypody of the Oak new gathered, ana: two oun∣ces, two ounces and a hal, three ounces for the ground of the decoction; yet so that sometimes you may prescribe a bigger quantity of one, sometime of the other, according as your intention is to purge this or that humor most. But if Flegme be to be evacuated, to the a∣foresaid basis or foundation you may add of Gummy choice Turbith ha an ounce, or six drams. Hermodactils half an ounce, or 6 drams. Agarick newly made into Trosches tyed up in a lawn rag, half an ounce, or six drams; (and sometimes) Rheubarbtyed also in a ragg half an ounce, or six drams; or else it may be infused by it self and afterward the infusion added.
Yet you need not add Turbithor Hermodactils, unless you have a purpose to purge very strongly, or draw humors from the remotest parts; other∣wise the two last may suffice. But if Melancholy be to be emptied (if you wil leave out Carthamus from the aforesaid basis, augmenting the quantity of the others) let these be added. Epithymum of Crete six drams, or 1 ounce. The roots or shavings of black Hellebor 2 drams, or half an ounce, (but this seldom, and onely in stubborn Melancholy.) But Agarick and Rheubarb are oftner mixed with things that purge Melancholy, perhaps be∣cause these durable obstructions are fomented by clammy muscilaginous humors. If choler be to be gently purged, you shal add to Senna (prescribed alone for your basis, to cleanse adust excrements.). Tamarinds an ounce and half, or two ounces. Choice Rheubarb, &c. as before, half an ounce, or 6 drams. The bark of citrine myrobalans (rubbed with oyl of sweet Almonds) half an ounce. Yet 'tis better onely to infuse the Myroba∣lans, lest they should impart to the Apozem a great∣er astriction then you intend. But if watrish and serous humors are to be drawn away, to the aforesaid basis you shal joyn. The roots of Ireos common one ounce. The middle bark of Elder or Danewort two drams, or 3 drams. The leaves of Soldanella. M. j.
Hermodactils half an ounce. The roots of Mechoacan infused by it self half an ounce. Spurg (where you would purge strongly) prepared with Vinegar one dram. The purgers of Phlegm also before spoken of may be added. To these purgers you must joyn their correctors as before; but the dose of them is from two drams to half an ounce. As to the order of prescribing & boyling, pur∣gers in the prescription of an Apozem are placed after the fruits, before the flowers, and the spices or the correctors immediatly after the purgers; nevertheless Polypody, because it is alwayes boy∣ed in the beginning, may also be prescribed at first among the roots. Things to be dissolved in the strained decoction are either dissolved as sweetners only, as those be∣fore numbred in the Altering Apozem, and in the same quantity there mentioned, viz: when the de∣coction of the Apozem of it self is sufficiently pur∣gative: but if on the contrary it be but gently pur∣ging, other catharticks are to be dissolved in the decoction strained; in which also are to be con∣sidered their quality, and quantity. Concerning their quality they are either pur∣ging syrups, and that alwayes if you dissolve no sweetners in it, as syrup of Roses solutive, for cholerick and serous humors; as also (according to the received practice) in al others; syrup of Succory compound, in cholerick humors; syrup of Fumitory, in the aforesaid, and Melancholy.
Or the juyce of Damask Roses newly expres∣sed, or the compleat infusion of them, (which is most usual in the spring; in those cautionary pur∣gations of the cholerick, and them which abound with serous humours) but then you must also pre∣scribe sugar as much as is sufficient. And these are prescribed to be presently dis∣solved in the strained liquor. Or else are they Electuaries of the shops, either in the form of opiates, as usually in the phlegma∣tick, Diaphoenicum, which is also profitable in the cholerick and bastard Tertians: in merely chole∣rick, Diaprunum simple, and solutive; Electuary de Psillio, when to be had, and sometimes Manna-These are prescribed to be dissolved only in the last Dose, and that in the time of present use, if the Apozem be not sufficiently purging of it self, otherwise abstain from them. Concerning their quantity, Syrups may be dissolved to four ounces, or 6 ounces, the juyce or infusion of Roses to four ounces, opiats and tabu∣lets to two drams, or 3 drams, according as either they or the Apozem are more forcible. The use and form of prescription is the same with that of the altering Apozem; in this onely it differs, because it is said, Take, &c. Let it be made an Apozem clarified, (or if we desire it the stronger, not clarified) and aromatized, &c. for four doses in the morn∣ings, in the last of which dissolve some Electuary (when your intention is to eradicate, or when your Apozem hath not sufficiently purged) and so make it into a potion.
It differs also, if before the use of your Apozem a moderate purge should be given, then is said in the prescription for four morning doses, in the first and last of which dissolve such an Electuary, &c. and make a potion. Touching the Commodity, Apozems of late are at once purgers and alterers, for so by little they prepare and concoct the humors, which because they cannot at once be wholly eradicated, are thus by parcels, per epicrasin, drawn forth without vi∣olence; A happy remedy in lasting Chronical dis∣eases which are fomented by an abundance of Phlegmatick and Melancholy humors: these be∣ing the fountain of rebellious and contumacious affections are by this art rooted out; in hot disea∣ses proceeding from fervent humors they are less needful; and if at any time they seem necessary, they are to be composed of the gentler sort of purgers of choler, if it be much; for a smal quan∣tity of matter needs not a divided evacuation, but being simply altered may easily be rooted out with one evacuation; they are also esteemed most convenient in the declination of diseases, to draw away the Reliques, and in preservation to prevent diseases. But it is now generally received, that before the use of this sort of Apozems, some Minorative Me∣dicine may be first prescribed, to diminish the hu∣mors either in the form of a potion, bole or pils, and afterwards by leisurely purging in this man∣ner to prepare them to be wholly eradicated.
ANNOTATIONS. COncerning the MATTER this is chiefly to be ob∣ved, that many do condemn the making your de∣coctions of such variety of things of divers parts: but because it is received in the practice of very famous Physitians (though it may seem to some to augment the pomp of the Receipt, that such large Decoctions or A∣pozems should be prescribed, of Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, Flowers heaped together;) it may very wel be allow'd. This one thing is to be condemned, that when four or five sorts of leaves, &c. wil suffice for the varie∣ty of indications, they should not be multiplied need∣lesly; Or for example, if the latitude of the dose of seeds in the Apozem of eight or twelve several kinds be of each one dram, if half an ounce of two or three sorts wil serve, why should they be augmented; this were to make a Decoction as copious as Treacle, to beget tedi∣ousness in the Apothecary that prepares it, or to give him cause to omit some things, thereby to frustrate the Physitian of his hope, and the Patient of the benefit, to the great indamagement of his health.
2 Concerning the Quantity or Dose of the ingredients of an altering Apozem nothing can be certainly veri∣fied, that may be imitated profitably: the usual law prescribed and confirmed by practice at Mont Pellier, and by the benefit of the sick persons, is that the dose seem not too large, whereby the Patient might loath it; on the contrary, a sparing hand wil hardly be able to give the virtues of the Medicine sufficiently effectual to resist the diseases; if therefore you would have the A∣pozem flaugh with the virtues of the simples, because a sufficient quantity of essence cannot be had unless you prescribe a greater quantity, it ought to be prescribed, for what vertue can you hope for out of half a pound of the matter of your Apozem for four doses; when besides by the ult of a less industrious Apothecary, or his carelesness, or the shortness of his byling, or by his o∣ver-haste (the bonds in which it is restrained not being sufficiently loosed) the virtues are not dissolved and extracted as they ought to be: or else by over-boyling through the vehemency of the heat and fire. And last∣ly, by imprudently uncovering the vessel wherein it is boyled, their vertue may evaporate and vanish: the first defect, and this last less, you may prevent by prepa∣ring your decoctions, plentifully impregnated with the virtues of the simples, not too watrish, or such as may frustrate both Physitian and Patient of their wished ex∣pectation. Therefore in general, let them be prescribed in the aforesaid quantity, seldom in a greater; in something a less, if the simples are dryed, because most effectual; also if either by nature, or the swinge of their virtues, they be of an acute quality, or a bitter or biting taste; or if ungrateful, or if you desire the decoction smal in quan¦tity, or gentle in operation, and so for the contrary.
But in special concerning roots, you must mark that these roots which are usually called openers, though they are by modern Practisers often mixed with others that provoke sweat (and that happily, for by attenuating the humours they are the easier turned into vapours and sweat) yet ought it to be done in a smaller quanti∣ty, as to two ounces or three ounces at most; otherwise they wil turn the attenuated humors to the passages of the Ʋrine which diminisheth sweat; to which intention the Arabians and modern Writers mingle them with the decoction of Lentils against the Smal Pox: them roots also that are very bitter should be added only to the quantity of six drams, or one ounce, as Gentian, Bryony, Elecampane, &c. if they be dryed, half an ounce, or six drams wil be sufficient. So also bitter herbs are to be in a little quantity, un∣less you desire the decoction very effectual, which were to be wished, to which purpose you see the bitterest of all joyned where cold obstructions are, as Centaury the less, Wormwood, to M 2, 3, or 4. But fruits are either prescribed onely to alter; as to cool, sharp Prunes, Apples; to heat, Raisins and figgs, to ten or twelve pair; but when the belly is to be mollified, cleansed, or purged, Raisins, Figgs, sweet Prunes, and Dates may be prescribed to twenty pair, more or less: but in affections of the brest and Lungs hot or cold, they are prescribed in a larger proportion; as Rai∣sins, Ijubes, Sebestens, sweet Prunes, &c. viz: to 30, 40, or 50 pair, yet beware the decoction be not made too thick and clammy, that it can hardly be strained; to which purpose when Figgs are joyned, let them be only to 4 or 8 pair prescribed. Here is to be noted that though seeds are prescribed by weight, yet barlie and red vetches, or cicers, as flow∣ers, are usually prescribed by P: j: or M: ss: so also is Epithymum sometimes with them prescribed to P: j: yet it is also very often prescribed by weight, as one ounce. Concerning Fruit; if they be the lesser sort, as Co∣rans, or if some parts of them are to be excluded, (as Dates prescribed cleared from their strings,) then are they never set down by number, or pairs, but by weight, but the greater, if whole, by number, Tmar∣inds onely by weight, Raisinseither whole or cleansed both by weight and number.
3. As to the QUANTITY of purgers in a purging Apozem, that they may be set down securely, we must note that the purging qualitie cannot be plentiful in decoctions prepared the usual wa; unless the simples are prescribed in a larger quantity, either they may perish in boyling, or not be sufficiently extracted for reasons before rehearsed; to which add this, that Ca∣tharticks are boyled in the liquor of the Apozem, after it is wel thickned and impregnated with the juice and virtues of other simples, by which means their force can∣not so wel be dissolved and mixed with the liquor, be∣cause being first imbibed with the substance of the al∣terers, and by that made thick it cannot so wel insinuat it self into the parts of the matter last added, to dis∣solve and extract the purging qualitie, for this is to be performed by a tenuitie of parts; therefore are they to be prescribed in a greater dose neer this proportion; those things which in substance are given in the smal∣lest quantity should be added (in the decoction) in a double proportion to that they are given in substance (for reasons aforesaid) as those which are vehement, as Turbith, Hermodactils, Hellebor, &c. if they be mo∣derate, as Agarick, &c. let their proportion be trebled: if the weaker sort (as Senna, Polypody, Carthamus, Epithymum, Tamarinds, &c.) a four-fold quantitie may be allowed by the consent of Authors, and truth of practice; from this foundation, because every Apozem is likely prescribed for four doses, the purgers must be taken in such a quantity as may suffice for these four; that is, four several doses of them are to be put into the decoction, as alwaies these three, Senna, Polyooy and Carthamus, after the usual manner, which you must appoint for the basis: as for example, to purge Phlegme four times together, to one ounce, or one ounce and a half of Senna, and as much Polypody; and al∣though
you have prescribed also as much Carthamus, yet shal you add a fourth, as Agarick to half an ounce, or six drams, and you wil have your aim: but if besides Agarick you desire other phlegmagogues, as Turbith, or Hermodactils, then either the dose of this or the others is to be diminished, or at least a less pro∣portion of these stronger is to be prescribed; and this is a general rule safe every where; yet you may prescribe a less quantity in respect of the sex, age, and time of the Year, &c. The Montpelier Physitians out of custom do usually prescribe a greater quantity, as was before noted in the Composition; so that against the common rules of others they take of the gentlest purgers to a six∣fold or eight-fold proportion of the more vehement, as (Turbith) to a four-fold quantity; but although the Montpeliers do this (other circumstances being seen to) securely, yet is it not to be followed in all places, nor the dose so indifferently to be prescribed, but rather relie on the common practice before mentioned; or else search out the several doses of the simples in the sub∣stance, by comparing of which you wil readily find out the several doses for the decoctions: this only is to be  ted, that though Tamarinds by this rule of proporti∣on might be boiled to eight ounces, which is the four-fold proportion, because they are given in substance to two ounces, yet we seldom in the decoction transcend the dose in which they are given in substance, because be∣ing viscid they make the decoction clammy and gros, hard to be clarified. Myrotilans, also though they
purge, yet are they never to be prescribed in the eattr, but alwaies in the less dose, at most to half an ounce, or 6 drams, because they make the decoction too much astringent contrary to the intention of the Phy∣sitian therefore also are they to be only lightly boiled, in an Apozem purely purging, but rather to be infused, as by the counsel of Mesues is rightly admonished a∣gainst the vulgar practice. 4. But the ingredients of either Apozem are not to be prescribed promiscuously in any order, but in a certain manner according to the nature of the things that are to be boiled, & according to that order which the Apothecary observes in preparing decoctions, by the rules of art, as first roots, 2ly. Leaves, &c. and so they add the rest severally to be boiled, as is above set down: yet although this be so, the root of Liquorice, because (for its tenuitie of substance) it is boiled in the rank with the flowers, it may also be prescribed with them; so if sweet Woods, or Aromatical barks, as Cina∣mom be set down with the number of Roots, yet because they ought to be boyled last, for their spirits which are easily vanishing, therefore ought they to be prescribed last, either with or immediatly before the flowers. Seeds should be added after the Leaves, yet the four greater cold Seeds, especially of Melons and Gourds, are prescribed just before the leaves; so your red soicers are to be prescribed either with, or just before the leaves, and Barley is seldom set among the seeds, but with the leaves, for this is chiefly to be boyled; but Mucilaginous seeds are to be added but just before the flowers, as the seeds of Mallows, Marsh Mallows, &c. lest by too long boyling they make the Decoction too thick and troubled. I have before said yt Catharticks are to be prescrib∣ed before the flowers, yet Polypody of the Oak is most usually added amongst the roots, but: Epithymum u∣sually among the Flowers, and often in their quanti∣ty, (viz. by the Pugil.) correctives are to be placed im∣mediatly after the purgers. 5. Concerning the Liquor this is to be noted, that Wine is usually added to Apozems or
Decoctions in cold affections, obstructions, when gross humors are to be attenuated, or when the force of the Medicine is to be conveyed far into the body; but not so conveni∣ently prescribed, when they say, in equal parts of Wine and Water, because tis without commodity: for if by a most gentle heat, nay warmth, the spirit of Wine (from whence Wine hath his acuteness and energie, and without which Wine is but water without life) in di∣stillation doth ascend, and be elevated into the air the vessel being opened in the boyling; what can we hope for but the whole loss of it by such boiling? hence we must conclude that Wine is much more profitably added at the last after boiling. Here is to be noted, that the opening roots are usu∣ally macerated in Vinegar, with a good Proviso; but they do ill-which after pour out the Vinegar, and boyl roots only, robbed of their virtue; for the virtue of them is passed into it, which by this means is pour'd away; for any sharp Liquors do effectually draw forth the force and essence of things, as we may see in Extracts, the Liquor therefore should not be poured away, for it serves to dissolve the things decocted. 6. It is to be noted, that the limits of the decoction is ambiguously defined only; in general, the ingredients should be boyled til they have left all their virtue in the Liquor: which in
special some note by the change in the colour; and alteration of the appearance of things, viz. that the hard things should be softned, others wa∣sted. Galen appoints to the Thirds, sometimes to half. Mesue to almost half; modern Writers are vari∣ous: but that truth may be found, both the faculties and nature of the Medicaments are to be considered; for they whose virtues are easily dissolved are to be boyled the less time, as to the consumption of the third or fourth part, lest the efficacy of the simples consisting in a thin substance should vanish; but they whose virtues will hardly exhale, may be boyled to the wasting of two thirds: they whose virtues are of a middle temper may be boyled to halves: And (that which is correspondent) those things that are boyld in four times their quanti∣ty of Water, to the thirds; they which are boyld in 6 times their quantity, til half be wasted, as for the most part are all Apozems and Decoctions; from whence this may be gathered, that simples of a solid close hord substance, as Roots, Woods, and Barks that are with∣out smel, should be boyld in eight times their quantity of water; those which are of a rare, thin, soft, subtile substance, as Flowers, Spices, Purgers, in four times their quantity; those of a middle substance between these, as Leaves, Seeds, and Fruits, in six times their quanti∣ty of Water. 7. Concerning Clarification, note that if we de∣sire the decoction the stronger, it is not to be clarified; therefore they do il who boyl it again, and clarifie it with the white of an Egge, because by that means the virtue and essence wasteth; it should therefore be thus appointed: first it should be placed in Balneo Ma∣riae, or in a pot wel stopped, over warm ashes; so is the virtue preserved, and the dregg; and residence which otherwise would make it apt to putrifie, wil settle to the bottom; and the thin liquor clear in the upper part, as if clarified, may be kept for use. 8. Concerning the Form of PRESCRIPTION, these few things are also to be noted, that fit words in prescribing forms and ingredients ought to be obser∣ved by an Artist, lest he be derided or seem unskilful, therefore these following things are wont thus to be prescribed.
℞. Of the common, or opening, or diueretical roots macerated a night in white Wine (for cold obstructi∣ons, or for them whom Vinegar hurts,) or Vinegar, &c. Liquorice shaved and a little bruised, &c. The Bark of the roots of Capers, &c. The middle Bark of Ash, &c. The middle Bark of Tamarisk; which three Barks are alway prescribed by the Montpellians in Obstru∣ctions and Melancholy affections. The leaves of Borage, Bugloss, Dandelion, Sor∣rel, Cichory, Endive with the roots, or with the whole, &c. The tops of Fumitory Hops, Mallows, Hysop. Wormwood Pontick, or the tufts of it, &c. Whole Barley (where you would cleanse and open) huld Barley, where you would lenifie; and in the affe∣ctions of the Brest. The seeds of Melons and Gourds cleansed; or the kernels of the seeds of Melons and Gourds, &c. Red Vetches, &c. Juniper berries, &c. Pippins pared and cut in slices, N. 1, 2, 3. Raisins of the Sun picked and stoned, &c. Dates cleansed from their strings, &c. Fat Figgs, or new Figgs, &c. Sweet Prunes, &c. Kernels of Pine Nuts washed, &c. Make a Decoction in Barley-water perfectly boyled, &c.
CHAP. II. Of Julebs. THis Medicine used chiefly for alteration un∣known to the antientest Greeks, is the invention of the Arabian, so called because it is made of sweet and pleasnt things, the word Julep, or Juleb, signi∣fying in the Persian tongue a sweet potion; but the latter Greeks after the manner of the Arabians cal it Julapium; and Jolabion which words yet remain among Physitians, although the thing it self be grown out of use. This is found two-fold among Authors, one of the Antients, another of modern Writers. The Juleb of the Antients is wholly different from ours, but simple, consisting of some juyce, distild water, insusion of Barley, or the decoction of one thing and su∣gar, most commonly made for present use, as was usually the Juleb of Roses, otherwise called Alexandrinus, or Regis, most famous against thirst and heat. But the Julep of modern Writers which is at this day every where prescribed, retains the name of the Antients, not the form, and is every where called a Julep, although some very late Writers cal it a syrup or Seraium as to this day some Italians do, perhaps because a syrup is the basis of Juleps; but at Mont∣pllier they are called Juleps. But a JULEP is a fluid Medicine composed of an appropriate Liquor, and Syrup, (and sometimes Su∣gar) mixed together without boyling, for or five doses, either to prepare or alter humors otherwise, or to strengthen the body.
Hence this altering Medicine may be judged two∣fold, either it prepares the humors for purgation, as the praepotions of the ancient Greeks, which were fore run∣ning potions of general purgations, which may therfore rightly be called a concocting potion; or else alters the humours without any scope or intention of purging; as also the spirits, and other parts of the body: hither ap∣pertain a strengthening and Cordial Julep. In this three things are to be considered, the Com∣position, the use, and the benefit. In the Composition two things chiefly are to be weighed. 1. An appropriat Liquor, of which it is to be made. 2. What things are to be dissolved in it. In the Liquor two things are to be regarded, the quality and quantity. In relation to the Quality, either there is pre∣scribed a single distilled water, regarding both the affection, and the affected part, which is most frequent (especially in the winter time for the defect of Herbs) either for a Julep to prepare the humors, or alter them any other way, or strength∣en the faculties of the body. Or else a distilled water and a juyce together, which is most usual for a Cordial and strength∣ning Julep. Or else a decoction for simple potions to be prescribed in half the quantity of an Apozem, and almost in the same manner, which is often to be put in practice, for the concoction and alteration of humors.
But the quantity for every dose of Liquor is to be prescribed to three ounces, or four ounces; so that when the Julep is prescribed for 3 or 4 doses, the quantity of the Liquor for the whole Julep should be eight ounces, or twelve ounces, if for 3 doses; to twelve ounces, or sixteen ounces, for four doses, having in the interim regard to the age, and growth of the body; for 4 ounces wil hardly be sufficient for great bodies, unless it be powerful in virtue, or strong in taste. We must mark that when distilled waters, and Juyces are prescribed together; sometimes they are prescribed in equal quantities; sometimes the Juyce, sometimes the water exceeds each other two or three ounces; but you must observe that when the Juyce that is added is sowr or sharp, one ounce, or two ounces will be enough for a Julep of two doses. Things to be dissolved are considered in respect of their quality and quantity: A to their quantity, either it is sugar alone which is seldom seen, or some appropriate syrup respecting both the affection, and part affected, which is generally received every where. Besides these sweetners, some other thing is al∣wayes to be dissolved in a Julep: sometimes ther∣fore there is dissolved, 1. In a preparing Julep, if you prescribe it of a decoction like apozems the same things that are dissolved in altering Apozems as aforesaid; for this kinde of Julep is as it were a pretty Apor zem. 2. In a Cordial or strengthning Julep, either some cordial Confection, and that alone, as con∣fectio Alkermes, & de Hiachintho, especially where we are to strengthen in fluxes of the belly, smal pox, & Worms; or Treacle in contagious times.
Or ese some Cordial powder alone, and that either simple, and this again arematical, as Saunders; or not aromatical, as is usual in the smal Pox, as of Harts-horn, Ivory, Coral-Pearls, Ʋnicorns horn, and also in other malignant hu∣mors, & in the Worms; as also Coralline among them, &c. Or compound, as the powder of some elect ary of the shops, as species of Diamargariti frigidi, &c. as your indications shal require; O else some confection and powder together: but because in this respect a Cordial Juleb is made of the same things that a strengthening po∣tion is, in his place such a potion uses to be pre∣scribed for one dose only, and so to be renewed as you have occasion: but either of these wayes are unblameable. Of late also spirit of Vitriol doth often use to be dissolved in Juleps, especially where there is an ebullition of the humors to be extinguished, or infection to be taken away, or putrefaction to be prevented; it may also be profitably mixed where humors are to be attenuated whether hot or cold; as also where obstrustructions are to be open∣ed. But in relation to the quantity, there is usually prescribed for one dose, Of sweetners, from one ounce to an ounce and half at most. Of clarified Juyces, or Liquors made of decocti∣ons as being strong, if sowr, half an ounce, if not, one ounce. Confections from a scruple to two scruples at most. Powders from one scruple to two scruples at most; if of the rarer sort, as Bezoar, o gr: 4 or 6. Ʋnicorns horn to half a scruple; Pearls from half a scruple to one scruple, for the richer sort.
From hence it is easie to find the quantity for a Julep for three or four Doses: and because Confe∣ctions and Cordial powders are esteemed as one thing, if they are prescribed together, 'tis not difficult to limit the quantities of both con∣joyned. And if spirit of Vitriol be used, the dose is pre∣scribed by saying as much as is sufficient to give it a grateful sharpness (that is which may neither smite the Lungs, or set the teeth on edge.) The use and form of prescribing is set down thus: ℞. &c. (that is, the Liquor and things conve∣nient to be dissolved in it) make a Julep for three or four morning doses, (it may also be prescribed for the evening, especially if it be a Cordial, and for one dose.) But if the Julep be made of a decoction, it is to be prescribed in the same manner as an Apo∣zem. If besides the Liquor, and Syrups (of which only the more simple Juleps both for altering (and pre∣paring are usually composed) you shal add some simple or compound strengthening powder to a∣romatize it; you may say, make a Julep which shal be aromatized with one dram, or one dram and a half of such a powder, for three or four Do∣ses The Juleps of Infants are to be prescribed, out of a spoon twice or thrice a day. The benefit and fruit of a Julep is very plenti∣ful, as the use of themis at this day famous. First, when you desire to prepare the humors for purging; for by this double form the concoction of the hu∣mours is perfected, viz. of a Julep and Apozem, and is chiefly to be prescribed in the Spring and Autumne, for the same end.
A Concocting Julep is chiefly useful for the Winter, and may supply the place of an A∣pozem, when not easily to be prepared, either through the defect of green herbs, or want of op∣portunity to keep them dryed; or by the scanti∣ness of time, or urgency of the affection, cannot be made ready neither that nor any other altering Medicine that requires much labour, then an ex∣temporary Julep may be prepared by the mixture of distill'd waters and syrups, and some fit Con∣fection, and this way also is cheaper for the poor∣er sort; so that a concocting Julep may be the deputy of an altering Apozem; but although by this means there is a present remedy applicable, both safe and pleasant, yet can it not be expected to have the same efficacy, for the virtues of an A∣pozem are much more effectual. 2ly. When your indications require the alter∣ation of the body, humors, or spirits, without in∣tention of a succeeding purgation; but chiefly to extinguish any fervent heat of them, or Fevers, or other hot affections, or to bridle the malignity of them. They are used chiefly against hot distempers, to which they are peculiarly dedicated, as also to re∣press the heat of the Head and Heart, continual and burning Fevers, that are troublesom by their intolerable heat; as also to quench the ardencies of the Liver, Reins, and Bowels, and to quench the thirst.
So also is the ardor of the humors restrained and if any malignity be joyned with it, it wil be commodiously repressed by this cooling Cor∣dial Liquor; so are they usual to prevent the ma∣lice of the disease, strengthen the heart, restore the strength, confirm the spirits and vigour, through the whole course of the disease, and partly to al∣ter the affections themselves. So also to restrain the motion of the humors, as cruptions of blood, from what part soever; as in the beginning of Pleurisies following the prepo∣sterous motion of the spirits, as in extraordinary watchings, &c. In summe, this liquid form is convenient to pre∣pare humors for purging, to strengthen the heart, restore strength suddenly, or alterto any other in∣tention; to perform it speedily when the parts afflicted, either humors or affections, lye deep in the body; to which place alterers in any other form cannot so wel be conveighed. CHAP. III. Of Potions. A POTION is a liquid form of Medicine, made of things conducing to the purpose, either Cathar∣ticks, Cordials, or others dissolved in a meet Liquor, to be prescribed for one dose only, and to be drunk down (from whence the name) prepared either to purge, strengthen or alter the body any manner of way. Hence a Potion is usually 3 fold, Purgative, Cordial, or Strengthening, and altering. A Purging Potion Is often understood under the name of Potion
spo∣ken simply, so that this name is generally received to signifie a purging Potion, and of late is called a dose, because it is not to be drank otherwise then at one time, not at divers, unless some dayes after, or some short time be interposed. But it is a liquid form of a Medicine composed of a purging Medicine, decocted or infused, or dissolved some other way in a Liquor and added, and a syrup; to be given at once, purging either some certain hu∣mor or divers, and specifically casting it out by stool. Hence the differences of a purging Potion are ta∣ken from the difference of humours they cast forth; hence some are Cholagogues, some Phlegmagogues, others Hydragogues, others Melanagogues, and o∣thers composed of all these proprieties are called Pan∣chymagogues, or Holagogues. In general three things are to be considered in them, Composition, Ʋse, and Profit or Ʋtility. In COMPOSITION two things are to be regard∣ed, an apt Liquor of which it is made, and such things as are to be dissolved in it. The LIQUOR that is fit to dissolve your Medi∣cines for a purging potion, is to be considered in quality and quantity. In respect of the quality, there is prescribed ei∣ther, 1. Some Decoction, or 2. Some Infusion, or 3. Both Decoction and Infusion together, or 4. Some other Liquor serving to the scope and intention of the Physitian. In special, 1. the decoction that is usually prepa∣red to make a Potion is either purging, altering, or both together. A purging decoction is usually prescribed of only
Senna, (for a Liquor to purge Melancholy, and Phlegme) to half an ounce, six drams, or one ounce, (according as you intend to purge; or some other purgative of the shops, viz. electuary or sy∣rup, to be dissolved in the Liquor) adding it's pro∣per correctives, as Aniseed, Cloves, &c. to 1 dram: you may also add of the cordialflowers (as Borage, Bugloss, Violets) of each P. j. and at Mont Pellier they cal these sorts of decoctions simply purging decoctions, and take it absolutely so, when some purging Medicine, as for example, Diacarthamum, is prescribed to be given with it. And this sort of decoction may be made of o∣ther Catharticks in such a quantity that may suf∣fice for one dose; according to the diversity of the humors, adding also their Correctors, as for your Phlegmagogue potion Turbith, Carthamus, and Hermodactils: for a Melenagogue, Polypody, Epithy∣mum, and Senna; but the first is least in use, because Senna can make the Liquor sufficiently purging to supply their place, and make it otherwise sa∣tisfie the divers intentions of the Physitian: but this sort of purging decoctions are very necessa∣rily and profitably to be prescribed when we want the proper purging Electuary, or would purge that only humor; which often happens in a phlegmagogue, and melanagogue potion; for see∣ing there is no Electuary that merely purgeth phlegme, if the in lication require such a purge, prescribe your decoction of Senna for the basis, adding Carthamus; or if you would have it work more strongly, or draw from remote parts, add Turbith, or Hermodactits, to the fourth part of that proportion that is prescribed for a purging Apo∣zem, correctives also being added; so because there is no Melanagoge effectual, (for Diasenna is weak) or safe, (for
confectio hamech the great∣er composition being both dangerous, & of doubt∣ful operation is seldom used) and the lesser so cryed up against Melancholy, rather purgeth cho∣ler) for it neither hath Senna (a chief purger of Melancholy) and the whole composition hath but ten parts of Melanagogues, but of Cholagogues viz. of Sammony, forty eight parts or doses; so that the purgers of choler are more then the purgers of melancholy by above three parts; therefore for these causes when Melancholy only is to be pur∣ged, we rightly prescribe a decoction of Senna, Epithymum, Polypody, Fumitory, &c. thus much for a purging decoction. An altering decoction such as is used at this day every where, may be presumed two fold, one usual of the shops such as the Apothecaryes make every where, without the prescription of a Physitian: Another which is never made but for the present occasion, and this may fitly be called a Magisterial decoction. The shop decoction is three-fold, viz. the com∣mon docoction for a Medicine; the decoction of fruits and flowers, and the pectoral decoction. The common decoction for a Medicine, so called because it is commonly used to make purging po∣tions with all as fit for every part and humour, is thus compounded. Take of Barley P. j. sweet Prunes 4 or 6 pair, Raisins of the Sun, and Liquorice shaved and a little bruised, ana. half an ounce, Aniseed, Fennel seed, and the four greater cold seeds (in the summer,) ana. 2 drams, the 3 Cordial flowers, ana. p. j. Make a decoction.
But it is not wont to be thus usually prescribed in every particular by the Physitian, but uses to be noted singly in the receipt by its name, which is also to be understood of the decoction of flowers, and fruits, and the pectoral decoction. The use of this decoction is three-fold, for it serves both to dissolve simple purgers in, but chiefly compound, as Electuaries and syrups for potions, which is most usual; or else to infuse sim∣ple purgers in: or lastly, to decoct them in, to the same scope or purpose. 2. The decoction of Fruits and flowers is made of Liquorice shaved, &c. and Tamarinds, ana, two drams, Raisins of the Sun stoned half an ounce, Ju∣jubes, Sebestens, sweet Prunes, ana. 4 pair, flowers of Borage and Bugloss, ana. pug. 1. &c. Make a deco∣ction. In Italy where this is most frequent, they use to make it purgative, by adding Senna to half an ounce, or six drams; and there they use it to dis∣solve other Medicines in, that are proper for the Breast and Reins chiefly, and also for the Choler∣ick The pectoral decoction of Mesues particularly intended for the affections of the Breast consists of whole Barley, P. 1. Liquorice and Raisins of the sun, ana: half an ounce, Maidenhair, M j. Hysop dry∣ed, M. ss. fat Figgs, Jujubes, and Sebestens, ana, three pair, or in number, six. Make a Decoction. The principal use of this is in cold affections of the Breast, to dissolve Medicines in that purge flegme, or to infuse them, or boyl them in. Sometimes this it self is made purgative by adding Senna, as is said in the cordial Decoction.
The Magisterial or altering Decoction that is prescribed by the Physitian for present use, and is never otherwise extant in the Apothecaries shops, is composed of divers parts of plants, which are to be prescribed to a quarter of the proportion of the altering Apozem aforesaid, (for as that is or∣dained for four doses, so is this for one only) al∣though to avid trouble in the dispensation of it, you need not add all the parts of the several plants that are in an Apozem, to make a heap, but 'twil suffice if you prescribe the leaves, or two or three which you shal see most convenient, of each one pugil, &c. This sort of decoctions is extream profitable and necessary, as often as it is convenient to be us sed, whereby the purging Medicine dissolved is made amicable to the part with which otherwise it would have no conveniency; or if of it self it have no peculiar inclination to the humor, it is by this means made correspondent; hence you must choose for these Decoctions, simples which have a propriety to the parts affected, and that may direct the force of the purging Medicine to the humour by a secrret disposition they obtain; then wil the commodity of the purging Medicine appear most plentiful in it's operation. But the chief use of this decoction is to be a convenient Vehiculum for the decoction, insusion, or dissolution of your appropriate purgers. Sometimes in the place of an altering deco∣ction is substituted (to the same end) the broth of a Chicken alter'd with the leaves of Endive, Sorrel, Maidenhair, Borage, &c. the use of this is best in hot distempers, in the summer time especial∣y, to dissolve Catharticks in.
A Decoction both altering and purging is oftn prescribed, for reasons before mentioned, two se∣veral wayes. 1. Either it is prescribed with Senna alone boyled in one of the common decoctions of the shops, or in a magisterial decoction, for a potion to purge either Melancholy or Phlegm, which is now very frequent. 2. Or else with other purgers boyled with it in the decoction, as is before said in the purging decoction, which is also a received practice. And the use of this is as those before, either to infuse, boyl, or dissolve purgers in. I . INFUSION: as to infusion, you must under∣stand that here by that word is meant the macera∣tion or steeping of any thing in a fit Liquor, wher∣by it's virtue loosened from its earthy body is conveyed (after the manner of tinctures) into the liquor, which impregnated with those virtues is called an infusion or dilution. In it two things are considerable, 1. The pur∣gers that are to be infused, and 2. The Liquor in which they are to be macerated. In both the quality and quantity are to be re∣garded. The things to be infused in respect of their qua∣lity may be al purgers, as Senna, Agarick, &c. (ex∣cept Manna: and also Aloes and Coloquintida, for their bitterness) for at this day in Paris they of∣ten infuse Cassia Fistula.
In relation to their Quantity: if the infusion only should be sufficiently purging without dis∣solving any other either simple or compound Ca∣thartick in the strained Liquor, they ought to be prescribed in a larger quantity, than if they were given in substance, yea in a double proportion, if they are the stronger sort: or in a treble quantity if they are the gentler sort, adding also their pro∣per correctors, to a four-fold proportion, if strong: or to a six-fold quantity, if weaker. The Liquor as to the quality is either simple, as common water which draws forth the virtues of things but slowly, or some certain distilled wa∣ter, especially in hot affections: Whey of Milk in Melancholy; the broth of flesh, and Aqua vitae, which is indued with a wonderful faculty of ex∣tracting the virtues, dissolving the spirits, and o∣perating substance of things, and attracting it to it self; in which it surpasseth all others; and there∣fore chiefly to be used for cold affections, and in∣fusions to correct Phlegme and Melancholy, a smal portion of it being mixt with the Liquor of the ifusion White Wine is next in praise for ex∣tracting and inbibing the virtues of things, w'h is most fit in cold affections, if you make the infusion in it and water, of each a like quantity; or other∣wise you may find some other convenient Liquor. Or else compound, as some of the aforesaid decoctions. The Quantity is not determined, but left to the discretion of the Apothecary, & is prescribed by the Physitian with q-s. that is, a sufficient quantity. But although in general the infusion of Cathart∣icks be so used as is said, that of all, or either, you may excusedly prepare an insusion for pur∣ges to better purpose than when they are boyled, as is said in the Apozem; yet more specially of late i is grown in use, only to have two kindes of infu∣ons for the Liquor of a purging potion, which as most usual are wont to be generally prescribed.
An infusion of Rhoubarb alone, to one dram, or a dram and a half, correctives as Cinamom or Spikenard being added to gr. 6 or helf a scruple in cold persons; or else in hot tempers, yellow Saun∣ders to half a scruple, for the liquor of a Chola∣gogue potion, as also for a Phlegmagogue. 2. Or the infusion of Rheubarb from  dram to a dram and half, 2 scruples of Agarick being newly made into trosches being added with his correctors, for a phlegmagogue potion, or where Phlegme and Choler are mixed together. An infusion is usually made in the distill'd wa∣ters of Endive and Succory, as in Chl rick peo∣ple; or Plant ain water, if a flux of he belly be present: it may also be made either in an altering or purging decoction, or some of the afore-menti∣oned, or in some other approprt Liqur. III. A DECOCTION and INFUSION together are very usual; & when it shal be prescribed, let such purgers with their Correctors be infused in s q. of some of the above-mentioned decoctions; to which purpose are Rheubarb and Agarick only u∣sually admitted; so at this day it is most usual and frequent, to have the decoction o Senna rescrib∣ed to be mixed with the infusion of heubarb a∣lone, or Agarick; according as the indications require; a potion purging either Phlegme, Melan∣choly, or adust choler.
IV. Any other LIQUOR that can satisfie the intention of the Physitian, is sometimes taken to make a purging potion, and dissolve Cathrticks in; as for example, any of these, as Diacarthamum, and may be prescribed to half an ounce, or six drams, to be dissolved in such a water or broth, and to be made into a potion; and this is chiefly useful, when sometimes, (as in a sudden case, through the urgency of the affection, or the shortness of time, or want of leisure, or for other inconveniences) decoctions, or infusions cannot be prepared. As to the quality of the Liquor, some distil∣led water respecting the part affected, and hu∣mor that is to be evacuated, is to be chosen; or broth (so we usually prescribe Manna to be taken in broth, either simple of flesh, or else of a chick alter'd with cooling herbs for the cholerick; so for phlegm a tablet of Diacarthamum is usually prescribed with them,) or else white Wine, with which the root Mechoacan and Jalop (which of late is come in use, for the same things that Me∣choacan is used) are usually taken, in substance to one dram, or one dram and a half, after they have slightly infused, for phlegmatick and serous hu∣mors; or else Whey of Milk, or Mead; but this mat∣ter is treated of thrice before. As to the quantity, the dose of the liquor in which the things are to be dissolved, varies much according to the age of the Patient; for to Boyes two ounces wil suffice, to Youths three ounces, to elder people four or five ounces at most; because seeing they require a greater quantity of purging Medicines, to be moved with all, unless you dilute them with a considerable quantity of Liquor, your potions wil be too thick and un∣grateful. Things to be DISSOLVED are considered ei∣ther in quantity, or quality. In relation to the quality, there are dissolved, 1. Purgers, viz. when the Liquor of the potion is little or not enough purgative, which because it usually happens, there are for the most part al∣wayes purgers dissolved in it.
2. Alterers, viz. tweetners, which are alwayes to be dissolved in it, for the better relish sake; Purgers that are to be dissolved in it are either simple or compound. Simples are, Manna, Cassia, which are usual in purging choler gently; as also to lenifie the af∣fections of the Breast, and Reins: or hard & dry, viz. in the form of powder, as usually the powder of Rheubarb, in the spitting of blood, dysentery, or other flux of the belly, &c. Mechoacan for phlegmatick and waterish humors, and the root of Jalop which of late is used in the room of Mechoacan. Compounds are either officinal or magiste∣rial. Officinal, or the purgers of the shops, are either syrups, as syrup of Roses solutive, of Succory with Rheubarb, of Fumitory compound, De pomis Regis Sabor (if to be had) honey of Roses strained. Or Electuaries, which are either soft as Opiates, or solid as Tabulets; Opiates either purge al humors, as Catholicon; or phlegm only, as Diaphoenicon, In∣dum minus, benedicta Laxativa, Hiera picra, though unpleasantly; or Choler, as Diaprunum simplex, Diacassia, Tryphera Persica, Diaprunum solutivum, Electuar. of Roses Mesues, Electuary de Psillio; or Phlegm and Choler together, as Diaphoenicum, In∣dum minus; or Melancholy, as Catholicon best of al, Diasenna solutive, Confectio hamech minor; or else watrish humors, as Benedicta laxative; solid Ele∣ctuaries either respect choler, as Eleci: de succo ro∣sar: or phlegme, as Diacarthamum, Electuary de ci∣tro solutives or Choler and Phlegme together, as the two last. Or some powder extant in the shops, as
Dia∣turbith in Germany, for phlegm and waterish hu∣mors. Magisterial purgers use to be prescribed by the Physitian, for present use, and as is the infusion of Rhuebarb alwayes prescribed, but chiefly for cho∣lerick humours, thus; let the infusion of 1 dram, or a dram and a half of Rheubarb made in En∣dive, or Succory water; or else the expression of one dram, or a dram and half of Rheubarb: or the in∣fused Liquor of one dram, or a dram and a half of Rheubarb; for these three wayes sound the same thing. ALTERERS or Sweetners, besides those now mentioned, are usually syrups, (but Manna is of∣ten given alone with broth; Diacarthamum, Rheubarb, & Mechoacam are most commonly pre∣scribed to be taken in white Wine. And these in respect of their quality are onely used as alterers (if the decoction or infusion be sufficiently purging it self; or if a sufficient quan∣tity of other purgers be dissolved in the strained Liquor,) and those respecting both the humour, and part affected, from whence succeeds a happy event. Or purgers also, when things are otherwise; and the most usual, for al potions almost is syrup of Roses solutive.
But in relation to the quantity, in general, the dose of the purgers to be dissolved shal be more or less, according as the decoction or infusion, or both, shal be nothing at al, or more or less pur∣ging: for Catharticks are to be dissolved in such a quantity that they may make one whole and allowable dose with the simple purgers (if any be either decocted or infused;) which may easily be known by the several doses both of simple and compound purgers: as for example, the dose of Senna in a decoction, that it may only moderate∣ly purge, is an ounce, or an ounce and a half, or rather from half an ounce to an ounce; of Rhubarb in the infusion, that it might moderately purge, frō a dram and half, to half an ounce; so that if you prescribe a decoction, of half an ounce of Senna, in which it should be infused, because half an ounce is onely one third of the dose in which it may be given, that is, of an ounce and a half, in which it purgeth moderately; and also prescribe one dram of Rhuebarb, which is but a fourth part of the whole dose of Rheubarb; it comes to pass that these joyned make only 7 twelfths of the whole dose, which make not up the whole dose by five twelfths, to supply wch you must dissolve so much of some fit Electuary as may make the dose com∣pleat, as Electuary Diacarthamum, whose dose since it is fix drams, you must borrow from thence 7 twelfths, viz. two drams & a half, so have you the proportion which may allowably be dissolved, that with the help of the others it may mo∣derately purge the body, where other contingen∣cies are indifferent. And thus the dose of those things that are to be dissolved is to be examined, that al things may be prescribed safely, not dan∣gerously or by chance. But in special, when the Liquor of a potion is little or nothing purging, at Montpellier (for a bo∣dy where al things are moderate, we may dissolve Manna to 2 ounces, or 3 ounces.
Cassia in a smal quantity, and not unless some powerful indication require it, (as in lenifying the affections of the breast and Reins,) because it makes potions gross and ungrateful if it should be dissolved in his legitimate dose, therefore 'twil be best to dissolve not above three drams, or four drams; but that this smal quantity may be made up, you may add the stronger sort of purging ele∣ctuaries to three drams, or half an ounce; where∣fore usually that it may be more acceptable in potions, 'twere better to infuse it as they do at Paris. Rheubarb if it be dissolved in substance against the dysentery or flux of the belly, &c. you may do it to one scruple, half a dram, or one dram; for a purging powder should not much exceed one dram, otherwise it may be too thick, and thereby ungrateful; Mechoacan to one dram, and a dram and half. Jalop to one dram. Syrup of Roses solutive new to three ounces, and four ounces, for old syrup is not used. Some things are seldom used or dissolved, to purge by themselves, as the syrup of Roses solutive, unless in delicate persons, as to them that are ea∣sily purged, or else (as it is sometimes) when the decoction of it self is very purgative. Electuaries of the shops in the form of opiats, if gentle, as diaprunis simple, diacassia, Tryphera Persica, Diasebesten, Catholicon, (though seldom) to one ounce, or an ounce and half at most; for in a greater quantity they thicken the Liquor too much; diaprunis solutive, and Electuary de Psillio, to half an ounce, six drams, or one ounce at most for strong people, Indum minus, Diaphoenicum, from three drams to six drams: Benedicta laxativa, from two drams to five drams. But those which are in the form of Tabulets, as diacarthamum, de citro solutive, de succo rosarum, from 3 drams to six drams at most in the strong∣est people.
The dose of the infusion of Rheubarb is above∣mentioned. Sweetning syrups, when altering, (although purgers are only dissolved) from one ounce to an ounce and half; when purging, from one ounce to half an ounce, unless you would purge with them only, which is seldom seen. The USE and FORM of prescribing is various, according to the variety of the Liquor. I. If the Liquor be any of the above-mention∣ed decoctions, 'tis prescribed. ℞. &c. (viz. the said ingredients) make a decoction in q. s. (of a fit Liquor) to three ounces, or four ounces, strain in it, &c. (or without straining make a decoction, &c.) take of the strained Liquor three ounces, or four ounces (for either way is usual) in which dissolve, &c. make a potion to be taken in the morning with care and order, having eaten a light supper the night before. But if you would not describe your decoction at length, 'twil be sufficient, if (having set down the purgers) you prescribe any, as for example, the decoction of Endive, Agrimony, Maidenbair, &c. Make a potion, &c. II. If of any officinal decoction, ℞. &c. (viz. the things that are to be dissolved) with q. s. of such a decoction, make a potion, &c. or else turn∣ing the order say, ℞ &c. (viz. of such or such a decoction 3 ounces) in which dissolve, &c. Make a potion. This same form is likewise commonly used, with the common purging decoction of the Shops.
II. of an . ℞. &c. (viz. those things that are to be infused) make an infusion in q: s. of some Liquor before mentioned (over hot emb∣ers twelve hours, or a whole night; or if you please without noting the time) then strain it, and dissolve in it, &c. so make a potion. It may otherwise be more briefly prescribed thus. ℞. The expression of one dram, or a dram and half of Rheubarb made in a fit water, in which dissolve, &c. So make a Potion. This is to be noted, that when Mechoacan, or the root of Jalop are infused, they should be pres∣cribed to be infused in white Wine; so let it be given in the morning with the usual ordering, without any expression to one dram, or a dram and half. IV. If of a decoction, and an infusion together, ℞. &c. viz. those things that are necessary to be byled make a decoction in q. s. of some appro∣priat Liquor, in a sufficient quantity of the strain∣ed Liquor; infuse, &c. viz. those things mentioned before in the infusion; then having strained them dissolve &c. so make a potion; and this order is now most usual. V.  without these, the potion be prescribed of some other Liquor, then thus. ℞. &c. viz. the purger that is to be dissolved, as Diacarthamum, six to purge a phlegmatick person, make it into a potion with s: q: of such a Liquor.
The UTILITY: a potion in general is very com∣modious when we have an indication of purging, either with a minorative Medicine to lessen the humors before concoction, or an eradicating Me∣dicine to exclude the humour already prepared and concocted, or else of otherwise evacuating it without this preparation, which seeing it may be done with Medicines under the three-fold form of pils, boles, and potions, (for powders and pur∣ging tablets, as also syrups never come in use, un∣less in the form of a potion, dissolved in some convenient Liquor) of these a potion is to be prefer∣red in these cases, When humours in respect of their scituation are gathered in the first region of the body; and are to be expell'd without any perturbation of the body, not to be drawn from far, for in this li∣quid form the purging quality soon descends in∣to the belly with the Liquor, and is soon commu∣nicated to it, so that in so short a time the purg∣ing quality cannot be diffused to the more remote parts, (although some smal evacuation happen also to them by consecution of the humors) un∣less you boyl or dissolve stronger Medicines, and in a greater quantity, which cannot be done so safely; in which case pils are better, which staying long in the belly, the virtue of them at last insinu∣ates it self into the habit of the body; therefore a potion is most commodious, in affections of the stomack, and neighbouring parts, Pancreas, Mesen∣tery, Spleen, Liver, and other inferior parts. But in respect of the several sorts of humors to be evacuated, the form of a potion (as also of a bole) doth more agree with tempers and affecti∣ons that are cholerick then the solid form of pils; because both to moisten, lenifie, and cool, (which three properties such a hot and dry constitution requires,) those things which are suppable and liquid do more aptly perform, and therefore ra∣ther to be used, unless a great weakness of the stomack, and a broken strength (which are more
dissolved by Liquid things) require the contrary: then 'tis better to use pils or boles. 'Tis also very profitable to purge Melancholy, because this humor as it were dusty with drought may be washed down by such actual moisture, and the wayes by which it is to pass made slippery, and al other hinderances relaxed and moistened; Tis also very useful in phlegmatick affections, unless the stomack be very weak, so that the plegm be found in the first or second region of the body: for if it be in the third Region, or re∣more parts, it wil be little advantagious, unless composed of the stronger and greater quantity of purgers from whence danger. 'Tis also useful in obstructions of gross, dry, condensated humors; and also in the summer, as pils in the winter. A Corroborating Potion. A Corroborating Potion, which also sometime is called a Julep, drink, or Cordial potion; is a liquid form of medicine composed of Confections, or Cordial powders, and a syrup dissolved in a fit liquor to strengthen and confirm the principal parts, restore strength, and help the peculiar affections of the heart. In this three things are considerable, the Com∣position, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In COMPOSITION two things are to be re∣garded. 1. A fit Liquor of which 'tis made. 2. What things are to be dissolved in it. The Liquor is to be regarded in relation to his quality, and quantity.
In relation to his quality there is prescribed. 1. Some distill'd Cordial water, as of Borage, &c. 2. Some distill'd water and a convenient juice together, which is most usual; for 'tis seldome made of a Juyce alone, and seldom also of deco∣ctions or infusions. In respect to its quantity the dose is the same, as of the purging potion, three ounces, or sour oun∣ces, yet in summer, and in the great heat of Fevers, and other hot affections, you may prescribe a lar∣ger quantity. Things to be dissolved, are also considered in respect to their quality and quantity. In relation to the quality there is alwayes dis∣solved some fit Cordial syrup, and besides it al∣wayes, 1. Either some Cordial confection alone, as usually Confection Alchermes, de Hyacintho, &c. of which see in the Juleps. 2 Or some Cordial powder alone, and that ei∣ther simple, as Harts-horn, Coral, Bolearmoniack Ter∣ra sigillata, Pearls, Fragments of preticus stones, Ʋni∣corns horn, Bezar stone, these may be prescribed, and are to be chosen according to the urgency and variety of the affections: Or else compound, as the powder of some electuary of the shops, (as Di∣amargaritum frigidum, &c.) and this is most usual to be prescribed for this sort of Cordial Potions, as the simples are though much seldomer. 3 Or some Confection or powder together. In relation to the quantity, syrups are usually prescribed to an ounce and an ounce and half. Cordial confections from half an ounce, to an ounce, and an ounce and half at most.
Cordial powders from one scruple to two scru∣ples, or one ounce at most. But if it be of the more scarce and pretious sort, let it not exceed one scruple; so for the most part 'tis prescribed to half a scruple, and one scru∣ple. The fragment of pretious stones and Ʋnicornshorn from gr 5, to half a dram. Bezoar stone to gr 4, or 6. Confections and powders together are so to be prescribed that they may compleat the whole dose, taking the greater quantity of this or that, or equal parts as you see fit. The USE is for 1 dose only, according to the present necessity, at any time of the day, or the dis∣ease. And this is the usual FORM of RESCRIB∣ING. ℞ &c. viz. the Liquor, in which dissolve, &c. so make a potion to be taken at such or such an hour. Mark this, that because some Cordials are dis∣solved in the potion, they may be prescribed in the said form: or else without the straining after dissolution 'tis usual to prescribe all the ingredi∣ents, adding only, Make a potion. The UTILITY: 'Tis very effectual against di∣vers affections of the heart, as Swooning, panting, &c. malignant affections, poysons: and when it is to be strengthened, being made weak by the vio∣lence of diseases; as also when the virtues of it, and al other principal parts are dejected, they are through the continuance of the whole disease to be assisted and restored; being weakned, to be strengthened, and confirmed, being exhausted, to be recruited.
An altering Potion. THat is to be called an altering Potion which is under a Liquid form not allotted either to purge hurtful humors, or comfort the strength of the body oppressed, so it be to alter any way, or e∣vacuate, so it do it not by purging, (as in expelling the stone of the Reines, &c.) prescribed for one onely dose to be taken by the mouth at one time The COMPOSITION of it is the same, as of the corroborating potion, viz. of a Liquor fitted for your present intention, either a distill'd water on∣ly, or else some Juyce or decoction being added to it, and some convenient powder, to be altered according to the variety of your indications, and a proper syrup serving to the intention of the Phy∣sitian; al which are prescribed in the dose, & after the same manner as the strengthening potion, as you may perceive by one or two examples fol∣lowing. A somniferous potion, restoring and corrobo∣rating the strength exhausted by over-watch∣ings. ℞. Water of red Poppyes, water Lilles, and Let∣tuce, of each two ounces, syrup of white Poppy, one ounce, syrup of Violets, half an ounce, Consectio Al∣kermes, half a dram. Make a potion to be taken at the time of going to sleep. A Potion for the Worms, and also Cordial.
Take the water of Purslane, and grass, of each two ounces, Confection of Hyacinth, half a dram, powder of Earthworms dryed, one scruple, Coralin, and the sha∣vings of Hartshorn, of each one scruple, syrup of Le∣mons one ounce. So make a potion. A potion to hasten delivery of a Child. Take Hypocras (made by the infusion of Cinnamon, and Dittany in white Wine) four ounces, or five ounces, Cinnamon water half an ounce, Corfectio Alchermes one dram, Saffron half a scruple, syrup of Mugwort one cunce. So make a potion. CHAP. IV. Of Syrups.
DIvers simples there are, Herbs, Roots Seeds, Fruits, Flowers, and others, or the Juyces of them, which cannot be had alwayes when need requires them, especially in winter, and autumn, that decoctions, infusions, or other Medicines may be prepared of them for a present use: or else they cannot be preserved sound with∣out loss of their virtues so long a time: or if they may, yet the urgency of the affection, or other in∣conveniencies do not alwayes allow such leisure as to attend the preparing of Medicines of them in divers forms, or til the virtues of them may be sufficiently extracted, from hence appears the ne∣cessity of syrups for the divers virtues of Plants thus kept and preserved by the benefit of Sugar or Honey, in the form of a syrup, are alwayes ready for use in every pressing necessity to serve for the various scope of the Physitian; and are preserved sound without any depravation, having joyned with them a grateful taste; so that syrups are as it were a certain preserving of a medicinal Li∣quor. Juyce, decoction, or infusion, in which is re∣tained the efficacy of the Medicines. But a syrup is the invention of the Arabians, and was scarce known to the antient Greeks; we read of only mention made of Oximel and cute, in Galen, and Hypocrates; after whose example the Mauritanians have a lorned their pharmacentick art with a vari∣ous collection of syrups: the modern Greeks as Actua∣rius, cals it Scrapium. Some derive this name from the Greek, others from the Arabick, but this is little considerable. Whatsoever it is, though at this time it be taken ei∣ther properly; for that which I shal describe, and for that which is extant in the shops, or improperly for a decoction preparing humors, or an Apozem (as Ron∣deletius and Jeubertus have written) as an altering Julep, for the Italians at this day cal a Julep Sera∣pium, (perhaps because a syrup is the basis of a Julep) yet at Montpelier. A SYRUP: is a fluid form of a Medicine, made of a decoction, Juyces or an infusion, preserved with Sugar or Honey, boyled to such a consistence, that a drop on a marble or plate may not spread abroad, pre∣pared either to alter or purge. It is of two sorts, an altering syrup (as was the syrup of the Antients, and this hath been revived by our la∣test Physitians) and a purging syrup. The altering Syrup. The definition of an altering syrup is to be sought among those things which we have said before in the altering Apozem, as also the differences there set down. But for the clearer method, use, and prescription sake, it is two-fold, Officinal and Magisterial,
The officinal or usual is that which is publickly ex∣tant  in the Apothecarys shops, of which I  in the use of it, and in respect of the prescribing of it, many things occur ne∣cessary to be known, hereafter to be rehearsed. And this diversly divided, as wel in relation to its virtues, as its composition. The differences taken from the virtues are conside∣red either in general, hot, cold, moist, dry, tempe∣rate. Or in special: in respect of the humors, and other parts of the body. In relation to the humors, it alters either in the first qualities; to which belong according to the diversity of the humor, that which alters, concocts, digests, pre∣pares either choler, phlegm, melancholy, or blood; or in the second qualities, in which number are con∣tained those which cut, attenuate, incrassat, cleanse, binde; or in the third qualities, hither are re∣ferd those which cause easy coughing, lenifie, ex∣pectorate, provoke Urine, break the Stone, pro∣voke the courses, condense the parts, expel poyson, and corroborate.
In regard of the parts which they properly re∣spect, some are Cephalical, others Cordial, &c. which you may seek among the store of Physical remedies; here I shal only propound the division of the Officinal syrups, according to their compo∣sition and faculties, onely considered generally, because other things more appertain to the phy∣sical magazeen; withal intending to give a Cata∣logue of the more usual sort, because some are here in use, which in other places are grown ob∣solete, and so on the contrary; neither is there the same number in use every where: here is to be noted that those which have a star at their be∣ginning fixed to them, are at Montpelier, of the more usual sort. The altering Officinal syrup is compounded either, 1. Of Juyces only, and this is either temperate, as syrup of the juyce of * Borage, of h Bugloss, * Bizantines of Mesue, of Fumitory simple, * Oxymel simple. Or Cooling, as simple Syrup of * Vinegar, and Oxy saccarum, syrup of Verjuyce, of the juyce of Sorrel, A∣lexandrinvs or Julep of Roses, of the juyce of Citrons, Barberries, * Quinces, of the juyce of Succory, Endive, Pomegranates both sowr and sweet, of Limons, of Ap∣ples, of red Corans, of Violets. Or heating, as simple Syrup of Betony, Miva of Quinces though moderately, especially the aromatical, Oxymel of Squils, though moderately. 2. Of INFUSION, and this also is cooling, as syrup of water Lillies simple h. of red * Poppyes, and of dryed Roses. 3. Of a DECOCTION, and this is either Cooling, as syrup of * Succory compound, of * Jujubes, yet moderately, of white Poppy, h. Or heating, as syrup de Althea of Fernelius, of Bettony compound, of the barks of Citron, of Calamint, of * Hysop, of * Horehound of the two roots, of the five roots, of * Staechados, of Colts foot, h. 4. Of infusion made in Juyces and Decoction together, and is either Cooling, as Oxysaccarum compound, syrup of Pur∣shine, h. Or heating, as syrup of Wormwood, * Mints, Oxymel compound. Or some other Liquor and a decoction, and is ei∣ther temperate, as syrup of * Maidenhair, and of Li∣quorice, which is moderately hot, or heating, as syrup of Mugwort.
V. Or a decoction and a Juyce, and this is either temperate, as Bizantinus compound, or cooling, as sy∣rup of Vineger compound; but moderately, of Endive compound; of Mirtles, of water Lillies compound; or heating, as syrup de Eupatorio, or Maudiens, of Fu∣mitary compound. But as from this division of the syrups you may per∣ceive how these altering syrups are affected in the a∣ctive qualities, so must you note also that all of them are drying in the passive qualities, unless such that have the letter h. annexed, which moisten and humect but how they severally are appropriated to divers parts and to concoct divers humors, you must find in the Materia medica. A magisterial syrup is that which is prepared for present use according to the various scope of the Physitian, composed of either more or fewer of the precedents. The division and differences of it are to be sought from what I have before said in the officinal syrup, and in the altering Apozem. In it three things are to be considered, the com∣position, the Use, and the Utility. In the COMPOSITION four things are to be regarded, the matter or Liquor of which it is made; the things to be dissolved in it; the clarifi∣cation and aromatization. The matter is to be weighed both in quality, and quantity. The consideration of the matter is two-fold, Remote, viz. the several parts of simples spoken of in the Apozem, and neer, which is three-fold, Decoction, Juyce, and sometimes infusion prepared divers wayes of the aforesaid ingredients, of which I must next treat.
1. The decoction of which the syrup is to be made is the same with the decoction of the alter∣ing Apozem, made and prescribed by the same reason, of the same things, & after the same man∣ner and form, of which I shal say no more in this place. 2. The Juyce is drawn out of Leaves, Fruits, and flowers bruised and pressed, and so effectual∣ly purified, is used with better Fruit, and to more purpose than the decoction whether it be to strengthen or alter any way. And this 3 several wayes is used in the making of a syrup. 1. Either it is taken merely, either of one only thing, or drawn from divers, and that either of Leave, (as of Borage, Bugloss, Hops in melancholy people, of Sorrel, Succory, Endive in the cholerick, &c. and so in the rest according to the diversity of the directors:) or of Fruits, (as of Limons in the cholerick, of Apples in the Melancholy) and is exactly to be purified from the feces by a gentle heat, whereby they settle down at the bottom, else they may afford occasion of corruption. 2. Or else for the greater efficacy, or some o∣ther reason, arising from the indications, other things are boyled usually, three pound or four pound of the clarifled Juyces is taken to prepare the syrup, and those things that are to be decocted in it (which must respect the part affected, or humor) are to be prescribed to half the quantity that is set down for an Apozem. 3. Or else more profitably specifical and proper ingredients are onely infused to the same intent, as Roots, Seeds, Flowers, Spices: and usually for the quantity of a pound and a half or two pound,
of a Juyce for a syrup are prescribed two ounces or 3 ounces of things to be infused, according to the several efficacy of the ingredients. 3. An infusion sometimes is taken or used for the siquid subject of a syrup, and is to be prepared of ingredients fit for the intention, of very forci∣ble virtues, and for the most part are spices, (the reason of which you may find before in the pur∣ging Potion.) In relation to the quantity, the usual proporti∣on of a decoction, clarisied Juyce, or infusion for a syrup is a pound, a pound and half, or 2 pound at most, according as we intend the use of it shal be more rare or frequent, or of shorter or longer continuance. Things to be dissolved in the aforesaid syrups, either to preserve them the longer, or for tastes sake, are considered in relation to their Quality, there is therefore dissolved in it, 1. either sugar, which is convenient for all, both hot and cold affections, and more acceptable to the sick; or sometimes Honey in cold affections of the head, and breast, or when you would more effectually heat, cut, cleanse, or when natural heat languish∣ing is to be revived. 2. Or else together with the sugar some offici∣nal syrup; but then the quantity of sugar is to be lessened, for a syrup is but sugar dissolved, & then sugar is only prescribed, q. s.
3. Besides some of the aforesaid sweetners that are perpetually dissolved in it, there are also dissolved (especially in that syrup that is pre∣pared of a decoction, and sometimes in those prepared of infusions) some clarified Juyces of Leaves or Fruits, and other Liquors, as Vinegar, Wine, &c. to mke them the more effctual▪ as is afore-said in the altering Apozem, in which place see more. In respect of the quantity: sugar is dissolved in equal proportion with the liquor; of this see in the animadversions following: so also is Honey (when used,) in syrups to five ounces, or six ounces, but then sugar to a sufficient quantity on∣ly: Juyces to six ounce, more or less, according to the quantity of the infusion or decoction. Clarification and Aromatization, see of them be∣fore in the Apozem. The USE and FORM of prescribing, In the use of a syrup either officinal or Magiste∣rial we must consider three things methodically: after what maner, how much, & when they ought to be prescribed and given. 1. How, or after what manner; that is, whether they are to be given in that sorm or consistence, that they are of themselves, or whether diluted with other Liquors, as in Juleps. 2. How much; that is in what quantity, or dose. 3. When, that is, at what time; neither doth there appear more things necessary to be conside∣red in the right and legitimate administration of them.
As to the manner of taking them; because a sy∣rup taken by it self, not diluted with any Li∣quor, penetrates not so far into the body, neither can quickly or easily without losing some strength and virtues; and withal works slower upon the part affected, and humor that is to be al∣tered; and on the contrary a syrup diluted in the form of a Julep doth sooner, easier, & farther in∣sinuate it self into the parts of the body, & noxi∣ous humours, (the clamminess little hindring it,) and can come to the most intimate spaces with firmer and less alter'd virtues, than when it is sincere, and doth sooner alter whatsoever it toucheth, so that according to the nearness and distance of the parts affected, the affections them∣selves, or causes that are to be alter'd, this or that form is chiefly to be used. Therefore sincere syrups are prescribed com∣monly by themselves, and are taken 1. To intercept or stop defluxions by thicken∣ing them from falling violently either on the Throat, Lungs, or stomack, for by the help of their clamminess by reason of the stay they make in the mouth, and in regard they do not very soon pass down, they easily stay the humor that is descend∣ing, and these are to be taken out of a spoon, and to be held long in the mouth. 2. When there is a hoarsness of the throat, and a roughness of the Wind-pipe, which by its gen∣tle clamminess (where with it (as it were) smears it) it helps, being swallowed by little and little, or licked down like lohochs. 3. For expectoration, or the spitting up of mat∣ter, collected and impacted in the Lungs, by ta∣king it by little and little out of a spoon, or lick∣ing it down from a Liquorice stick. 4. To mitigate coughing after the same man∣ner. 5. In diseases and affections of the stomack, especially cold ones, (for they which are hot and dry, as in hot and cholerick affections, should ra∣ther be temper'd by moisture, unless its strength be much decayed) although usually they are dis∣solved in a smal quantity of Liquor (except syrup of Wormwood) or when your scope be to strength∣en or bind.
6. In the affections of parts nigh the stomack, to which it may easily be conveyed. But diluted or dissolved syrup in the form of a Julep is best, 1. When the Liver, Spleen, or Mesentory are affected. 2. When the head, heart, Lungs, Reins, Bladder, Womb, habit of the body, & Limbs are diseased, to which the virtue of a syrup could either not at al, or very slowly, and much alter'd from its own nature, otherwise have entrance. 'Tis to be prescribed to be dissolved in a fit, and appropriat Liquor, that may either respect the humor, affection, or part affected, or al these to∣gether: but most usually in some distill'd water; or with a proper decoction which is much more effectual than water, or with the broth of a chick, and that either simple or alter'd, with Roots, Leaves, &c. agreeing to the same purpose, as here∣after. The quantity is to be considered, as singular and several. As to the singular or united quantity or dose, an officinal altering Syrup may be given from half an ounce to an ounce, an ounce and half, and two ounces at the most, in defining which dose more exactly four things are to be diligently re∣garded.
1. The scituation, or distance of the part affe∣cted, for when the virtue of the syrup is to be conveighed to parts far scituated and remote, it ought to be given in the greater quantity, yea in the highest dose of all if you see it fit; otherwise you wil hardly perceive any benefit in the oper∣ation, because in a long passage its virtues must needs be much broken and alter'd; unless the Li∣quor in which it is dissolved be also very effe∣ctual. 2. The action or motion of the affection it selt, and the morbifical causes, and the quality of them, either vehement or remiss, that requires a middle, or else the highest dose; this a les∣ser. 3. The Age: as to Infants half an ounce, which is the least dose; to Boyes of better growth one ounce, which is next the least, wil suffice for the highest of al. 4. The efficacy of the syrup it self, and the vi∣gor it hath naturally to operate; hence 'twil suf∣fice to prescribe syrup of Poppy, only from half an ounce to an ounce at highest, because of his narco∣tick quality; so also unpleasantness ought to les∣sen the dose, as usually one ounce doth suffice for the highest dose of syrup of Wormwood. 5. To these may be added the manner of ta∣king it; for that which is taken to be swallowed down by licking it leisurely, because they cannot be taken in a large quantity, against divers affe∣ctions of the Wind-pipe and Lungs, for then it would soon slip down without doing any good, therefore it is often to be iterated, and is al∣wayes prescribed to four ounces, or 5, or 6, for fre∣quent use to be often repeated; so that such ought not to be included within the aforesaid rule; the same is to be said for such as are prescribed to quench thirst in the heat of diseases, because the use of them is to be frequent, for which purpose they are prescribed to four ounces, five, or six.
But the quantity of the Liquor, to dilute them in is much like that of the Jleps, as to three oun∣ces, or four ounces: yet you may prescribe less when the stomack or any neer part is affected: but more to allay thirst, as in Fevers, and al sorts of hot, boyling diseases, especially in the summer time. As to the several or divided quantity, digest∣ives may be taken morning and evening when the stomack is empty: but they which are given against thirst, coughs, or to help spitting, are ta∣ken often; they which provoke sleep only once, and that about the accustomed hour of sleeping, neither are they to be reiterated unless necessity require it; others are taken either oftner or seldo∣mer, as the several occasions require. As to the Time of taking them, preparing Sy∣rups, and those which are allotted for the digesti∣on of humors, are to be taken in the morning 4 or five hours before meat, lest the virtue of them should be stackned either by meat newly taken, or not yet concocted: they may also be taken at eve∣ning when the digestion of humors is to be acce∣lerated, but at a good distance from feeding when the stomack is empty: those for a cough, at any hour when it is troublesom: they which provoke sleep, or are to stop defluxions, are best taken at the time of going to sleep: these to ex∣pectorate, in the morning; those to quench thirst, when they are dry; any others, as neer as may be when the stomack is empty. As to the magisterial syrup, the use of it is ei∣ther by it self, or else diluted with some fit water, or other Liquor, simple or compound broth; and is taken after the same rules as the officinal.
And this is the USUAL FORM of PRES∣CRIBING. 1. If it be made of a decoction. ℞. &c. viz: (the ingredients of an altering Apozem) make a de∣coction in &c. take of the strained Liquor, &c in which dissolve, &c. make a syrup wel boyled, clarified, and aromatized with &c. keep it in a glass safe; let him take of it one ounce, an ounce and half, or two ounces by it self, or with, &c. at such an hour, so often in a day, &c. see more a∣bove. 2. If of a Juyce without any other mixture; ℞, of the Juyce of such a thing bruised, newly pressed out, & wel clarified, &c. in which dissolve, &c. So make a syrup. 3. If of a Juyce in which other things are boyl∣ed or infused, ℞ of the Juyce (newly pressed out and clarified) of &c. in which dissolve &c. So make a Syrup. 4. If of an infusion, ℞ &c. let them be infused in, &c. of such a Liquor, take of the liquor strain∣ed, and gently pressed out, &c. dissolve, &c. The Utility of a syrup in general is sufficient∣ly declared above, whether officinal or magiste∣rial; for it is instituted to conserve divers virtues of plants, with which decoctions, Juyces expres∣sed, and infusions prepared of them are plentiful∣ly fraught, that they may be the readier at hand, and fit for use without loss of their natural effi∣cay.
The efficinal also more specially serves for the making up of divers forms of Medicines: so is it added to Apozems, Juleps, and Potions, for taste sake, an also to add to their virtues; so also is it ken to make up opiats, pils, preserves, Lohochs, Troscischs into a convenient form or consist∣ence, and for the uniting of a compound Medi∣cine, and preserving of it. But the magisterial syrup as of old, so at this day, and hath been chiefly in request of late to prepare both humors, and the body; and is very necessary to precede a prosperous purgation (of which see in the altering Apozem,) and is very useful also to alter the body, or parts of it, divers ways, both by correcting the distempers of them, and tempering the peccant humours: of this see also in the altering Apozem. In summ, against al internal affections or cau∣ses, that ingender them: and to alter and strength∣en the parts afflicted by them, any proper and spe∣cifical Medicines, suggested by the indicantia (or things from whence you take directions what is to be done) may be reduced into the form of a Syrup; so that the utility of it is of large extent against any affections, dropsie, plague, &c. but 'tis fittest to be prescribed, when you would continue your altering for some time, or must cherish the strength continually: (when otherwise that labor must be fain to be renued often; with the trou∣ble of a new prescription of some Apozem, Ju∣lep, or potion:) hence it is most profitable in long diseases and affections, and chronical distempers of the parts which have taken such rooting that there must be a continual alteration to remedy them; yet because some usual syrup is to be had, that hath the same virtue, unless you think its vir∣tue less effectual, or decayed, or that it consists not of those things which your specifical indications require, or that you hope to compose one more powerful; prescribe them but seldom.
A Purging Syrup. YOu must seek the definition and division of a purging syrup according to the variety of the humors, in the chapter of the Apozem. A Syrup is two-sold, officinal and Magiste∣rial. The officinal is here chiefly divided both in respect of the composition, & the chiefest of their virtues, as you may see in the following ta∣ble. The of∣cinal purging syrup is com∣pound∣ed ei∣ther of A deco∣ction made A juyce, and purgeth Melancholy, as Syrup of Fumitory compound, Water, & purgeth Melancholy, as Syrup de Epi∣thymo. Water, & purgeth Choler, as of Succory compound Water, & purgeth Mixt humours, as Diasereat, A juyce, & purgeth. Melancholy, as syrup de Pomis Regis Sabor. Infusion in Water, & purgeth Choler As Syrup of Roses solut: Syrup of Vi∣olets, each made with 9 infusions, sy. rup of Peach flow: Phlegm As Honey of Roses strained. The definition and division of a magisterial purging syrup may appear out of what is afore∣said. In it three things are to be considered; Com¦position, Use, and Utility.
In the Composition four things. 1. The matter whereby 'tis made purga∣tive. 2 The things that are to be dissolved in it. 3. Clarification. 4. Aroma ization. The matter of which 'tis made, is either remote, and this in regard of its quality, are the purging simples with their correctives, either boyled or insused; or neer, and thus the matter is two-sold, either a purging decoction, or a purging in usi∣on. A purging Decoction is nothing else then the decoction of a purging Apozem, made of the same things, both alterers and purgers, varied ac∣cording to the intention of the Physitian, to be prescribed after the same manner and order, and upon the same conditions, as is before speci∣fied. This only is to be marked, concerning the dose or purging Medicines, that the Montpelier Physitians for a syrup do usually double the quantities of purgers prescribed for Apozems; but 'twil suffice if you take onely the same quantity; or if I might perswade you, the double quantity  it matters not if it be the treble, for so it wil be contracted into the lesser dose, and be taken with the less nauseousness to the patient, so that you exactly finde out the true dose, and not measure it according to the usual proportion; see the use. It is also to be noted, that when fit juyces are to be used, the purgers may be boyled in 4 ounces, or 5, or 6, with their correctors.
How a purging infusion is to be prepared, is said before in a purging potion, and from thence easie to be collected; but how to prefer'd before a deco∣ction, see in the animadversions. Things that are to be dissolved in the decocti∣on or infusion, are also considered in quality and quantity. Concerning the quality, there is dissolved either sugar, or sometimes Honey; or else together with the sugar some officinal syrup, and that either al∣tering or purging. Besides those sweetners that are perpetually dissolved for its preservation, there are frequently to the aforesaid purpose dissolved, 1. Some fit Juyce, and that either altering, as of Leaves, Fruits, &c. according to the indication; see in the Apozem; or purging, as the juyce of Roses, especially in the Spring time, against cho∣ler; of Fumitory or Hops for Melancholy. 2. The compleat infusion of Damask Roses, especially in the spring time, when 'tis to be had, and most effectual. 3. Sometimes the infusion of Rheubarb (if the indication require it) made by it self, and added at the latter end; otherwise should it be added in the beginning before the syrup come to a consist∣ence, its virtue may exhale by long boyling. In an infusion the same thing is to be obser∣ved, except concerning the aforesaid Juyces, which 'tis best to prescribe in the beginning.
In relation to the quantity, sugar or Honey are to be added in the same quantity with the strained Liquor, which for the most part is to be prescribed to a pound, or a pound and a half; this one thing is also to be observed, that the quantity of sugar or Honey is exactly to be set down, (con∣trary to that custom which Physitians vulgarly use) and not to be left to the pleasure of the A∣pothecaryes; otherwise you can never be certain of the exact dose, which is one, where there is but a little sugar; another, where there is much. This makes practicers stammer when a dose of a purge prescribed by themselves is to be defined: then they admonish you to begin with a less dose, so proceeding til you have found the true quantity without error. If a Syrup be added, 'tis for the most part to 5, six, or eight ounces: and because this is accounted of as sugar, 'twil be easie to finde out the right quantity, making an abatement for the quantity of syrup: but it matters not whether it be altering or purging, so that you use this way to find out its right proportion in your computa∣tion. Juyces may be added to six ounces or eight ounces; only be mindful of the purgers in appoint∣ing the dose. See CLARIFICATION and AROMATIZATION be∣fore in the Apozem. The USE and form of PRESCRIBING: in the use of a purging syrup whether officinal or Magi∣sterial, three things should be briefly considered; how 'tis to be prescribed and ought to be given, in what quantity, and at what time. As to the manner of giving an officinal syrup, 'tis either by it self out of a spoon, or else diluted: the former way is rare; for every one of them use to be dissolved, and that in a fit Liquor, as afore∣said.
As to the dose, in general, this may be appointed, viz. from one ounce, to two ounces, three ounces, and four ounces, which is to be the highest; yet syrup of Fumitory and de Epithymo may be given to five ounces, or six ounces; in the mean time com∣paring other circumstances, which I have said should limit the dose of purgers in the purging Apozem. The time of giving it is the same as of other purgers, viz. in the morning, the stomack being empty, lest the virtue of them should be dull'd, or their operation by the meat or chile be much re∣tarded. The magisterial syrup (as to the manner) is used either by it self, out of a spoon, or (which is most usual) dissolved in some fit liquor, as above. As to the quantity, and that the continued, or u∣nited, they usually but very ill define it from two ounces to three ounces: they may truly look into the quantity of the Catharticks, but 'tis but curso∣rily; and perhaps in the mean time are ignorant of what quantity of sugar the Apothecary hath made it up with al; hence is it that they are un∣certain concerning the dose; I for my part con∣ceive it may be half an ounce, an ounce, an ounce and half, two ounces, three ounces, 5, 6, according as the Liquor with which the sugar is boyled into a syrup, is impregnated with the more copi∣ous or violent purgers but thus it is, the doses of the purging decoctions, infusions, things dissolved,
&c. are to be accounted, for how many times they may serve to purge withal, considering them all together. As for example, suppose them to suffice for eight times, and to one pound of Liquor; im∣pregnated with the virtues of those purgers you may add one pound of pure Sugar, and boyl it to a Syrup. If you shal divide those twelve ounces in∣to eight parts, (for there are eight purging doses) there wil be an ounce and half for one dose: and if you add only eight ounces of sugar to make it to a syrup, there wil be one ounce more for every dose: &c. As to the divided quantity, it is usualy given once or twice a monethin chronical diseases; and so that filth that is usually gathered is gently ta∣ken away, that it cannot arrive at a quantity suffi∣cient to breed a disease. But the time of taking it is fittest in the morning, as before. The UTILITY is great in chronical diseases, in which there is need of a continual precaution, or a gentle evacuation to be frequently renewed; lest otherwise, excrementitious humours that are apt to breed divers affections should be heaped to∣gether in such distemper'd bodies, and ill-affected bowels, which are by this means opposed; and an occasion of future affections quite taken away. ANIMADVERSIONS of SYRUPS. COncerning the quantity of Sugar for Syrups, 'tis much disputed on, so that you wil hardly find any precept absolute, and agreeable to the nature of every thing: Mesues that Author of the Art is vary∣ing, for he prescribes in cold Syrups, especially of juy∣ces, to one pound of liquor eight ounces of sugar; as in syrup of Verjuyce,
so that the Liquor is more than the sugar by a third part: in other places he pres∣cribes the Liquor to double the quantity of Sugar: as in Syrup de Ponnis Sabor; sometimes to treble it, as in the syrup of sowr Prunes, and that which is most wonderful, sometimes to be six times more then the sugar, as in the sowr syrup of Quinces: sometimes that the sugar should double the Liquor, so that to six ounces of Liquor, he prescribes one pound of sugar; sometimes to eight ounces of Liquor twelve ounces of sugar; sometimes he prescribes a like quan∣tities of Liquor and sugar; but most commonly Mesues prescribes in hot syrups both of Sugar and Liquor, a like quantities, or a little more or less, &c. Modern Writers do much wrangle among them∣selves: sometimes they appoint according to the rule of Syrups a like proportion both of Sugar and liquor, sometimes more of the Sugar, or more of the Liquor, Silvius, Fernelius, Joubertus, and Rondeletius, chief Writers of this Art, prescribe several quanti∣ties. In Syrups made of Juyces, the Liquor generally ex∣ceeds the sugar: but in particular, for one pound of the Liquor they sometimes put seven ounces, seven ounces and a half, eight, eight ounces and a half, nine, or of each a like quantity, as the nature of each particu∣lar Juyce requires. In syrups made of infusions they every where put off the infusion and sugar, and; but in syrups made of de∣coctions, sometimes of each alike, or (as it is most com∣monly) they let the Liquor exceed the sugar by one third.
The thing seems indifferent to me, onely the nature of the syrup is somewhat more exactly to be weighed; in which two things are chiefly to be considered. viz: 1. The sugar (or sometimes Honey) which is only as the subject to receive the essence of the simples, and pre∣serve their virtues. 2. That virtue or essence, consisting in the Juyce, Infusion, or Decoction, from whence the syrup hath his force or energie, as the conservation of that essence from the sugar; the syrup being composed by the union of both, through the evaporation of the su∣perfluous humidity. Now every one knows that if you dissolve one pound of Sugar in any quantity of Liquor, it may easily be boyled to the consistence of a syrup; that is also appa∣rent, and approved to them that know the making of extracts, that the Liquor in which the essence was dif∣fused, and with which it was drawn forth (which is correspondent to the Juyces,) whether it be 2, 3, 6, or 8 pound, &c. may be wholly evaporated, set in Balneo, or over ashes, the essence by little and little taking what consistence you wil either of a syrup, or some solid∣er form; why therefore need they trouble themselves a∣bout the proportion of either in vain, seeing they may reduce any of the aforesaid proportions to the form of a syrup: for if the things compounding the syrup: (viz: Sugar, Juyces, Decoctions, Infusions, &c. whatsoever be their quantity) can be boyled to that ordinary consist∣ence, by consuming the watrish parts, what matter is it in what quantity they are joyned. If Joubertus and Silvius boyl three pound of Liquor with one pound of Sugar to the height of a syrup; why may it not be done with the like proportion of your Medicinal liquor, whe∣ther Juyce, Infusion, or Decoction; and on the contrary, if to three pound of Sugar you add only 1 pound of the Liquor, as Rondeletius in his Syrup of Limons, why may not this be done also; therefore in appointing the quantity of sugar for a syrup, we must not so much regard the quantity as the force of it, and intention or purpose of the Physitian; as for example: suppose that one pound of simples decocted or infused have imparted three ounces or four ounces
of virtuous essence to four pound, or five of the Liquor of the decoction or infusion strained, if you pre∣scribe of that Liquor and Sugar, and, one pound, as we usally do for a syrup, 'twil truly make a syrup, but of ll efficacy; and in a pound of which there withe contained onely a dram of essence; so that each ounce wil conin but v. gr. but if the afore∣said half ounce of essence be diflused only in two pound of Liquor, and you prescribe one pound of syrup to be made of that & sugar and, you wil have a syrup, and that effectual, in which bound are contained two drams of the essence, and in an ounce of which re∣mains half a scruple of essence: but if you boyl those two pounds of Liquor in which four drams of essence is con∣tained with one pound of sugar onely, you wil have a most effectual syrup, in which is contained three drams, or half an ounce of essence, and in anounce of which is one scruple: but if you yet desire it more effectual, take to those two pound of Liquor but half a pound of Su∣gar, and you have also in this three drams, or half an ounce of essence; and in every ounce of it wil be half a dram, or two scruples of essence. Therefore we must not so much look on the quantity of the Liquor, as on the virtue and essence wherewith it is fraught; or from what quantity of matter it is extracted. Lastly, what weight of Liquor soever you boyl it in, whether a pound, two pound, or three, &c. this is to be chiefly marked, (that you may be the more certain of the efficacy of your syrup, and may prescribe it weaker or stronger as shall be for your purpose) that you should see, to the virtues and efficacy of it rather then to the quantity of Liquor you prescribe; therefore 'tis best to follow the common rule, where they usually prescribe the Liquor and Sugar in equal parts, that you may have some knowledg of its operation.
CHAP. V. Of Vomitoryes. THe excrementitious humors, whether natu∣ral exceeding in quantity, or preternatural in any quantity, either mixed with the blood in the veins, or residing elsewhere, are apt to breed an il habit, and therefore require an evacuation, chiefly that way they naturally tend, by condu∣cing places or veins for their expulsion, whether by purging (either particular or universal) Urine, Sweat, insensible transpiration, or Vomit. And although Medicines which perform either of these may in general be called purgers, yet particularly they are counted so which draw forth the excrements of the body by stool and vomiting: and of these those which by stool evacuate, are significantly called purgers; those which expel things upwards, Vomito∣ries. A Vomitory is not so much a name of the li∣quid form of a Medicine as of the faculty of it, taking its name from the operation; yet it usually signifies both, viz. the Medicine procuring that motion or evacuation of the humors upwards, and also the form in which it is prescribed; of which my intention is here to write.
A VOMITORY therefore is a liquid form of a remedy prepared of a simple emeti∣cal Medicine, boyled, infused, or dissolved in some Liquor, evacuating & expelling perforce by the mouth any thing hurtful to the Stomack, and su∣perfluitie, either of meat, or excrementitious hu∣mors from it and the adjacent parts. This from its effect may be said three-fold, evacuating, revelling, and deriving. But from the manner of working one may be termed gentle, correspondent to the mollifying and lenitive purger, working more by its quantity; another moderate, which operates by its quality; another violent, answerable to those purgers pro∣perly called Catharticks, provoking this motion by a specifical and internal virtue. Vomitoryes are simple, or compound. The more SIMPLE consists of fair water war∣med, drank suddenly to a pint or better; warmed Barley water in a good quantity; the fat broth of flesh drank plentifully, Mead plentifully taken, which Galen prescribed; any sore of drink drank suddenly and liberally; Hydraeleum, i. e. water and oyl, to eight ounces or ten, common oyl to four ounces or six drank warm, and melted but∣ter.
The which and such like other gentle vomits (improperly so called) we use chiefly, when those things that are to be voided this way, (whether things taken down, or divers sorts of impurities, and vitious humours contained in the stomack,) are so ready for evacuation, that upon every little occasion, without much trouble they may be ex∣pell'd whether nature be inclin'd to it or not, or whether she strive to shake off such a burthen nim∣bly enough or not, or be not sufficient of her self, then with these gentler sort do we give occa∣sion of such a motion to the excretive faculty, if it be dul, and as it were shew her the way: or else if she moves but unperfectly, we render her endeavour the more easie by these means; which we often do also (without giving a vomit) by thrusting the finger down the throat, or a feather dipt in oyl. But those which work only by their quantity, and move the excretive faculty by their warm moisture & fatness, are not profitable when that that is to be vomited up, either is not in the stomack, but in the adjacent parts; or else are contained in the more remote parts; or if in it, are fixed in the tunicles of it; or are not prepared; so that they cannot be shaken out without a greater and more violent motion; for then 'tis better to use the compounds. In the COMPOUND Vomitory two things are to be considered, 1. The matter of which 'tis made. 2. The things to be dissolved in it. The MATTER of a Vomitory is two-fold, Li∣quid and solid. The liquid matter (or liquor) with which I de∣fined a Vomitory, and which is for the most part used, either provokes vomit, or doth not provoke it. That Liquor which doth provoke vomit is ei∣ther a decoction or an infusion, or sometimes water, or a distiled Liquor. As to the VOMITING DECOCTION, in it three things are to be regarded 1. The matter or ingredi∣ents whereby it becomes a vomitory. 2. The Liquor in which these things are boyled. In either of these we must see to the quality and quantity.
The matter or ingredients, as to their quality are diverse parts of vomitive simples, and those moderate (for the strongest sort seldom are put into decoctions) as Roots, Barks, Leaves, and some∣times Seeds and Flowers, of which 2, 3, or four should be prescribed together. As to their quantity, those moderate vomitories are prescribed almost as those of Potions, that is, that they make in all one ounce, two ounces, or three ounces at most; but particularly, if one or 2 of these following be added with others, or should be prescribed of themselves, it should usu∣ally be in these following doses. The root of Asarum to one dram, two drams, or three drams. The middle Bark of a Walnut-Tree, to 1 dram, or two drams. The roots of Pompions dryed to two drams, and half an ounce. The flowers of Broom to two drams, or three drams, or so many pugils. As to the quality of the Liquor in which they are boyled, you may take very commodiously fair water, or (where the humors are also to be clean∣sed from the stomack) Barly water, or some de∣coction (where they be dry, sharp, and hot,) or Mead, (where gross clammy humors are to be attenuated, cut, and cleansed;) or Oxymel made with water in either case, or fat and lenifying broth where the acrimony is to be temper'd, whe∣ther it be of the humors-or poysons taken, or of sharp violent vomits, so also water and oyl in the aforesaid case; which are therefore chiefly con∣venient, because they are reckoned among the gentler vomitories.
The quantity of the liquor is usually let to the judgment of the Apothecary; yet you may pre∣scribe it having regard to what is said before in the Apozem and potion; only observe, that be∣cause for the most part they take eight ounces of Liquor for a vomiting potion, those moderate vomitories should be prescribed to double the quantity. A Vomiting Infusion in relation to the quality of the things to be infused is most commonly pre∣pared of the strongest sort of vomitories, which are more rightly infused then given in substance or decoction; as those two most famous for their vehemency in working, white Hellebor of the Anti∣ents, and Antimony of modern practicers; and al∣though to the same purpose we may take also the moderate vomitories, as Asarum, Radishes, Pom∣pion roots dryed, the middle bark of Walnuts, &c. yet because there cometh no danger from them, either given insubstance, or decoction, they are to be prescribed onely in decoction; but in these stronger 'tis better only to give the infusion, which communicates onely its spiritual virtue without any quantity of the substance, which might make the operation last the longer, or irritate the excre∣tive faculty too much. Therefore two things chiefly serve to prepare an infusion of white Hellebor of old most famous, not only in rebellious and desperate affections, but also in the sleighter sort; but now scarcely used in the greatest, and then with caution, which being prudently had, you may infuse it from half a dram to one dram, and a dram and half in broth, adding withal one scruple of Cordials for cor∣rectors.
In the place of this you may give an Apple made hollow a little, then filled with the root of white Hellebore and roasted; afterwards the Helle∣bor being taken out give it to eat. So also the root of a Radish stuck thorow with slices of it, then roasted and eaten. But in the place of Hellebor (as it is now gene∣rally used) take Antimony, the other growing out of date; neither let it trouble you that it hath hi∣therto been rejected by the unexperienc'd; for 'tis far safer than the other, and finisheth its operati∣on without any manner of suffocation, convulsion, or danger of other vehement symptomes: to the same purpose some use Antimony crude, some its Vitrum, and some the regulas of it: but 'tis better to chuse that preparation of Antimony which they cal Crocus Metallorum, because so prepared 'tis spoiled of its fetid sulfur, which otherwise may be the cause of great symptoms. To the same end take Antimony so prepared, to 1 scruple, or half a dram; or rather half a scruple, or gr. 12 infuse it in three ounces, or 4 ounces of white Wine over hot embers, strain the liquor tho∣row a brown paper, and give it. Of the same Crocus is made that water com∣monly called Aqua benedicta: instead of the afore∣said Crocus you may infuse the vitrum to one scru∣ple, [or rather to gr. 12.] in any fit Liquor. As to the quantity of the things to be infused, what is said before wil. serves or these stronger; if you would use them which are moderate, you may prescribe The root of Asarum from one dram and a half to three drams, and half an ounce.
The roots of Pompion dryed from one dram to three drams. Nettle seed, from one dram to half an ounce. The bark of Walnut to 3 drams, and half an ounce. But 'tis better to use the Antimony before spok∣en of. As to the DISTILLED Liquor it is seldom pre∣scribed by a Physitian, except distilled Vinegar of late by the vulgar brought into Physical use, which being most violent in workings is to be u∣sed with caution, and that in strong people only: and it is prescribed two wayes; either distill'd alone out of a leaden stil, or else as it is in use by the Women of Montpelier, they take a Loaf hot out of the Oven, infuse it in two or three pound of Vinegar, and so distil it; the use of this Liquor as also of the former is, to give three ounces or four ounces in Fevers, and chiefly Agues that are of long continuance, either before or in the very fit. Hitherto of the vomiting Liquor. The liquor that is not vomiting is also used com∣monly without the infusion or decoction of any simple vomitory made in it, in which after is dis∣solved either things helping to vomit, or prepar∣ing only for a gentler vomit, or some simple vo∣miting powder in the manner of a julep. But for the quality see that before in the qua∣lity of the liquor for a vomitory decoction. In relation to the quantity, it should be prescribed to 8 or ten ounces. Thus far of the liquid matter of vomitories of which (as we have said) now they are only com∣posed, and which before I defined a vomitory, as that which was the received form to give them in.
They may also be given in a form that is not fluid, viz. of powder, bole, &c. some of your vomi∣tories being powdered and incorporated with a conserve. (So modern Authors prescribe vitrum antimonii, crocus metallorum, & Mercurius vitae.) which thing may also be done with other vomi∣tories which work in a greater quantity, (as Asa∣rum, the root of Pompion, &c. (except Hellebor, which is not to be given in substance, but its pur∣ging virtue to be drawn out by infusion: but a li∣quid form seems more commodious, because by its moisture the stomack is wet and relaxed, that those things which are to be voided may be ere∣cted with the greater ease, and more readily, be∣cause all things in the stomack are as it were washed out, and cannot cleave to as otherwise they would; as also because the stomack is filled, and thereby the readier to empty; otherwise the whole bottom must be as it were inverted, and turned up to the mouth of it before it could ex∣pel them. But as it is, if you desire to use that sol∣id form, you may by taking some of the follow∣ing powders either of it self in a spoon moistening it wth a little liquor, or by mixing it with some fit conserves, to two drams, or three drams, in the form of a ole; and thus the usual things shal be prescribed, Root of Asarum, from one dram to four scruples. Pompion root dryed, from two scruples to one dram. Nettle seed, from half a dram to a dram. Radish seed, from three drams to half an ounce. Bark of Walnuts to one dram. But if you take the vomitories of Minerals, used by late practisers, you may take
Of Vitrum Antimonii to grains six and eight to the strongest sort. Crocus metallorum to grains six or eight. Salt of Vitriol to one scruple, or half a dram. Roman vitriol or white vitriol prepared, from half a scruple to 1 scruple. THINGS to be dissolved, are either not used when you in tend to move it gently, and only to give occasion of motion to the excretive faculty, as above; or when the Liquor is sufficiently vomi∣tory; but chiefly if that that is to be voilled up∣wards, be readily prepared; if otherwise, divers things are dissolved in the said liquor, which may be reckoned two-fold, Vomitories, and not Vomi∣tories. The not vomitories are often and usual in a vo∣mitive decoction, and also in a Liquor that is not vomitive; in relation to their quality, they are to a three-fold end, viz. for the stirring up of the ex∣cretive faculty; for the preparation of the humor to be voided; and the correction of the symptoms, which may arise either from the humour, or vo∣mitory. For some are oyly and fatty, which move vomit by overthrowing the strength of the stomack, and give occasion to the excretive faculty, though ir∣ritated when it moves but slowly; and therefore are only used in the sleighter sort of Vomits when the stomack is apt to vomit, else not so fit; they are also useful for the quelling the sharpness of humors, or other things taken down, and poysons, such are common Oyl, Linseed Oyl, and Butter. Other things are used to bridle the violence of the cholerick gnawing humors, as Vinegar, Oxy∣mel simple, Syrup of Vinegar.
Others (and this is the chief end of things to be dissolved) respect the preparation of the hu∣mor that is to be voided, and are either cleansers when vitious humors are to be loosened from the stomack, or when they are slimy, clammy, and stick fast (as is usually phlegme;) these are Oxymel simple, Oxymel of Squils, Sugar, Honey; you may al∣so note that some do (much amiss) reckon a∣mong the vomitories, (contrary to experience) Oxymel, and syrup of Vinegar; when we see Vine∣gar it self (either smelt to or taken down) from whom the former have their energie doth bind, and that eruptions of blood, fluxes of the belly, and vomitings are stayed by it; so that they can only be used to prepare the humors that they may the more easily be voided. In relation to the quantity, they should be pre∣scribed from one ounce to an ounce and half, or two ounces, but these are not wont to be dissol∣ved in a vomitory made by infusion, or of other distill'd Liquor, because a preparation ought to precede the use of them, and because that Liquor of Vinegar serves wel enough to the same pur∣pose, yet 'twil be no great error if you do dissolve them in it. But Vomitories that are to be dissolved are best used when the Liquor it self is no way vomitive, and are some of the foresaid, in the same dose there set down. The USE: in it three things are to be consider∣ed, after what manner, how much, and when.
As to the manner, as Vomitories should be usu∣ally liquid, so should they also be taken warm; for so they the easier make a nauseousnes, and stir the excretive faculty; but if they are given in form of a bole, they are to be taken as boles are wont: but 'twil be convenient to give some Li∣quor warmed half an hour, or an hour after, to make the vomiting easier. As to the quantity or dose, a simple vomitory may be rightly given to one pound in them of ripe age, for so the excretive faculty of the sto∣mack is more oppressed. A Compound, of a decoction and that mode∣rate to eight ounces or ten. The dose of an infu∣sion (as also of a vomitive Liquor) is before not∣ed, the proportion also of a Liquor not vomitive, to 8 ounces, or ten ounces. As to the time when, in chronical diseases they may rightly be taken in the morning, the stomack being empty, like other purgere, especially if the humours that breed the nauseousnes are thin: but when on the contrary they are tough, gross and clammy, if you take them after meat; they wil work the sooner and the easier: in periodical diseases, and intermitting Agnes, as the fit begins; because we see nature ordinarily indeavour this way of evacuation at that time of her own accord. Yet take them at any time when poyson, or any hurtful thing hath been taken down into the sto∣mack. And this shal be the FORM of Prescrib∣ing. 1. If of a Decoction, ℞ &c. make a decoction in, &c. q. s. take of the straining, &c. make a vo∣mitory to be taken warm at such an hour; and if he do not vomit a little after, let him provoke a vomit by his finger thrust down his throat: if you would dissolve some things in it, you may add, take of the straining, &c. in which dissolve, &c.
2. If of an infusion, ℞ &c. Make an infusion in, &c. let them be strained and filtrated thorow a brown paper (because an infusion for the most part consists of the strongest sort; if you should be content with only straining it, there were fear that some of the gross substance might pass thorow with the liquor, which sticking long in the tunicles of the stomack might too long provoke vomiting, and trouble the patient;) so make a vo∣mitory. 3. If of a distilled liquor. ℞. of such a liquor &c. let him drink it, nd a little after let him vo∣mit. 4. If of a liquor that is not vomitive, ℞. &c. in which dissolve, &c. Make a vomitory. 5. If in a solider forme, as of a bole, ℞, of the powder &c. mingle it with such a conserve, which let him take as a bole; a little after let him vomit: but if in the form of a powder, ℞ &c. let him take it in a spoon in a fit liquor. The UTILITY: vomiting and vomitories were used by the Antients both to prevent dis∣eases, and also to cure them; for with them it was usuall (for health sake) to vomit every moneth, as may be observed out of Hipocrates; and for this reason they did the more easily bear vomitories through custom. But at this day they are only used for the cure of diseases; and they are very few which in a sound condition wil use them to prevent dis∣eases, unless such as are much given to intemper∣ance: neither in our age wil they give them indif∣ferently in any diseases, but in those which are rebellious and chronical.
But the utility of a vomitory is either particu∣lar, respecting the stomack, or universal, regard∣ing the whole region, or some other part of it, de∣riving the offending humors of them; or if it flow from some other place to them, withdrawing it; so that the motion of nature, and inclination of the humor, together with the verge of the places, and parts wherein it stayes, and where into it fals, and the wayes by which they are to be derived or withdrawn be naturally dispos'd thereto, and have some proximity and com∣munion with the stomack by free passages by which they may communicate: so that a vomit is in general an emptying or purging remedy, as wel particularly of the stomack, as otherwise uni∣versally for derivation and revulsion. But it evacuates in special, 1. The stomack, from all excrementitious humours both choler∣ick and Phlegmatick, either thin, gross, & clam∣my, gathered by the imbecillity of that it self, or sent thither from the whole Body, Head, Bowels, or Veins; which a vomit doth clearly exclude whether they fluctuate in the cavity, or are impa∣cted in the tunicles of it. Hence it is profitable in the proper affections of the stomack, especially want of appetite, nau∣seousness, frequent vomitings, paines of the sto∣mack, and heart-burning, &c. and also for those diseases of other parts, contracted by their sympa∣thizing with it; for the very fountain from whence they sprang being exhausted, they also must needs vanish; for this it was that Galen said, it helped the affections of the Pericranium, and also the Falling Sickness, Megrim, Suffusions, and
all other affections of the head, ingendred by sympathy with the stomack, either by reason of the morbifical humors translation to the part affe∣cted, or the expiration of some vapour arising from the filth contained in the stomk: it also suddenly relieves the stomack, & frees it from the hurt might arise by things taken down, either met or drink, so much in quantity, or of an ill quality; also from Surfettings, ru lities, and poy∣sons. Furthermore, according to Galen, it cleanseth the first region of the body from a various impu∣rity, and purgeth forth the filth from the hollow part of the Liver, the Spleen, Pner as, Mesentery, and other parts adjaeent to the stomack: and as he himself hath noted, it excludes that at once which any other vehement purger cannot eradi∣cate at divers times; and for this reason contuma∣cious diseases of those parts have been healed mi∣raculously by it; for from those parts to the stomack the passages are short and expedite, therefore it is profitable in the proper affections of those parts, as Ill habit, Jaundies, Dropsie, Ob∣structions of the Liver and Spleen, Agues, which there have their fomenting causes, &c. and also (as we have said) it helps the stomack troubled by the diseases of other parts with which it hath communion, all whose impurities the causes of these sympathetick diseases are (according to Ga∣len) by this way eradicated.
Lastly, out of the same Author in his Lib. 1. concerning Fevers, it also purgeth the second and third region of the body, but 'tis only by the consecution of the humors, unless you use the strongest sort, as the Antients did their vomit of Hellebor, whereby they drew the exrmntitious humors even rom the most remote arts int the stomack; by the sam reason that we see your vi∣olent purgers do th like; therefore because it is not safe to use such vilent means to empty with∣al, in reltion to those parts 'tis only to be esteem∣ed  revelling remedy. It is, o profitable when the humor is contain∣ed in the parts neer the stomack, or fals to them from some other place, which by this means is atly derived; for which cause 'tis ood for the invetert affctions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesen∣ty, and intrals, therefore good in hypochon∣driacal affections, so that the diseases of those parts arise not romventosity, a hot distemper, or some tumor. It also turns the course of the humors falling in∣to divers parts, whether the original of the deflux∣ion be the stomak, o other arts contined in the first region and recals the vitious humors (falling to them) to the stomack from whence they are ex∣pell'd by vomit; hence (as aforesaid) 'tis profita∣ble in the sym pathetick affections of the Head, Fluxes of the Bely, the Sciatick, and pain of the joynts; so that Galen concludes a vomitory the most wholsom of all purging Medicines, so it work easily and moderately; but what observati∣ons are to be had in the administring it, see Hipo∣crates in his Aphorismes.
CHAP. VI. Of Medicinal Wines. MEdicinal Wines as they were in use among the Antients, as may be seen in Dioscorides; so also are they now in frequent use, especially among the Northern people, and those which are curious pa∣lated; who abhorring both altering and purging Deco∣ctions, Syrups, infusions, and Potions, for their unplea∣santness, do more liberally admit this sort of Wines, stored with the virtues of the same simples, and that to good purpose, as wel because Wine doth plentifully draw forth the inmost virtues of things; as also because by the help of his most piercing spirit, conveighs them into the farthest parts speedil; you may add also, that seeing many do fancy the taste of Wormwood-Wine, and use that, and that which is called Hypocras fa∣miliarly, divers purgers may be concealed under the taste of the Wine, so that they shal not finde it out; who without such a deceit would hardly take a purging Medicine. A MEDICINAL WINE is that that hath drank up the virtues of divers simple Medicines infused in it; prepared either to alter or purge. Hence it may be counted two-fold, one purging, the other altering. Both these in general are compounded, 1.
of Must or new Wine, such as can be had onely at the time of Vintage; and therefore you should then prepare) your Wine sufficient to serve a long time, viz. that it may help chronical affections. It is made in this manner; the medicaments dryed and cleansed are grosly brui∣sed and sowed up in a thin linen sack or bagg; (either bigger or lesser, according as you prepare more or less Wine, or intend it for a shorter or longer time,) put them in a vessel ful of new Wine, so that it may hang in the middle of the Wine; let them boyl together; af∣terward let them work some dayes; and as your Must sinks put new to it to fil it; when it hath done working, the vessel being close stopped, let all things steep fifteen or twenty dayes; then let your Wine so cleansed be drawn into other vessels, (lest by too long steeping the ingredients should corrupt, and contract some ungrate∣ful, hurtful quality, and impart it to the Wine;) so lay it up for your use.
2. Or of Wine cleansed from the lees, and this may be prepared at any time, and therefore may be made in a less quantity as you please, (according as the present use requireth) after this manner; let your me∣dicaments being dryed and cleansed be somewhat grosly bruised, and put into a glazed vessel (either big∣ger or less according to the quantity you intend to make) putting to them of the best white Wine, (or o∣ther quick tasied) three, four, six or eight times their weight (or more, as you intend the dose to be great or little, or the coutinuance of it long or short) let all (the vessel being close stopped,) steep eight, 12, 15, or twen∣ty dayes (if it be prepared in a greater quantity;) otherwise, (if you make but little, and would use it sud∣denly,) for three or four dayes; afterwards strain it, and shift it into other vessels for your use; or else (to make it the more pleasant and palating) let it be strained thorow a Hypocras bagg, (if it be prepared in a smal quantity; else 'twil be better to infuse the following things in it after it is strained:) let it let it be aromatized, and sweetned with s. q. of sugar, thus made, you ma call it either purging, or altering claret or hypocras, especially if it be aromtized by much spice But in special, because in either some things re to be specially observed, I wil treat of both, beginning with the purging Wine. The Purging Medicinal Wine. THat is called a Medicinal purging Wine which being impregnated with the virtues of divers purging simles, is prepared to purge either one humor alone or more 1. In regard o its composition it is either simple consisting of one simple Cathartick together with his correctors or commound, which is made of many pur∣gers together with their correctrs, or in which are al∣so infused divers lterers, respecting the part affected or humor to be purgd. 2. In respect of the quality of the purgers them∣selves, and the humers to be evacuated, one is an uni∣versal purger, others &c. 3. Laly it  made without sweetning or spicing, of the aforesaid things onely, and is simply called a purging Medicinal Wine; or else 'tis over and above sweened with Sugar, and seasoned with spice, and strained divers times thorow a Hypocras bagg: and is called purging Claret, or purging Hypocras (for that term absolutely taken signifies a Wine prepared for pleasure.) In it three things are to be coilered, the Com∣position, the se, and the profit. In the COMPOSITION three things are to be examined.
1. The Wine of which 'tis made. 2. The things to be infused in it. 3. The things that are sometimes dissolved in it. In all these we must consider both the quality and quantity. The WINE in respect of its quality is either new and uncleansed, which is otherwise called Must, which is much commended for this pur∣pose, because by the protection of its colour, and working heat, the colour and taste of the ingredi∣ents are the better obscured; or else Wine cleans∣ed from the lees, and kept for use, either red or white. But in relation to the quantity, this in general is limited by the use and dose; as, if the use be to continue long or short time, or the dose to be a larger or a Iess quantity; as thus, it may exceed the things that are to be infused, eight, six, four, or three times their weighty but those which add 12 times their weight do it in favour to them that love bibbing, perhaps not with respect to the in∣tention. And it wil be alwaies best to let the dose for a purging Wine be as little as you can in quantity, that it may be the less, and more ac∣ceptable. But in special, they usually define the quantity of Wine and things to be infused in it, thus; A purging Wine that is to be prescribed is to be used twelve dayes, either together, or every other day; in which you must be sure to have twelve several doses of the purgers with their correctors, and if it
e needful fit alterers; then must you compute the quantity of them all, as for example, suppose them 8 ounces, now if you would have the dose o the Wine to be about an ounce and a half, or two ounces, prescribe it to 3 times their weight; and so for other quantities as you please; by the same way and reasons you may proceed as you see fit: but if the Wine be purely purging, made of the gentler sort of Catharticks, 'tis to be taken four, five, or six times, allowing requisite internals, as in the magisterial sy∣rups. The things to be infused in respect of their qua∣lity, are 1. either purgers onely, with their corre∣ctors, (among which Cinnamom is chiefly used for pleasantness of the spice; as also Calamus Aroma∣ticus of the shops for its fragrant smel) either one or more: and these are to be chosen such as are not of a very strange and unpleasant taste; such are Senna, Polipody, Epithymum, black Hellebor, (especi∣ally for Melancholy persons) Carthamus, Turbith, Hermodactils, (for the phlegmatick) Scammony, Cassia, and Manna sometimes, (for the cholerick and sweet palated, though seldom) Me choacan, and the seeds of dwarf Elder, (for purging serous humors;) of the which Wines may be prepared to purge any humors; either of some of these single, or (for the mixture of humors, and complication of intent i∣ons) of divers joyned together. 2. Or else with them are also infused divers alterers dryed, as Woods, Roots, Barks, Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, spices either fewer or more, such as respect the humor, or part, whereby the wind is rendred more familiar to it, and generally the Germans (because they are pleased with it) mix wormwood with it.
In relation to the quantity (whether it be a simple purging Wine, or made of more things) the number of doses for which the wine is prepar∣ed shal direct you, as for example: a Wine of Senna is desired for twenty doses; now the dose of Senna an infusion is half an ounce, or six drams; therefore ten ounces or fifteen of it is to be prescribed, ad∣ding correctors in the proportion aforesaid. If the Wine be prepared of many purgers both gentle and strong, and also alterers joyned with them; this proportion is for the most part to be generally observed. Of the gentle sort of purgers let there be one part. Of the stronger sort, a quarter so much as com∣monly it is (though you may add them to a third part or to half, it matters not so you finde out the right dose of the Wine,) of Correctors, a quarter so much as of purgers, or else to a third part, if the purgers are the strongest sort. Alterers should be half so much as the purgers, or a third part (if very effectual, as dryed Roots, Seeds, and Spices especially) marking this, that dryed Leaves are to be prescribed by handfuls, ounces, and drams; And flowers by pugils, and ounces also, and drams. THINGS that are to be DISSOLVED, in respect of their quality (if perhaps the taste or smel doth not please the curious palated) are Sugar, some certain spices, especially Cinnamom, which are cast into the Wine (if it be much;) or if a smal quan∣tity, they are put into a Hypocras bag g, and the Wine often poured thorow them, and is made in∣to a purging Hypocras. As to their quantity: for every pound of pur∣ging Wine you may add 3 ounces, or 4 ounces of Sugar, and two drams of
Cinnamom; as the Apo∣zems, Juleps. Hypocrass, &c. are wont to be made and aromatized. As to the USE: in it two things are chiefly to be considered, how much, and when. As to the quantity or dose of Wine to be drank which is not alwayes one but divers, and which (of whatsoever quantity of purgers or Wine you compose your Wine withal) you shal thus find out, and exactly define. Measure your Medicinal Wine when you strain it, and shift the vessels, and by the measure collect the weight; or else by some other means; And (as for example) suppose it to be three pound, and this was made purgative with four ounces of Senna, two ounces of Polypody: of Epithymum and black Hellebor of each an ounce and a half, there being one ounce, or an ounce and half of corre∣ctors also added over and above; Now because all these infused suffice for seventeen doses, they are also sufficient for seventeen times; then if you divide it into so many doses, you may find it out without error, and the true dose of it wil be two ounces, if you would purge strongly, for once; but if you would purge often and gently for some dayes together, half that dose wil suffice.
As to the time when; because a Medicinal Wine is usually destined for tedious, stubborn, and especially cold affections, (such as many are that have had continuance from dreggy mucilagi∣nous humors) whose causes cannot suddenly, but must by little and little be taken away; therefore the use of it is to be continued for divers dayes (especially in the winter time, to 10, 15, or 20 together, or every other day, like the usual pils; so may this also be drank in the morning, or two hours before dinner: but if it be not intended for this kinde of purging (which is called Epicrasis,) but that you would give it for once to work strongly; the use of it wil be the same as of your other eradicators in the morning, when the indi∣cation of purging shall require; or if it be pre∣scribed instead of your purging magisterial syrup the use is the same with that once or twice in a moneth, in the morning like other purgers. The FORM of Prescribing may easily appear from the manner of compounding it.
The UTILITY: as to the benefit arising from this form, whether you look upon the virtues of the simples infused that are to be extracted, & which the Wine doth copioufly attract to it self, or the conveighing them into the most intimate parts of the body, by the help of its piercing spirit: or whether you consider the familiarity of it with our nature; which makes it be friendly received by her; or its formal essence, what affinity it hath by its very substance with the radical moisture, heat, and spirit of the solid parts of our body, for which cause it easily is converted into them, and united with them, carrying with it the virtues of those simples steeped in it, I say considering all these, it cannot but be to our great benefit: so that whether it be to purge, and seperate the dreg∣gy humors, confused with the rest of the humours, spirits, and solid parts, it can do it perfectly, by the familiarity it hath with our nature, whereby it may insinuate it self, and the virtues it is imbued withal; or whether it be to alter divers wayes, ei∣ther to cleanse away the relicks of the foregoing impurities, or restore the natural vigour by appro∣priat means, or to strengthen the parts: either of these are this way effectually performed through the sympathy it hath with nature, and is united to it, together with the Medicinal virtues it car∣ries with it. But though the benefit of Medicinal VVine be so great, yet 'tis not so frequently used in all re∣gions, nor at all times of the year; but is most u∣sual with them that inhabit cold Countries, and chiefly in the Winter, Spring, and Autumn. In general, 'tis good in a cold time of the year, a cold Country, and cold temper of the body, &c. as is specially profitable in chronical affections, & a cold time of the year for delicate palated per∣sons, and is prescribed against paleness of colour, difficulty of breathing, confirmed obstructions of the bowels; and for them that are also paralytical, though VVine be forbidden to them, (in which respect wine made of Honey would be much better) in affections of the stomack, and weak∣nesse arising from crude cold humors, VVorm∣wood-wine made purging would be excellent. The Medicinal altering Wine. UNder the notion of altering Wines are contained Wines imbued with divers faculties, which both respect certain parts, break the relikes of humors left behinde blot out the remainder of diseases, and also specifically corroborate (as of simple Wines) are Sage wine for cold affections of the brain, Hysop and Elecampane wine
for the Breast, and worm∣wood wine which is familiar to the stomack.) As al∣so they which evacuate, yet without a purger, (as Wines prescribed to move sweat, break the Stone, provoke Ʋrine, and the courses;) as also those which excite, cherish, and confirm the virtues of the principal parts; as those which are made of spices to strength∣en. And this is (as the purging Wine) in respect of its composition either simple or compound. In respect of its essect, either altering the body, hu∣mors, or spirits, in the first second or third qualities or else strengthening. Moreover, 'tis made either without sweetning, or spicing, and is simply called a Medicinal altering Wine; or else is seasoned with such things, and let often run thorow a Hypocras bagg, as above, and is cal∣led a Claret or Hypocras, although these names belong to such as are made for pleasure. In it three things are to be weighed, the Compo. only sition, the Ʋse, and the Ʋtility. The COMPOSITION is the same with that of the purging Wine; either 'tis made with Must, (when the use is to continue long, for the alter∣ing of chronical and stubborn affections,) & one simple medicament dryed; or of more, respecting the affection, humor, and part affected with a particular propriety; or else with wine defe∣cated. But what ought to be the proportion of the must, and dryed ingredients, is before declared in the purging wine; yet you may add (because altering wines may be taken in a larger quantity, and ought to be so) a greater quantity of wine then in the former, to ten times, or a 11 times the quanti∣ty of the ingredients.
But the quantity both of wine and ingredients is to be limited by the dose that is to be taken ei∣ther greater or less, by the short or long conti∣ance of its use. Lastly by the quality of the sim∣ples,   either weak, or effectual, as that which spices in art to it. We have said before that this sort of Wines when they are passed thorow a hypocrass bagg, and sweetned, are called clarets. Hither also belongs that which is otherwise called Hypocras absolutely, which is also cor∣roborating, composed of divers spices, pleasant both in smel and taste; as of Cinamom, Ginger, Grains of paradise, Cardamomes, Pepper, infused to two drams in one pound of claret Wine, for some hours, afterwards strained thorow a Hypo∣cras bagg divers times, adding sugar s. q. viz: two ounces or three ounces; but 'is generally mae Iess compounded of Cinamom only, but if in stead of sugar the Wine be relished with hony, 'twil be vere profitable in cold affections, where vvine alone is hurtfull, as in the Palsey, &c. the honey working most effectually; and this is called Oeno∣mel, or honied Wine; and also Mulsum, which the Ancients used much, made of one part of honey, and two or three parts of VVine, Spices also being added if need required, either to the quantity of half a part, or to one fourth part, or one fifth part. The USE contains these two questions: how much, and when? As to the time when, it may be given every day, or every other day, or interposing a longer time, according as the disease requires, 1, two or three hours before dinner. As to the quantity or dose, that is moderated according to the quality and quantity of the in∣gredients, and the divers proportion of the wine they are infused in; as when the ingredients infu∣sed
In it three things are to be considered, Com∣position, Ʋse, and utility. In the COMPOSITION also three. 1. The matter of which stamped the milky juyce is drawn forth of. 2 The liquor with which it is milked out. 3. Things to be dissolved in it. In all these the quality and quantity are to be considered. The MATTER in relation to its quality are both fruits, as Almonds, viz: the sweet, blanched, and also seeds, viz. the 4 greater cold seeds, of which emulsions are every where usually made. To these are sometimes added both fruits, as the kernels of pine nuts in affections of the breast, or where we would moysten, and also restore, as in Hectick; and also seeds, as usually of white pop∣py, Lettuce, and Purslane, when we would either-provoke sleep, or cool more effectually, or thicken thin & hot humors, and temper their acrimony. In respect of their quantity, both fruits and seeds are in general prescribed from one ounce to three ounces, but in special, there may be of fruits, an ounce and half or two ounces; of seeds, one ounce, or an ounce and half. The LIQUOR with which this milky sub∣stance is drawn forth, in relation to his quality is either fair water, or some simple distill'd wat∣er; or usually the decoction of whole Barley, es∣pecially where we desire to cleanse; or ptisan, that is, the second decoction of huld barly, after the first wter is thrown away, or else the decoction of li∣quorice, where we, would lenifie; or the decoction of other pleasant things tending to the same pur∣pose.
In regard of the quantity for every particular dose, three ounces, or four ounces wil suffice; hence (because Emulsions are for the most part prepar∣ed only for three doses, for 'twil not be kept longer without corrupting) you may prescribe 9 ounces, or one pound. Things to be DISSOLVED, in relation to their quality, are sometimes Sugar alone; or as it is ge∣nerally received, some fit Syrup pleasant to the taste, that may moisten, lenifie, and cool, as Syrup of Violets, and Maidenhair. Sometimes to make it the more pleasant, there is added some Rose-water. They also which dissolve Manus Christi made and with Pearls do very wel. As to the quantity of sweetners, one ounce, or an ounce and half at most wil serve for one dose; an ounce, or an ounce and half of Rose-water wil serve for the whole Emulsion, and a dram of Manus Christi for every dose. The USE: in it three things are to be consi∣dered, the manner how, the quantity how much, and the time when. As to the manner; 'tis taken either by it self in the form of a drink, or else 'tis often prescribed; 3 ounces, or 4 ounces of it with the broth of a chick altered with appropriat things. As to the quantity, the dose is apparent by what is already said. As to the time when; 'tis taken morning and evening; and if it be prescribed to procure sleep, then at the time of going to sleep. The FORM of prescribing, ℞ &c. let them be beaten in a marble Mortar, pouring to them by little and little,
&c. in the strained Liquor dis∣solve,
&c. so make an Emulsion for three or 4 doses, to be used as aforesaid. The UTILITY: an Emulsion is not only pre∣scribed to lenifie and asswage the affections of the Breast and Lungs, especially the hot and dry; the burning of the Reins, and Bladder, sharpness of Urine, and Gonorrhea, as they usually wil have it; but to other uses also: against thirst, and to temper heat in any hot diseases; and therefore is most peofitable in burning continual Fevers, to temper the drought of them that alwayes accom∣panieth such diseases; therefore are they very usual in the Hecticks, and to provoke sleep; and alter in Fevers or any hot distempers instead of Apo∣zems. Generally 'tis used to lenifie, cool, and moisten. CHAP. VIII. Of Almond Milk. THis differs not much in colour and taste from an Emulsion, only 'tis usually thicker than it. This is two-fold, one more liquid, being a milky substance drawn out of Almonds, like the Emulsion as aforesaid; another thicker, made thick with boyling, of which at present. And this is a restorative Medicine, somewhat thinner of substance than syrup, much like Milk, (hence 'tis called Almond Cream, & Almond milk) drawn and sweetned with Sugar, prepared both to alter and nourish.
CHAP. IX. Of Barly Cream. THat which we (from the matter it is made of) call Barly cream, the Antients from the manner of preparing called Ptisan: which was a meat made of barly huld, and baked, (for the Greek word signifies, to hull and bark,) and water; usually we cal this barly cream; but our ptisan is a drink. And though it be seldom prescribed, yet 'tis COMPOUNDED, either after the grosser manner of barly cleansed and boyled, which is given to∣gether with the broth, adding sugar as you list; but this is only convenient for sound people. Or else that which is truly barly cream, of huld barley two ounces; let it boyle in fair water, over a gentle fire, then cast away the water, and boyl it is a new water four or five houres with a gentle fire, then pulp the barly thorow a strainer, sweeten it with one ounce, or ounce and a half, or two ounces of sugar, and after let them be a lit∣tle boyled. The VSE: anciently it was wont to be the meat of feverish people, but now a dayes 'tis given for the most part neer sleeping time; and then if they are troubled with over-watching, there is added to it little of the emulsion prepared with white poppy seeds. The UTILITY of it is much in fevers, in which it is an alimentory medicine, cooling, cleansing, nou∣rishing much, & breeding good juyce; it moystens, and is best for affections of the breast, & hecticks.
CHAP. X. Of Milk, and the whey of Milk. MIlk also happens to be prescribed, but chiefly in the phthyfick and disentery, and that with some caution, both in the sort of milk, and also in the dose, and manner of giving it; Asses milk is chiefly commended in the hectick, because it restores radical moysture, and is of good juice; Cows milk is the fattest, and fullest of butter; sheeps milk is fullest of cheese, Goats milk moderate between all, best for persons extenuated. As to the USE, DOSE, and manner of PRESCRIB∣ING, 'tis this, ℞ of Asses milk, (when you would cool & cleanse, but Goats milk when you would nourish) four ounces; of sugar or honey (left it corrupt or grow sowr in the stomack,) one ounce, and this for the first dose; for the second dose in∣creasing one ounce, to five ounces, so proceeding til you come to ten ounces, or twelve ounces, and then decreasing again by the same degrees, til you are returned to the same quantity: let it be ta∣ken 4 hours before meat, neither sleeping, nor mo∣ving the body violenly after the taking of it. But the use of milk is never to be begun, til the body be very wel cleansed.
The UTILITY: 'tis chiefly prescribed for those that are hectical, for it fattens, restores; in the use of it we must have a care that the body be not impure, for in a cold stomack it sowres; in a hot, it turns to a nidorousness, from whence comes Head-ach; it is not therefore profitable for them
that are Feverish, or have their short rib-region puft up: but 'tis very commodious in the dysente∣ry, both to lenifie, and also cleanse and heal the Ulcer, especially if it be chalibeated, and you give a good quantity of it morning and evening, with one scruple of Terra sigillata, four hours before a∣ny meat. The WHEY OF MILK is not nourishing, but medicinal, and evacuates both serous and adust humors: if it be liberally taken it cools, and is good in those that are Feverish, and in the heat of the Liver and Reins in summer time; but most profitable in Melancholy, and affections proceed∣ing from it, as the Leprosie, Scabbiness, &c. es∣pecially if Fumitory be steeped in it. This is the USE and manner of PRESCRIB∣ING. ℞ VVhey of Milk let it be strained & boyl∣ed, (both because it is windy, as also that any thing of curdiness in it may be separated and settled;) then steep in two pound of it, for one night, one handful of Fumitory, of Succory, m. ss. when 'tis strained add to it an ounce, or an ounce and half of Sugar; but the second day two ounces are to be added more; so every day increasing til you come to three pound; afterwards on the con∣trary decreasing til you come to one pound. O∣therwise let one pound serve every day for a moneth together, steeping in it the same quantity of Fumitory, adding to it when 'tis strained one ounce of Sugar; and in Melancholy people as much of the Cider or juice of pippins. Otherwise 'tis used for fevers and heats, to eight ounces, with sorrel steeped in it, and that in the morning four hours before meat.
that they more hang in it tyed in a ragg 2 drams, or more of yest, or Leven, and add to it half a dram, or two scruples of spices; to every pound; and so according to the quantity of Hony. The USE and UTILITY, it is prescribed for the ordinary drink in cold affections, and especi∣ally the phlegmatick, and where the abstaining from VVine is advantagious, or where the use of it is hurtful, as in the Palsey; or when we desire effectual virtues, powerful both to alter cold hu∣mors, and strengthen the natural heat; it also won∣derfully preserves from putrefaction: But as it is convenient for them that are of cold complexion, and for old men; so is it hurtful for those that are feverish, cholerick, or hot of temper: because it soon turns into choler, and grows bitter, as we may finde in boyling it over-much, or by keeping it too long: therefore Hippocrates forbis it to them that are very cholerick, or that have great spleens, in which it is too suddenly drawn into the body; from hence it is that it is the cause of crudities, and incredible windiness of the intrals; it is also according to Hippocrates diuretica), wonderfully cleansing and driving forth sand or gra∣vel. The Winish performs this more sorcibly, and like Malmsey powerfully concocts cold humours, expectorates, enthens the stomack and conco∣ction, discusseth windiness, & concocts crudities; as also doth the commoner sort according to Ga∣len; it wonderfully, loosens humors in the breast, and is good for them that be asthmatick.
The Medicinal Mead is easily prepared of the simple by boyling dryed simples in it, respecting the part to which it is destined, and of those such as are most pleasant; let them be boyled after it is clear scum'd, & let them be (for example) four handfuls of Herbs; boyl them, and strain the LI∣quor from them, in which infuse for two or three hours half an ounce, or six drams of spices. The Ʋtility is great, and the virtue of it speci∣fical, (besides what is afore-said) in taking away diseases, especially cold ones, and those of long continuance, as the Palsey, &c. CHAP. XII. Of Sugred Water, and Barly Water. SUGRED WATER is a more sweet and plea∣sing drink than Mead, and is almost as effectu∣al, in those in whom we abstain from the use of Mead for fear of heat, and is chiefly convenient for them that are abstemious. It is made of Fountain water clarified at the fire, 12 parts, and sugar one part, more or less to your palate. You may aromatize it with Cinnamom, or in fe∣vers with Saunders to 3 drams, or half an ounce; so let them use it for their ordinary drink PTISAN was a meat of the Antients, which we now call barly Cream. Our ptisan is a drink fit broth for the healthy, and Feverish, and when heat is either present, or imminent, and where Wine is forbidden. And this is made divers wayes, according to the desire of them that take it.
Either it is made simply of whole Barley, and fountain-water, to one part of Barly, ten, fifteen, or which is better, twenty parts of water, as 'tis generally made in the shops, which is to be boyl∣ed to the consumption of five parts, and til the barly swel much; (Nicholaus therefore directs ill to boyl it to the consumption of fifteen parts, un∣less it be for meat) and such like is vulgarly eal∣led in the shops, Barley water, and decoction of Barley. Or else Liquorice, Raisins of the Sun, the roots of Grass or Sorrel, and other things, according to the palate of him that takes it, are boyled in it, though in smal quantity; but 'tis seldom now a dayes prescribed by the Physitian. The UTILITY: it moistens, cools, cleanses, yeilds little nourishment, but such as is fit for cholerick and sanguine people, and for them that are in fevers, or have hot affections of the Liver, Stomack, or Reins. Note, that Barly water, or that which we now cal Ptisan, consists of whole barly, one part; of water, twenty parts, boyled til the barly swel, and the cream of Barly, til it be bursted: but that which we cal Barly cleansed and boyled, is boyled til it go into a pulp, represents the Ptisan of the Antients; and if it be pulped thorow a hair strainer, 'tis called the juyce of Barly.
CHAP. XIII. Of Dyet-drink. BY this name of Diet, we do not so much under∣stand the regulating of the six things not natural, as divers decoctions made of usual sweating Medi∣cines; through the whole use of which, because an ex∣act and accurate way of living temperately is to be observed, from hence it is that these have been abso∣lutely called by the name of Diet. But that which we understand by the name Diet, is a decoction of one of the usual sudorifical Medicines, or more, made in a fit Liquor, prepared either to alter simply, or evacuate insensibly by transpiration, or sensi∣bly by sweat. Therefore a Diet-drink is to be accounted two-fold, altering and evacuating. The altering Diet-drink. ALthough these four usual sweating Medicines seem to be destined only for provoking sweat, yet are they often prescribed with very good success in divers affections without sweating; hence it is that I cal it an altering Diet-drink. In this three things are to be considered, the Composition, the Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In the COMPOSITION three things also, the matter of which 'tis made, the Liquor, and the things to be dissolved in it.
The MATTER in relation to its quality, is two-fold. 1. Some of the common Sudorificks, as Guaia∣cum, China, Sassafras and Salsaparilla. 2. Divers alterers, as roots, leaves, seeds, flow∣ers, &c. respecting the affection, the humor offend∣ing, and part affected. But in special, that matter is chosen diversly, according to the variety of the parts in which the affections that are to be removed are inherent. For in altering and removing powerfully phlegmatick and inveterate affections, we usually take Guaiacum, China, or Salsaparilla, either alone, or mixed together with fit alterers, as afore∣said. But in affections of the breast, as the stuffing, Ulcer, and putrefaction of the Luns, (in which now a dayes such an altering diet is usually pre∣scribed, and is every where called the pectoral de∣coction,) we chuse either China alone, or else there is sometimes added to it Salsaparilla, or Sassafras, together, with alterers appropriated to the breast. So that from what is said before, an altering Diet drink may be reckoned two-fold, 1. Not pectoral, in∣sensibly consuming the phlegmatick affections of divers parts, 2. Pectorel, viz. a decoction of China, (some∣times Salaprilla being added) prepared of pectoral seeds and fruits, such is only now a dayes prescribed.
As to the quantity; those sudorificks in a diet-drink not pectoral are prescribed either alone, or mixed, to six ounces more or less, according as the time, age, and region shal further require; but al∣terers, as Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, either all or some of them are to be added to half the quantity they are appointed for the Apozem a∣foresaid. But in a pectoral Diet-drink, whose basis is China, this (if alone) is added to one ounce; if o∣ther things aforesaid be joyned to it, then to two drams, or three drams of these, they usually take six drams of China. Of alterers pectoral fruits are added to an ounce and a half, or two ounces; pectoral seeds to an ounce, or an ounce and a half; and if (as some∣times in the Phthysis) the flesh of Craw-fish, or tortoises be added, 'tis to an ounce, or two oun∣ces. The LIQUOR, in relation to its quality in an altering Diet drink not pectoral, is common water, or some other fit liquor, as before in the Apozem, chiefly Mead) because these sorts of decoctions for the most part respect cold affections, and hu∣mors. In a pectoral Diet-drink also, either com∣mon water, or decoction of Barly is taken; but with this proviso, that the China be infused in this Li∣quor for some hours; then let it be put up together with the pectoral fruits and seeds in the belly of a chick, or hen; then let them boyl in the aforesaid Liquor til all be boyled to pieces. As to its quantity, take 10 or 12 pints, or q. s. as is required to boyl it throughly. Things to be dissolved, as to their quality, in a diet-drink not pectoral, are sometimes syrup, or sugar, and are prescribed to be dissolved together with the aromaticks, as in an altering Apozem. In a pectoral drink sugar of Roses is generally prescribed, yet it may be also some fit syrup. As to their quantity, they are dissolved to an ounce, or an ounce and a half, in every dose.
The USE: in it mark three things, the manner, the quantity, and the time. The decoction not pectoral, as to the manner indrinking, is to be taken without sweating. As to the united quantity, or dose, it is to be taken to four ounces, or six ounces; as to the divided quantity, it is to be used ten or fifteen dayes. As to the time, this sort of alterer ought to be taken in the morning. The pectoral drink also, as to the manner, is taken without sweat. As to the dose, six ounces also, and is to be conti∣nued also for fifteen dayes. The Time also is the morning. And this is the FORM of PRESCRIBING. In a decoction not pectoral, ℞. &c. make a deco∣ction, keep it in a glazed vessel for four or five morning doses, which (the body being first pur∣ged) let him continue for ten or fifteen dayes; in the mean time observing a moderate and dry∣ing diet; and for his ordinary drink, let him use the second decoction of the aforesaid ingredients, which is called a Bochette.
But in a pectoral one, ℞. (China, or other thing, infuse them in, &c. of water, then put them in the belly of a chick, together with the fruits, &c. boyl it til it be all to pieces, adding at the latter end of the decoction the leaves, &c. (viz. the preparers) straine all with a gentle pressure; in one pound of the strained liquor dissolve, &c. for two doses, to be given in the morning, keeping his bed two or three hours after, without sweating; let him continue this fifteen, or 20, or 30 dayes, the body being first purged with Manna, which is to be repeated once in fifteen dayes: in the mean time living temperatly, and using the second decoction of China, or small mead, for his ordi∣nary drink. The Utility is remarkeable in all long-lasting affections, when your scope requires the attenuat∣ing, resolving, or otherwise insensibly consuming that collection offilthy humors yt foments this sort of chronical affections; as also to rarifie the wayes and passages by which they are to be digested, and to prepare them powerfully for expurgation: neither is it safe to use them with sweat, as in the Asthma, and Phthysis especially, in which now a dayes this sort of diet is onely prescribed; in which affections 'tis pernitious to use either pur∣gers, or Sudorificks. Neither can we consume or evacuate those humors that are the fomenters of such affections any other way. An evacuating Diet, drink. SƲch as is now a dayes for the most part only pres∣cribed, is here understood, which consumes and empties the morbifical causes by sweat. And this is two-fold, one only sweating, the other is also purgative. The sweating decoction is now only properly called a Diet-drink; and is (as I said before) that which visi∣bly consumes the Antecedent, and conjunct causes of diseases by sweatings. In this three things are to be marked; the Composi∣tion, the Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In the COMPOSITION two things are to be considered.
1. The matter of which this sort of decoctions are made. 2. The Liquor in which they are boyled. And in either of them both the quality, and the quantity. The matter, in respect of the quality is either sudorifical, or also altering both at once some∣times. As to the sudorificks, 'tis compounded either of Guaiacum, and its barkonly; or only China, seldom of Salsaparlla alone, and hardly ever of Sassafras alone. Either of Guaiacum as the basis, with sometimes one, sometimes two of the others mixed with it, according to the divers intentions of the Physi∣tian; or else that the too much heat of Guaiacum might be allayed, yet retaining the same benefit of sweating. Or of China as the basis with Salsaparilla, or Sas∣safras where the scope is to heat less; yet it dries as much, and consumes vitious humors equally. As to the alterers, it is most profitable (with the aforesaid) to add divers altering simples towards the end of the decoction, that may be appropriat∣ed to the humor and part affected, whereby the Diet-drink becomes famous; or else they are ad∣ded to this end only to correct & allay the heat∣ing and drying quality of the Guaiacum, lest it too much inflame the Liver; and for this are used Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, Flowers, either more or less. As to the quantity, sudorificks prescribed alone, or mixt, should be allotted to one ounce, or an ounce
and a half for every dose; and because a sweating diet-drink is usually prescribed for 4 doses, only four ounces, or six ounces ought to be prescribed; which quantity may be lessened or augmented according to the variety of the tempers, age, strength, time of the year, constitution of the dis∣ease, Country, &c. But the alterers when they are added to them, should be prescribed to half the quantity they are appointed for the Apozem; and as to their order they should be set after the sudorificks; this is eve∣ry where to be observed, that in the decoction of Guaiacum you are to add Liquorice, and Raisins of the Sun, ana, an ounce, or one ounce, and a half. The LIQUOR, in relation to its quality is pre∣scribed to be fountain-water. As to the quantity, although by the precepts of art in the decoction of Roots and Woods it ought to be eight times so much as of the things to be boyled; yet because in the decoction of these sweating drinks much of the Liquor useth to be wasted, it ought to be twelve times their quan∣tity; so that to one ounce of Sudorificks should be one pint of water, and then to be boyled til half be wasted, which is the most usual manner; it may also be prescribed to a pint and half, and then boyled til two thirds be wasted. The USE: as to the quantity, eight cu∣ces of this sort of decoction may be gi∣ven. As to the manner, let it be drank warm, covering the body with many clothes more than is wont.
As to the time, 'tis best in the morning some∣times, though seldom 'tis repeated at evening: in very strong and phlegmatick bodies, abound∣ing with excrementiious humours. The FORM OF PRESCRIBING is after this example of Guaiacum, ℞. the shavings of the wood of Guaiacum four ounces, the bark of the same two ounces; let them be infused in six or nine pints; of fountain water twenty four hours, over warm embers, the Vessel being close stop∣ped; then boil them with a gentle fire of fresh charcoal without smoak, till half be wasted; afterwards run them throrow an hypocras bag, (but if you desire the decoction the stronger, presse them out gently, sweeten the decoction with three ounces, or four ounces of Sugar, and aromatize it with a dram and a half, or two drams of Cinnamom (but this sweetning and a∣romatizing may better be omitted in those that are lesse curious palated) so keep it in a glazed vessel for your use; let him take of this decocti∣on eight ounces warm in the morning, covering him warmer than usually, and let him sweat as he can reasonably endure it. Note, that when Alterers are prescribed wih the sudorificks, it may be appointed in the form thus, towards the end of the decoction adde such things, &c.
℞ the remainders of the decoction aforesaid, (viz. when no other simples are added to it) add (if you wil) an ounce of some of the aforesaid sudorificks fresh, infuse them in 12 pints of fount∣a in water, eight or twelve hours, boil them till a third part or a quarter onely be wasted, strain them through an hypocras bag, sweeten it with s.q. of Sgar, and aromatize it with a dram and a half, or two drams of Cinnamom, so make it for a second decoction, or a bochet for your or∣dinary drink. Observe, that this manner of diet should be continued for fifteen, twenty, or thirty dayes (un∣lesse the strength fails, then may it be now and then intermitted three or four days space) in which space let him rather use rost meats then boiled, as mountain and field-birds stuck thorow with Cinnamom and cloves, as also hens and capons, bisket-bread baked with anniseed, and raisms of the Sun, torrified Almonds, and in the last course at table, coriander and anniseed comfits: let him use the second decoction strained, and aromati∣zed with sugar and Cinnamom, q. s. for his ordina∣ry drink, but if his belly be bound, let a com∣mon glyster be now & then administred, or which is best, every six or eight dayes, renew the use of pills, potions, or other purgers prescribed, (that the more grosse matter wch (the thinner parts be∣ing consumed otherwise) useth to remain behinde in the bowels may also be expelled) on which day let him abstain from the use of the decoction. And as they ought to be purged well before the use of the decoction, so ought they also every eleventh or twelfth day.
There useth also in the prescribing these diet∣drinks, of digesting head-herbs, (the hair be∣ing first shaved off) two bags to be applied to the head reasonable hot for a quarter of an hour, til the sweat burst forth of the face, as soon as the drink is taken down) to provoke sweat, and also after sweat is wiped off, especially in affecti∣ons of the head, as well todigest as consume the offensive cause; and when these are taken away, the head is to be wrapped in warmed locks of Hempe, fumed with the ordinary fume. The UTILITY is eminent and plentifull, not onely in externall, but also in the internall af∣fections, especially the contumacious, whose causes have taken deeprooting, and could not be removed by ordinary purgers, and alte∣rers, so that they need these sorts of medicines, which by their subtilty and tenuity of parts may either insensibly dissolve them, or visi∣bly expell them by sweat, and discusse the reliques of vitious humours; so also is it used a∣gainst inveterate defluxions from the head, and catarrbes of long continuance, the ill habit, drop∣sy, and other affections of like sort, proceeding from abundance of phlegmatick humours, and also aganst the French Pox, &. Thus much con∣cerning the sweating diet-drink.
But the PURGING-SWEATING diet-drink is a decoction, which in the aforesaid diet moves both sweating, and to the stool together, an inven∣tion of the Modern Physitians, and not used till with∣in these few years; neither was it invented without great hope of a happy successe: seeing that by the help of this, both the inner parts of the humours are expell'd by sweat; and grosser reliques, which other∣wife use to stick very firmly to the intralls and other parts, are by this means profitably eradicated toge∣ther; nor matters is all what some may object, concern∣ing the contrary motions for the natural heat, that in∣strument of the expulsive faculty, together with the fa∣culty it self, is ready indifferently for any motion, so that where there is a way made by the stimulation or at∣traction of the mediine, it indifferently stirs up it self for the expulsion of the morbificall cause, especi∣ally since it is approved and confirmed by experience it self; this discovereth the reason of the name and de∣finition. In this three things are considered, the com∣position, the use, and the Ʋtility. In the COMPOSITION, chiefly two things. The Matter or Ingredients, and the Li∣quer; in either of them, the Quality, and the Quantity. As to the MATTER in regard of its quality, you may take the aforesaid decoction, consist∣ing as is aforesaid of onely sudorificks, or else also of altering simples joyned with them, from whence it hath the name of swea∣ting. To this matter (that the decoction may be also purgative) those things are added which are spoken of in the purging Apozem, as those purgers appointed there for the basis, Senna, Car. thamum, and Polypody, as also other purgers, that chiefly are appropriated to the phlegmatick hu∣mour, turbith, hermodactills, rheubarb, and agarick, (together with their correctors) more or lesse, as is for your purpose. As to the quantity: concerning Sudorificks, and alterers, see before; but purgers are to be added near the quantity they are prescribed in, for the purging Apozem, or something lesse, (viz. by a quarter) because the strength can not bear such copious evacuations, both by stool and sweating together.
Of the Liquor, both touching its quality, and quantity, see before. The USE: as to the quantity, 'tis given to four ounces, or five ounces; as to the time, in the morn∣ing, and that for four dayes usually, in the begin∣ning of these sort of diets; for in the rest of the dayes following, the simpler sweating diet drink is to be used without the purgers. As to the FORM, 'tis this, ℞. &c. i: e: the things aforesaid, o the sudorifical decoction; in the end of the decoction add the purgers afore∣said; or else with them the alterers; let them be strained, &c. see before. This purging decoction being ended, and the four morning doses being finished, let them use the same decoction (excepting the purgers) 15 or 20 dayes, &c. The UTILITY: this sort of Diet-drink is most usual our late Physitians in bodies that are very soul, and also strong, which require that double evacuation; to expel hose morbifical humors re∣siding in the first, second, and third region, that both the gross with the thin might by one labour be cast forth: but this as it is most profitable, so most usual in the ordering and curing the French Pox. ANIMADVERSIONS. THis is to be noted about Sudorisicks, in the forms of Prescribing, and specifically. Of the Wood Guaiacum it is said, ℞. of the resinous Lignum sanctum, i. e. Guaiacum. Of the Wood Sassafras, ℞. of the wood Sassafras newly brought over, together with his bark cut or sha∣ved into thin slices. And
Of the Root China, ℞ of the weightiest root of China, not worm eaten or rotten, cut in thin slices, &c.. and of the root SALSAPARILLA, ℞ of Salsaparilla cut in slices, together with his hairy strings. This also is to be noted, that the decoction of China is to be kept in a warm place, otherwise 'twil grow sowre, and the decoction of the Wood Sassafras if kept wil ose his grateful smel. CHAP. XIV. Of a Bochete. ABOCHET is the most profitable of the aforesaid diet Drinks; otherwise useful in affections, in which Wine is not safely given, or where your scope is to dry leisurely, and consume the dreggs of humors. And it is (briefly) compounded, in diets of the residencie of your sudorifical decoction; (so that no alterers or purgers have been boyled with it, as hath been above declared in the form of the sudorifical diet-drink; otherwise it is to be pres∣cribed, and prepared of fresh ingredients) one ounce, or two ounces of the same, or some other sudorifick being added over and above; let all be infused twelve hours in twelve pints of water, as above, solet them be boyled, onely to the con∣sumption of a third or fourth part; let them be strained thorow an
Hippocras bagg, and rellish it with half a pound, or a pound of sugar; or else sea∣son it to your palate, and aromatize it with three drams, or half an ounce of Cinnamom, so make a secondary Decoction or a ochete, to be kept in glass bottles for your ordinary drink. Or else 'tis made for present use, either in re∣gard no diet-drink hath been prescribed before, out of whose residence this may be prepared (or because perhaps it was composed of other simples, both alterers and purgee, whose virtues are not needful in this kinde of ordinary drink,) then is it to be prepared of some one or more of the suborificks, prescribed to two ounces, or two ounces and a half, after the same manner as is above-said; so make a Bochete, to be used as is said. The USE, FORM, and UTILITY, are already sufficiently declared. CHAP. XV. Of Cock-Broth. THe reason of the name is plain; this was the in∣vention of the Antients, and is much confirmed by the use and practise of late Physitians. But this DECOCTION of a Cock is a broth prepar∣ed either to alter or purge, of an old Cock, together with some certain sudorificks, and also alterers; and sometimes also purgers. From hence this sort of decoction is two-fold, altering, and purging. The altering Cock-borth. IN the altering broth are considered chiefly the matter, and the Licuor, and in both of them the quality and quantity.
As to the matter, in respect of its quality, an old COCK is taken (as it were) for the ba∣sis. Then either his belly is filled with these fol∣lowing things, or else they are added neer the end of the decoction, and they are usually these sudo∣rificks, as China, Salsaparilla, Sassafras, either alone, or mixed; in the Asthma, and Hypochondriacal me∣lancholy they are chiefly prescribed: as also to them alterers, as Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, more or less. As to the quantity, Sudorificks are prescribed to two ounces, but the alterers much like their quantity in the altering Apozem, or somewhat less. The LIQUOR, as to the quality, is alwayes fair water. As to the quantity, q. s. The USE: as to the quantity, the dose is six or eight ounces. As to the time, 'tis to be taken in the morning, continuing the use of if fifteen dayes, or the space of a moneth. And this is the FORM, ℞. an old decrepit red Cock, or of four or five years old, that hath been tired with coursing, and beating; pul off his feath∣ers whiles he is alive, then strangle him, and take out his bowels, let his belly be filled with the Su∣dorificks, fruits, and seeds as aforesaid, then sew it up, and boyl him in a glazed pot with a suffici∣ent quantity of water, til the flesh be con∣sumed, and wholly fal from the bones; but when the broth is scum'd, at first add the roots,
&c. and towards the end of the deco∣ction add the leaves and flowers, &c. boyl them til there remains about three pints of broth, straine it, and presse it out strongly, and keep the decoction in a glass bottle, in a cold place, taking off all the fat when it is cold. Take of this broth from one pint to eight ounces in the morning, adding if you wil, especially in the affections of the breast sugar, or some fit syrup to an ounce, continuing it fifteen dayes, or the space of one moneth. The UTILTY of it is much in stubborn obstru∣ctions; hence it is that it is generally prescribed in the hypochondriacal melancholy: for which purpose there is usually prescribed for this sort of broth the ots of Parsley, Succory, Grass, & Spa∣ragus, the leaves of Ceterach, Baume, Bugloss, Burnet, Agrimony: Frits, as Corans, and sometimes China, and Sassfras wood: it is also used in any other durable obstructions of the intrals, as also in the affections of the breast, especially the Asthma; to which China is added, with fruits dedicated to the breast; and in arthritical pains with wood of Sassasras, and for paleness of the face, &c. The purging Cock-broth. IT differs not from the former, except that be∣side the aforesaid ingredients there are also added purgers, and for the most part these, of Sen∣na, Polypody, Carthamus, and, two ounces, or two ounces and a half, Agarick one ounce, as much Epithymum, which are shut up in the belly of the duck, and is prescribed to be made a decoction to two pints, in which dissolve (if you wil) four ounces of sugar, and to be aromatized, &c. for 4 morning doses thus to be used every moneth: And the hypochondriacal melancholy, obstructions of
the bowels, Gout, and Cholick: but 'tis very sel∣dom used for the Asthma, or difficulty of breath. CHAP. XVI. Of the Restorative distilled liquor. WHere the sick are extreamly weakned, ei∣ther by the violence or length of the disease, or some extreame evacuation, they very hardly digest any meat to repair their lost spirits, or else through nauseousness they refuse all; yet ought the strength both to be preserved and restored: wherefore the late Writers have invented a way to preserve them by liquors distilled out offlesh, that hath both good and much nourishment. This from the effect is called the distilled Restorative; as also sometimes from the matter 'tis made of, they call it Capon-water. This DISTILLED RESTORATIVE, distilled water, or Liquor thus drawn by a still, imbued with the nourishing virtue of the flesh (chiefly of Capons) and with the Medicinal virtues of divers conserves, powders, waters, and Juyces, is chiefly prepared to re∣store lost and decaying strength. And in this three things are to be considered, the Composition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In the COMPOSITION two things chiefly, the matter of which 'tis made, and the things  be dissolved in it.
As to the MATTER, 'tis commonly the flesh of a Capon, or Hen, or else of two Partridges, cut in the middle, cleansed from the fat & bones, washed in some Cordial Liquor, as Rose-water, white Wine, &c. to this they take, & mingle with it, ivers Conserves, Preserves, Cordial powders [to little purpose] leaves of Gold, &c. and sprinkle all with a convenient Liquor, and distil it in bal∣neo Mariae: but because by this means the nourish∣ing quality of the flesh is very smal, or none, in the distilled water, and this manner also is re∣proved, the thing is to be more accurately per∣formed; which wil be done if you boyl the afore∣said flesh to a perfect pap, and thence strain forth the broth, and with it mix the aforesaid things, and distil them. The matter of this sort of distillation is two∣fold, nourishing, and Medicinal; the nourishing matter, as to the quality, usually one Capon is chosen, (it may also be a Hen) and that either a∣lone, or else one Partridg may be added, or a shank of veal; as also, if this distilled Liquor be prepared to restore one that is either hectical, or phthysical, there may be prescribed the flesh of a tortoise that lives in the woods, either one, or two; so the things of froggs are also prescrib∣ed.
This nutritive matter is boyled in s. q. of wat∣er, and (according to the medicinal quality required) divers parts of plants, (as they also use to do in altering broths,) as Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, &c. and for the most part those that are the most grateful in smel, and taste, and which do most respect the affection it self, the cause of that dissipation of the strength, and that neer the quan∣tity they are prescribed for the altering Apozem, or somewhat less; by which means you see to the restoring of the strength, and the alteration that is to be made both together. When all things are boyled to pap, so that the flesh fals from the bones, the broth is strained, and the relicks strongly pressed forth; and when 'tis cooled, the fat that is congealed in the top of it is to be taken away. And this broth the neer matter of the future di∣stilled Liquor, which is to be prepared of three or four pints of it, and eight or tenounces of some fit cordial waters, with which afterwards are mixed four, five, or six ounces of conserves, or fit Preserves, (and sometimes confections are taken, as Alchermes in the greatest weakness, and also treacle, when there is malignity to three drams, or half an ounce) or the powders of cordial sim∣ples, or officinal electuaries, as Diamargariton fri∣gidum, to half an ounce, or an ounce, where 'tis less pretious; and this is to be constantly noted, that Pearls, fragments of pretious hones, bole Ar∣moniack, terra sigillata, and leaves of gold, are ad∣ded in vain, because this gentle sort of distillation by Balneo Mariae can draw no virtue or spiritual essence from them: seeing they wil scarce part with any for a greater heat, and that in a dry stil, though they have been diligently prepared for it. The aforesaid things mixed are put into your glass body, & are afterwards distil'd in that man∣ner which they cal Balneo Mariae: Note also that if you desire the virtue of Ambergreece, or Musk, these to gr.
5, 6, or half a scruple, may be tied up in a thin linen ragg, and so tyed to the snout of the almebick, that the Liquor as it distils may pass thorow them, and take their virtues along with it, which in this manner are more certainly ex∣tracted than if you mixed them with the other things: the distilled Liquor is to be kept in a glass bottle in a cool place. Things to be DISSOLVED (though seldom used) are sometimes prescribed (and are fit cordial juy∣ces, as Juyce of Limons, Juyce of sowre Pomgran∣ats,) and that profitably to three ounces, four ounces: according to the quantity of distilled li∣quor, although they may also be mixed with the broth and waters before distillation. The ƲSE: as to the manner, this sort of distil∣led liquor is either used alone of it self out of a spoon, or dissolved with other broths & Panadaes. As to the quantity, one, two, or three ounces may be taken. As to the time, when you please, and that 3 or 4 times a day, or oftner. The FORM is, ℞ the flesh of one of the best Capons, or Hens, (or with other flesh as is said) slit in halves, and taken from the bones, or onely from the fat, put it into a pot glazed with s. q. of water, boyl them, towards the end adding the roots, &c. i. e. the alterers, when all are boyled to a pap, strain them, and press them hard; then ha∣ving taken off the fat as aforesaid, take of this broth four pints, or five to which add &c. (viz. the conserves, &c. distil all in B. M. let the Liquor di∣stilled be kept in a glass bottle in a cold place, of which let him take, &c. by it self out of a spoon, &.
The UTILITY is the same with other Analept∣icks, or restoratives, viz. suddenly to restore, and (as it were) patch up the strength and spirits ex∣hausted either by the length of the disease, fa∣mine, or over much evacuation, to recreate the languishing condition of the principal parts; much used in many affections both of the heart, and o∣ther parts, not onely in the ho, but also cold epi∣demical, malignant, and continual fevers, h∣cticks, and consumptions of the Lungs. In fine, 'tis useful when the vigour of the parts extreamly languishing can digest no stronger forme of nourishment, and yet ought necessarily to be refected; from hence we conclude that these distill'd restoratives are rather to recruit the strength & spirits, than firmly to nourish the body. CHAP. XVII. OF Brothes: BROTHS are also often prescribed by Physitians to this end, that by altering we may also nourish, and that the virtue of the Medicinal things might be the more eagerly received by the parts themselves, un∣der the form of nourishment, and thereby might be the less trouble som to them. And these are either altering, or restorative. Altering broths are made diversly, according to the scope of the Physitian, most frequently with a chick: As at Moutpelier they usually prescribe the broth of a Chick alter'd with heoatical leaves, and roots, and also with cooling things in fevers:
'Tis not particularly prescribed by Physitians, on∣ly commanded, let them use the broth of a Chick, alter'd with such leaves, &c. either 2, 3, or 4, in the morning, or else also in the evening; and this is most usual in hot diseases. Restorative broths prepared to restore lost strength, which are otherwise (from this manner of working, and from the consumption wherein they are much used) called Consumption broths: these are made of a fat Hen or Capon, (the bowels ta∣ken out) out in pieces, boiled in a glazed pot, or an alembeck close stopped, (lest any thing breath forth,) to a perfect pap; these are all strained, and the juyce pressed forth. Lastly, (when it is cold) the fat taken clear off; and this Liquor is kept in a glass bottle for your use in a cold place: in this broth sometimes other things are dissolved, viz: in each pound of it three ounces of white-Wine, (if your scope require it) or other cordial liquor, two ounces of Sugar, one dram of Cinnamom, and confection Alchermes; lot them warm til the su∣uar be dissolved, then strain them, and keep them for your use. They labour in vain, which only for vainglory add to these Consumption broths, the leaves of gold, for they do no good. The USE is the same with the distilled resto∣rative. And the UTILITY is also the same, only these Consumption broths are great nourishers, and restore and nourish the solid substance of the body.
THE SECOND SECTION Of the First Book: OF THE SOFT FORMS OF MEDICINES. CHAP. I. Of a Bole: ABOLE is a form of Medicine, almost of the consistencie of Hony, or some∣what thicker, prepared either to alter or purge; and because it is a bit a Medicine, as much as the mouth can wel contain, therefore it hath its name. A Boble is three-fold, viz. purging, altering, and strengthening. A PURGING BOLE. WHat a purging Bole is, and what are his differences taken from the variety of humors that are to be purged, may appear by what hath been said before in the Apozem. But in it three things are to be considered, the Composition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In the COMPOSITION, chiefly the matter of which 'tis made; in which there is to be consider∣ed its quality, and quantity.
As to the quality of the MATTER, in general 'tis composed of purgers both simple and com∣pound, as any purging powder, both simple and compound, and sugar. As to the quantity in general, a bole ought not to exceed six drams, or 1 ounce, seldom 10 drams, unless it consist of the gentlest sort of purgers. But in special, a purging bole, as to the matter, is composed, 1. Either of Cassia alone, which is most com∣monly the basis of a bole (or also pulp of tamar∣inds, especially in the cholerick,) though 'tis bet∣ter to have it of Cassia, and some other purger to∣gether, that its purging quality might be acuat∣ed, which else is only lenifying; lest otherwise by staying too long in the intrals it might over∣slacken them; and then as to the quantity, there is prescribed half an ounce or six drams of Cassia; but of the purging opiate, or tablet, two drams, or three drams, more or less, examining the doses by that caution before noted; that if two or three be mingled with the Cassia, the compleat dose of all might be found out. Note, that 'tis commonly used in the affections of the reins and bladder, to prescribe a bole of the aforesaid Cassia, as the basis to six drams, to which add two drams of Turpentine washed in violet, or pellitory water, with a sufficient quantity of pow∣der of liquorice and sugar: to which purpose also Turpentine alone is prescribed, & sometimes with a scruple of Rheubarb added to it, as is hereafter setdown.
2. Or of the purging officinal opiate; which is either prescribed alone in that quantity which hath been before in the potion, and shal hereaft∣er be defined; or else together with it is added a purging tablet, or solid electuary in that pro∣portion, that all together may make up the com∣pleat dose, yet should the opiate somewhat ex∣ceed the others. Note, that sometimes, either to these two joyned, or to the opiate alone is added some purging powder, and that either simple, as the powder of Rrheubarb, Mechoachan, &c. from half a scruple to half a dram, or compound, as of dia∣turoith, from half a scruple to a scruple, accor∣ding to the quantity the other things are prescri∣bed in; or else sometimes not purgative, but ei∣ther directing or correcting, or strenghening, to half a scruple. 3. Or else of a tablet or solid electuary, ei∣ther alone, in the dose aforesaid in the potion, and hereafter to be set down, with some syrup or S∣gar, or sometimes an opiate being added, or a purging powder, as aforesaid. 4. Or, which is very seldome of a powder onely, either simple or compound, made up with a syrup or sugar, but this manner is lesse used. 5. Or else (which hardly deserves the name of a purging bole, yet is used in affections of the reins) of Turpentine washed in violet water, &c. to two drams or three drams; with a scru∣ple of the powder of Liquorice. The USE, as to the manner, 'tis taken by swal∣lowing it down, which is easiest done out of a spoon, with some syrup that is gratefull to the taste. A to the quantity, 'tis above defined. The time is in the morning after the manner of other catarrticks.
The FORM of PRESCRIBING, when Cassia onely is taken, is, ℞. take the marrow of Cassiae newly drawn, and (sometimes 'tis added) by the vapour of some decoction, as of Barly, Liquo∣rice, Mallows, for the Reins) or else 'tis said, the pulp or flour of Cassia, &c. make a bole with Sugar. If of an Opiate, ℞. &c. with Sugar make it a bole. But when a bole is made of the drier things, as tablets, and powders, so that they can hardly stick together in the form of a bole, ℞ &. let them be moistened with such a syrup, then with Sugar reduce them into the form of a bole, which let him take &c. but when the bole is made of Turpentine, ℞ Turpentine washed, &c. make a bole, let each bit be wrapped in Wafers, so take them out of a spoon, with a convenient Syrup, as of Maiden hair, Violets, &c. let them be swal∣lowed down in the morning three or four hours before dinner, and that usually for three dayes together. The UTILITY is the same with that of a po∣tion, viz. when the cause of the affection is in the inferior region, or the parts adjacent; but a bole of Cassia is particularly profitable in the reins and bladder, in which we should deal ve∣ry gently, and onely lenisie. The strengthening bole. IN it three things are to be considered, the com∣position, use, and utility. As to the COMPOSITION, in respect of its quality, it is prepared.
1. Either of officinall conserves, and a pow∣der, which is either the Species of some Electua∣ry of the shops, or other aromaticall powder, as of Cinnamom, &c. with Sugar. Note, that sometimes with the aforesaid con∣serves are also taken cordiall confections, as alchermes, & de hyacintho. 2. or of some strengthening officinall confe∣ction alone. As to the quantity, this bole in generall seldom exceeds three drams, or half an ounce. In speciall, the quantities and dose of the first sort of these boles is this; as of conserves let there be three drams, half an ounce, & pow∣ders a Scruple. Of confections (if added) one scruple, or half a dram. But of the second sort, viz. the confection, is prescribed from a dram, to a dram and half. The USE, as to the time; it useth to be prescribed, the day after a purging Medicine, two hours before dinner, or otherwise at any other convenient hour, simply to strengthen, with∣out any purge preceding it. As to the manner, 'tis to be swallowed out of a spoon (if you will) with syrup, drinking af∣tr it a little wine diluted, or other liquor fit for the purpose. The FORM; ℞. &c. make it a bole with Su∣gar, which let him take &c. The Ʋtility sufficiently appears in its name; see also the cordiall potion; but most usually they are prescribed after purging medicines, to comfort the stomack and parts afflicted by them, as also by the violence of diseases, and also simply to strengthen,
without Relation to any preceding Purga∣tion, as often as the strength (growing weak, or feeble by any other cause) requires it, as also to alter, together with the strengthening: so al∣so this sort of boles are used against fluxes of the belly. CHAP. II. Of Opiates. THe Ancients called those medicines which had in their composition either opium or o∣ther narcoticks by the proper name of opiates, but now adayes we abusively and improperly call those medicines opiates, which are without opium, whether to strengthen, alter, or purge, onely for the consistency wherein they are made, like Treacle, and other Opiates of like sort. They otherwise call them more rightly, Ele∣ctuaries, which now are in use twofold; the so∣lid, which is otherwise called a tablet, or the soft, otherwise called an Opiate; both these were by the Greeks called antidotes, yet this name ex∣tends not to include the purgers, as our appella∣tion of Opiates. But an Opiate is a medicine of a thicker sub∣stance than a syrup, scarce running abroad (like that true Opiate treacle) prepared of divers things, mixed in honey or syrup, to keep long either to purge, alter, or strengthen. Hence, 'tis twofold, purging, and altering, or corroborating.
The purging Opiate. WHat it is (& its differences) may be sought in the purging Apozem and potion. Here I shall at present account it twofold, Ma∣gisteriall, and officinall. What a Magisteriall is, see in the purging syrup. Neverthelesse three things are to be consider∣ed, the composition, use, and Utility. As to the COMPOSITION, 'tis prepared, 1. Either of powders onely taken in syrup, or ho∣ny, or both together. These powders are every where chosen out of purging Simples (and sometimes may be in use the spices of purging Electuaries) together with their fit correctors, both Simples, and com∣pounds, as also their directors. As to the quantity, these sorts of purging powders ought to be prescribed, according to the number of doses for which you desire or in∣tend your Opiate; as if you desire an Opiate for six times, you must prescribe six doses of pur∣gers in substance, adding also their correctors; as to the quantity of that they are made up withall, they usually, though ill prescribe it, q. s. as is be∣fore noted in the purging syrup; for as it is there said, the quantity of these is also to be defined, and its proportion ought to be three or four times the weight of the powder, and that expressly to be set down, that you may be certain of the dose. Note also, that when Cassia or other things which have the consistency of hony, are added, they are to be accounted instead of so much hony.
2. Or seeing that now they are very seldom made of powders onely, they are usually prescri∣bed of officinall purging opiates, Cassia being al∣so added, where we would purge more gently; or else there is also added a solid purging Electuary of the shops, together with a purging powder, and their correctors; all which are to be taken in a convenient syrup: And this is their proportion. To an ounce of opiate you may adde a dram or two drams at most of a purging powder. But for the most part, four ounces of these sorts of Opiates are required, and then the dose of the syrup is not defined, for there is need but of ve∣ry little. 3. Or onely of the softer sort of purging sim∣ples, as Cassia, tamarinds, manna, pulp of prunes, raisins, or Sebestens, with their correctives, when you would onely lenifie; and if you would yet purge more, you may adde the simple purging powders in the proportion aforesaid. 4. Or else with all these together, as the leni∣fying Simples, officinall Electuaries, purging Powders, together with the aforesaid proportion of syrup. The more usuall Officinall Opiates. CAtholicon, all humors. Diacassia, chol. mel. Diaprun-simpl. chol- Diasenna, or Elect. lenitivum, melanch. Hiera picra, phlegm- & choler, and all humours that are easily moved. Diaprun. solutive, chol. Elect. de Psillio: phleg. mel.
Diaphoenicon. phlegm. & chol. Benedicta laxativa. phleg: and watrish humours. Confectio hamech. chol. melanchol. The less usual, are: Elect: rosarum Mesues, purgeth choler. Triphera persica, chol: mel. Indum majus, phleg. chol. Hiera Pac hii, phlegm. The use of the officinal Opiate. AS to the manner, they are taken either by themselves, as a Bole, or else with a fit Li∣quor dissolved in the form of a potion, see be∣fore. As to the time, 'tis in the morning, as other Ca∣tharticks. As to the quantity or dose, 'tis this.   Dose the least. moderate, highest. Diasebesten, to dra. 6, ou, 1 & half, ounces 2 Diaprun-simpl. oun. 1, ou. 1 & half ounces 2 Dia prun-solut. ou. half drams 6 ounce 1 Elect. rosar. mes. ou. half dram 6 ounce 1 Elect. de Psillio. ou. half drams 6, ounce 1 Diacatholic. dra. 6, drams 10 ounces 2 Triphera Persic. oun. 1, ou. 1 & half, ounces 2 Diaphoenicon. dra. 2, drams 3 drams 6 Indum minus, dra. 2, drams 3, dra. 5, scr: 2 or dr. 2. h. dra: 3, scr. 2 drams 7 Benedict. laxativ. scru. 4, dr. 2 & half oun. ss. scr. ss. or drams 5. The USE of the MAGISTERIALL Opiate. As to the manner and time of using, 'tis as the Of∣ficinal. As to the quantity in general, 'tis also as the of∣ficinal; but in special it cannot be defined, unless
(as is aforesaid) by computing the doses, and by the weight of the whole purging opiate; for the whole masse is to be divided into so many parts, as there be purging doses in the whole composition. The FORM of PRESCRIBING. ℞ &c. with a Syrup or honey, s. q. (which ne∣verthelesse is to be set down precisely, that you may be certain of the dose) either to three or four times the weight of the other things, so make an Opiate, of which let him take, &c. either by it self, in the form of a Bole, or else dissolve it in broth, decoction, or some other fit liquor, and that every fifth day, having taken a Clyster the day before. The ƲTILITY is the same with that of the purging Syrup, only as the Syrup is used in Sum∣mer, so this in Winter; but the profit of it is, that it may by little and little draw away viti∣ous humors, that are heaped, or are abounding in us, at certain distances of time; and that we may not suffer ill humors to encrease so far, as to pro∣duce a disease; therefore 'tis very useful for Ca∣cochimical natures: and where through the ill complextion, or temper of the intrals, they use to gather many excrementitious humors, from whence comes the original and durability of diseases.
And seeing, of these, one is only lenifying, a∣nother purging particularly; The first is usually prescribed, for affections of the Reins, Bladder, and Brest, and also to move the belly, and a∣gainst the heat of the Liver, and consists for the most part, of the Pulp of Cassia, Tamarinds, Prunes, Sebestens, Manna, &c. with fit altering powders: Here is to be noted, that this form of medicine is chiefly to be used in them whose Liver is heat∣ed, which with the use of pils would be more in∣flamed. The strengthening Opiat. Beside the lenifying and purging Opiates, o∣thers use also to be new prescribed by the Physi∣tian, for the present use, not only to strengthen, and confirm the vigor, and restore the spirits, as aforesaid in the corroborating potion, but also to alter the body in any manner, in first, second, or third qualities. In a strengthening Opiate, three things are to be considered, Composition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. And in the COMPOSITION, two things chief∣ly; the Matter, and the Form-Giver; and in both, their quality, and quantity. The Matter, in relation to its quality, is either moyst or dry; the moyst is some officinal conserve, of which, as its basis, a strengthening Opiat is compounded. To this is somtimes added, according to the scope, some officinal preserve, as of roots, stalks, fruits, barks. And if occasion require, Confections, as Al∣chermes, Confect. de hyacintho; also Treacle, Mi∣thridate, &c. The dry, which is alwayes joyned with the Conserve, is some strengthening powder, either simple of Spices, or some other strengthening pro∣per things; or compound, of some strengthening E∣lectuaries, as of Aromaticum Rosatum.
As to its quantity, because the whole compo∣sition of a strengthening Opiate should not ex∣ceed six ounces, or seven ounces of the aforesaid things, this is to be their proportion, Of Conserves four ounces. Of preserves if admitted an ounce and a halfe or two ounces. Confections if added 2 drams, 3 drams, or half an ounce. But the proportion of powders in respect of the things aforesaid should be so that an ounce of them should contain a dram, a dram and half, or two drams of powders at the most, according to the efficacy, or as you desire the Opiate more or less powerful, or according as the powder is more or less pretious. The FORM-GIVER, or that which gives it the consistence, as to its quality, is some proper officinal Syrup, or the Syrup of some appropriate preserve. As to its quantity, 'tis seldome expressed, only is set down, q.s. yet (as is aforesaid in the purging Opiate, where 'tis to be three or four times so much as the powder,) it may easily be defined; yet 'tis not here to be limited by that proportion, in regard of the Conserves, which helps to the giving the form.
Here is to be diligently marked, that when the aforesaid matter is prescribed, this order should be kept: 1. The Conserves. 2. The Preserves. 3. The Confections. 4. The Powders: and last∣ly, the Syrup is to be prescribed, and also Amber∣greece, and Musk, are usually added to some few grains, and when condited Mirobalans, and Nutmegs are joyned, they are usually prescribed by number, as one, two, &c. or else half an ounce, or an ounce, &c. The Ʋse, as to the manner, 'tis taken in the form of a Bole, and then (if you desire it, and the scope of the Physitian can admit it) drinking after it a smal quantity of wine, or some other liquor, ac∣cording to the intention prosecuted, that nothing might stay behind in the jawes or gullet, and that it might be the easier carried down into the sto∣mack. As to the quantity, the dose is two drams, three drams, or half an ounce, more or lesse, according as it is stronger or weaker from the quality or quantity of the powders, or confections joyned with it, otherwise 'tis prescribed to be taken to the quantity of a Filberd or Chesnut, according to its faculty in operation.
As to the time, 'tis generally prescribed an hour or two before dinner, if the stomack or other in∣trals are to be strengthened, and that every other day in which he abstains from these usual pills; for these two, the usual pills, and strengthening O∣piates, are successefully prescribed to be taken af∣ter one another in Cacochimical bodies, where the intrals are also distempered; it may be used twice in a day, as before supper also, when there is a greater necessity of comforting: in affections of the head, they are taken to very good purpose after dinner, and supper, for so with the sumings of the meat, the virtues and spirits of the medicines are together easily elevated; but if it be not strengthening, but only altering: or evacuating by urine, or the courses, or to open obstructions, or for other the like inventions, let it be prescribed when the stomack is empty, that the vertue of it may not be dulled, therefore let it be taken long before meat. The FORM of prescribing; ℞ &c. with the Sy∣rup, &c. make an Opiate, of which let him take, &c. i e. to two drams, or three drams, or to the bignesse of a Filberd or Chesnut, an hour before dinner, &c. drinking after it a little, &c. The ƲTILITY is much to restore strength to the parts weakened, or afflicted, and to preserve them, when there is need of a continued corrobo∣ration in chronical diseases, in which together with these the usual Pils are prescribed, then the use of this and them by turns is appointed. They are done also to alter divers wayes, (as is said) divers parts, and divers affections, arising from unlike humors, both in first, second, and third qualities; also to purge by urine, open obstructi∣ons, provoke the courses, break and force out the stone, &c. or where any malignant quality is to be prevented, or taken away. CHAP. III. Of Lohochs, or licking Me∣dicines. THat which the Arabians call Loch, or
Lohoch, and the Greeks Eclegma, from Ecleicho, to lick, the Latines call Linctus, the name in all be∣ing taken from licking them by little and little, the manner of taking them. It is a medicine of the thicknesse of honey, mean between the consistence of a Syrup and an opiate, composed of divers thoracical simples, destined to divers affections of the Wind-pipe, Lungs, and Brest, which retained in the mouth, & melting by little & little, with its smoothing slipperinesse imparts its Cough-curing vertue to those parts; and this is twofold, Officinal, and Magisterial. The Offi∣cinal Lo∣hoch or Lincture, is either heating, cutting, cleansing, Sanum & expertum: De pineis: De farfara: Of Coleworts: Of Fox lungs: Of Squills, simple and compound: cooling, thickning De Papavere: De Psillio: In the Magisterial, three things are consider∣ed, Composttion, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. As to the Composition, 'tis various. 1. It is compounded of powders taken in a li∣quor, or rather honeyish substance, and made in the form of an opiate. These powders, in relation to their quality, are appropriated to the lungs, fit for the purpose, and those either simple, as the roots, leaves seeds, dried juices, of bechical or cough-curing simples, or else of some thoracical electuaries, as species diaireos, either alone, or mixed, to which often (if the scope permit) are added su∣gar or penidies.
As to the quantity, they are most commonly prescribed to one ounce, with four times the quantity of the liquor they are made up withal, so that a Lohoch seldome exceeds three ounces, or four ounces. That in which these powders are taken, in rela∣tion to its quality, is usually some fit Syrup, som∣times honey or sape, called also cute, the mus∣cilage of some convenient gums or seeds, sweet wine, &c. as the indication requires; but most usually they are made up with a Syrup. As to the quantity, 'tis not expressed, but said s. q. yet it may be defined, that the Syrup may be four times, or five times, the weight of the o∣ther; for a lohoch or lincture ought to be thin∣ner than an opiate or electuary. 2. Or else 'tis made of a decoction impregna∣ted with the virtues of fit bechical simples, but chiefly of leaves, fruits, and flowers, thickened with muscilage, sugar, or somthing equivalent, as honey, cute, adding to them also fit powders. As to the drawing of that muscilage; first the decoction shall be described of thoracical things, that are by their own nature muscilagi∣nous; by this order, that there may be of roots two or three ounces, of leaves four or five hand∣ful, of the greater sort of fruits, pairs 18. of the lesser sorts pairs, 20.24: one ounces and an half, of seeds one ounce, or an ounce and an half, so make a decoction till all be pap, then presse all strongly out of a presse, with a new strainer, so drive them thorow.
There is taken of this muscilage one quartern (for that will be enough) and therefore the in∣gredients of the decoction are to be prescribed, for the making it in a lesse quantity, for that which is set down will afford a pound. To this muscilage is added one ounce, or an ounce and half of sugat only; or over and above, the pow∣der of some electuary, or other sit things, from half an ounce to an ounce, more or less, accord∣ing to the consistence of the muscilage. 3. Or of the pulp of fruits, as an ounce of the powders to six ounces of the pulp. with Syrup, s.q. 4. Or of some officinal Lohoch, to one or two ounces, to which you may add two or three ounces of powder, with Syrup, s. q. 5. Or of thoracical fruits, seeds, and juices, beaten all together, and forced through a haire strainer, taken with syrup, honey, muscilage, ac∣cording to your intention; in this proportion, that there may be of fruits two ounces; of seeds an ounce; juices half an ounce; syrup; s. q. And note, that a powder may also somtimes be added. 6. Or which is most usual, a single pectoral Syrup may be prescribed for a Iohoch, to four or six ounces, to which you may, if you will, add some fit powders in the proportion aforesaid. 7. Or else, (and that chiefly in those that are phthisical) of astringent conserves to two ounces and divers powders to six drams, or an ounce syrup, s. q. yet a greater quantity of these may be prescribed, because the use of them ought to be frequent and daily.
Note also, that sometimes 'tis prescribed of butter, with twice so much sugar or honey, in the cough and roughnesse of the windpipe, to which are somtimes added three drams of powder, with s. q. of syrup; and evermore in cleansing a cold matter, an ounce of Turpentine may be joyned; or in its place, Oyle of sweet Almonds an ounce, in the Pleurisie and Phthisick. The ƲSE of the officinal; as to the manner, if a syrup only be prescribed, it is said, let him take of this often out of a spoon, licking it leisurely; but if it be a compound Lohoch, let him take it from a Licorice stick, bruised at the end, licking gently and frequently. As to the quantity, a Lohoch should not ex∣ceed three ounces, four ounces, or six ounces, unlesse it be prescribed for them that live re∣mote, then it may be made to a pound and half, and if it be often to be used, you may exceed that quantity; as also when it is prescribed fot the Phthisis: The particular dose is about a spoonful, or as much as a liquorish stick bruised can take up: as to the divided quantity, 'tis to be taken often, except Lohoch de Papavere, which is to be taken only once a day, when the time of sleep is. As to the time, let it be some distance from meat, either before or after it, or at any time, if necessity requires. The USE of the Magisterial is the same. The FORM is, ℞ &c. Make a Lohoch, which let the Patient (holding his head a little lifted up, or leaning forward, that the epiglottis which covers the wind-pipe might open a little) use with a Liquorice stick &c. or out of a spoon. The Ʋtility: they are preseribed only in the af∣fections of the Lungs and breasts, as in the Asth∣ma, Cough,
&c. Catarrhs, and faults in the wind∣pipe; so that now adayes they are prescribed; only to lenifie the asperity of it, arising either from the acrimony of the humors, or otherwise composed of bechical things that are both sweet and sharp: and in cleansing the clammy, of things that are sweet and bitter; but these must be smal in quantity: or else to stay Rheums fal∣ling into the breast, or to thicken thin rheumes, of clammy muscilaginous things; or else to bind in the spitting of blood, of healing things; as also in drying up the Ulcers of the Lungs; but do this with caution, for it stops the way by which the breath is drawn, and 'tis very necessa∣ry to have an easie clear breathing to maintaine life. CHAP. IV. Of Candied Confections. THis is an invention of late Writers, so call∣ed, because of the similitude it hath with the candying of flowers in sugar. And it is a pleasant medicine, of a mean form, between electuaries and powders, made of di∣vers strengtheners, to preserve the vigor of the principal parts, and restore strength decay∣ed. In it three things are considerable, the Compo∣sition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. As to the Composition, in respect of the quality, of conserves, as the basis, to which are somtimes
added cordial confections, but alwayes a cordi∣al powder and sugar. As to the conserves, in respect of their quality, they are chosen strengtheners, and cordials, and such as are sweet; as also divers preserved fruits and roots, which are esteemed as the same thing; in respect of their quantity, three ounces will suffice. If a confection be taken, it should be in qua∣lity cordial, as Alchermes chiefly, because of its pleasantnesse; and the quantity of it from a dram to two drams. A powder, in respect of its quality, should be also cordial and strengthening, and that either simple, as of pearls, and fragments of precious stones, &c. or the seeds of cordial simples, or compound of electuaries; to which for the rich∣er sort you may add Ambergreece: As to the quantity of the powder, for every ounce of con∣serves, let there be one dram, or four handfuls of powder at most. Either white sugar, or sugar of roses in Ta∣bulets, and that double or treble to the other things is taken to make it into a confection, or else is prescribed, s. q. To these may be added also leaves of gold, in number six, but more for ornament than any virtue comes from them. The ƲSE: as to the manner, it is either taken by it self, or dissolved in a convenient liquor, or some simple water or other, or in a Julep wine, or broth. As to the quantity, 'tis taken to a spoonful, or a spoonful and an half, or two. As to the time, if it be for strengthening
the animal faculty, 'tis best after meat, or at going to sleep; if for the vital, at any time, when need requires; for the natural, either before, with, or after meat. The Ʋtility, is to preserve the vigor of the principal parts, to restore the strength wasted by diseases: Hence it is that the use of these can∣died confections is wholly restorative, rather helping nature and the strength, than regarding the disease, which neverthelesse is not to be neglected; therefore these candied confections are made heating, cooling, binding, &c. the use of them is frequent in the hypochondriacal af∣fection, panting of the heart, consumption of the lungs, weaknesse of the stomack and liver, &c.
THE THIRD SECTION Of the First Book. OF THE SOLID FORMES OF MEDICINES. CHAP. I. Of Paste-royal, and morsels. THere is also an invention of mo∣dern Writers, which in consi∣stence resembles Pineolates, or Paste of Pine kernels, made of di∣vers things, wrought together like paste, (from whence its name) and of sugar dissolved in some conveni∣ent liquor, and boiled to the height of Tabu∣lets; this is made into boles or morsels, like Conserves of Roses dried, (hence it is called morsels) which being leisurely dried are kept for use, and are somtimes gilded; and this is called Paste-Royal, for the Soveraign virtues it hath in affections of the brest, lungs, and in ex∣tenuated bodies.
In this also three things are to be noted, Com∣position, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. As to the Composition, 'tis made two wayes. 1. Either without the flesh of living creatures, (as shall be said) of bechical fruits and seeds only, and sugar. These fruits are for the most part blanched Almonds, washed, soaked, and bruised; the ker∣nels of Pistaches, and pine nuts, washed also in a fit water, as of violets, or roses. They are usually prescribed to the quantity of four ounces. The seeds are the four greater cold seeds usu∣ally, huld and bruised, to which (when sleep is to be provoked) the seeds of white poppy and lettice are added. Let these be prescribed to the quantity of two ounces, or two ounces and an half. The sugar is to be chosen white, dissolved in a fit liquor; the quantity of it is usually set down q: s. yet it should usually be double the proportion of the rest. 2. Or else this paste is made restorative, with the flesh of the tortoses of the wood, washed and boyl'd in barley water, the head and tail being left out; and this is afterwards called Te∣studinate paste, or paste of Tortoses; or with the flesh of Crawfish, Capons, and Partridges, or else to these are added the fruits aforesaid, seeds and powders mentioned in the Candies, and sugar dissolved in Rosewater, usually in this proportion;
Of flesh, three or four ounces. Fruits, three ounces. Seeds one ounce, an ounce and half. And let one dram of powders answer to eve∣ry ounce of the rest, and of those that are preci∣ous a lesse quantity. Sugar is mentioned, q. s. Somtimes Ambergreece and Musk are added in small quantity to some few grains; somtimes also the paste is covered over with leaf gold. The ƲSE: the manner, is either by it self, or in broth. The Dose, or united quantity, is to half an ounce, or an ounce, the morsels in numb. one or two. The divided quantity; 'tis to be taken often with meat, and in your meals. The time is expressed. The FORME, ℞ &c. make a confection in morsels, and somtimes 'tis added like pineo∣late, so let it be used. The ƲTILITY; the paste that is not nourish∣ing is good for divers affections of the lungs and brest, to incrassate, lenifie, cleanse, or expecto∣rate; &c: but the restorative paste, both in the same, and the consumption, for them that are extenuated and weakened by the ulcer of the lungs, it nourisheth, drieth, and thickneth rheumes; therefore the use is wholly restora∣tive, regarding also the affections from whence that lack of nourishment, and dejection of the strength proceeds.
CHAP. II. Of a Pandaleon. THis invention of the Arabians, and latter Physitians; is a medicine dedicated to the brest and lungs, made of pleasant ingredients, agreeing with the Lohoch to the same purpose, differing only in form, in which it resembles Tablets: From them also it differs in this, be∣cause they are made up in a certain shape; but this (when the sugar is sufficiently boiled, and the ingredients mixed with it) is poured into a box, and there suffered to harden, and at the time of using it, a bit is taken out with a knife or spoon, &c. Therefore it is a medicine solid, like Tablets, kept in a box like a cake, made of powders, bechical conserves, and sugar dissolved and made into a Tablet - consistence appointed for the same uses as Lohochs are. And in it three things are to be noted, Com∣position, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. The COMPOSITION is two wayes. 1. Either of bechical powders, simple or compound, several or mixed, and sugar dissolved in a fit liquor boiled, in or neer this proportion, that to half an ounce of the powder there may be four ounces of sugar dissolved, or else q. s. 2. Or of thoracical fruits and seeds, powders of electuaries, sugar dissolved, after these pro∣portions.
Of fruits two drams, seeds an ounce, pow∣ders three drams, sugar q.s. Note that conserves may somtimes be added to three drams, or half an ounce. The ƲSE; the manner is to contain it in the mouth, that it may leisurely melt, and may gently be swallowed down, and used frequent∣ly: The quantity; let a bit of this be taken from a spoon, or the point of a knife. The time is the same with that of the Lo∣hochs. The FORM: ℞ &c. make a Pandalcon in a convenient box, of which, &c. The ƲTILITY is the same with that of the Lohochs, from which this differs only in form, and that this for the most part consists of the pleasantest things. CHAP. III. Of Marchpane and Pineolates. MArchpane is a most pleasant confection of latter writers, nourishing much, conveni∣ent for people that are leane, and for affections of the lungs, instead of sweet meats.
'Tis compounded of blanched Almonds, three ounces Pistaches cleansed, one ounce stamped in a marble mortar, with a little rose∣water, adding half a pound of white sugar, make a paste, which make into little cakes, to be baked gently in an oven, till they begin to be coloured yellow, and are a little hardened; o∣ther pleasant things may also be added, as Ci∣namom, &c. A PINEOLATE is made to the same end, of equal parts of pinekernels, and sugar dis∣solved, of which are made morsels, adding musk for the better grace, if you will; but this is to be injoyned by the Physitian, not else to be usually prescribed. CHAP. IV. Of Tablets. THat which they were wont to call the solid ele∣ctuary, is otherwise called from its flat shape, a Tablet; and because the sugar of which they are made when it is boiled and flatted is cut into divers figures; as when square they were called Tessellae (i.e. little dice) and Lozenges, commonly by the Apotheca∣ries; or else when they were made round, in the fashion of Manus Christi, they were called Rotulets, and Orbi∣cles, from the rotundity of their figure. It is a solid medicine, chiefly of sugar dissolved, and a powder, boiled to a higher consistence than syrup, and drawn into a flat board, as it were, pre∣pared either to alter or purge. Therefore Tablets are twofold, purging and al∣tering.
The purging Tablets. The distinction and difference is as above, yet are these twofold, officinal and magisterial, of which here chiefly. In the magisterial Tablet three things are to be considered, Composition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. As to the COMPOSITION, they are made of powders, and sugar dissolved in a conveni∣ent liquor, boiled beyond the consistency of a syrup; and somtimes purging Tablets, and the species of purging Tablets are added. The powder is either purgative, or altering, viz. some fit correcting spice, or the species of some electuary. As to the quantity, the doses of the purging ingredients are to be computed as is afore∣said in the purging opiate; whatsoever they are (because the whole composition should not exceed four ounces, or six) 'twill suffice to pre∣scribe one ounce of powder, and three or four times so much sugar dissolved, though com∣monly they do not set down the quantity, the which is very ill. The ƲSE; as to the manner, 'tis either taken by it self, or dissolved in some convenient li∣quor: See the potions. As to the Dose, see the purging opiate. As to the time, in the morning, as other pur∣gers. The FORM; ℞ &c. with, &c. of sugar dis∣solved in a convenient liquor, make Tablets of the weight of three drams, or half an ounce; let him take, &c.
The Ʋtility is the same with that of the opi∣ate, viz. to purge withal; & being under a diverse form from electuaries, it is a means to avoid that nauseousness which the often giving one medicine will procure; and besides, 'tis a neat way to deceive the curious palated; for thus the purgers are concealed, and they eat Physick instead of sweet meats. The strengthening Tablets. What they are, and their differences, see in the cordial potion. As to the COMPOSITION, 'tis made of di∣vers sorts of strengthening powders, either sim∣ple, as of some spice, or other proper things, or compound, of some officinal electuary, and su∣gar dissolved in a fit liquor, that the whole mass may not exceed six ounces, by this proportion of each several. Of powders let there be one part. Of sugar six, or eight, or ten parts, accord∣ing as you desire your Tablets stronger or weak∣er, or as the powders are more pleasant or un∣pleasant, effectual or otherwise, more or lesse, though the sugar be only said, q. s. the dose of powders is alwayes expressed, and that usually to five or six drams. Note, that to these powders is very conveni∣ently added somtimes a confection, is Alchermes to two drams, of which alone at Montpellier they make most pleasant Tablets, and somtimes they add fit conserves, to three drams.
To these strengthening Tablets may be re∣fer'd those which are prepar'd of divers things, (without cordials) only to alter, according to the scope of the Physitian, powdred and made up in the same manner with sugar, and in the same dose, yet may they be prescribed in a grea∣ter, adding only three times the weight of su∣gar, of which sort there are divers extant in the shops, serving to the various scope of the Phy∣sitian. The ƲSe of the strengtheners; as to the man∣ner, they are used chiefly by themselves, or dis∣solved in some fit liquor. As to the quantity, from one dram to three drams, according to the efficacy of the ingredi∣ents. As to the time, three hours before dinner, or also before supper; and that the day after purge∣ing, if it hath preceded; or if the usual pills are prescribed, then are they to be taken by turns e∣very other day; or otherwise where you will sim∣ply strengthen, they may be used at any time. The VSE of alterers, as to the manner, is the same. As to the quantity, one dram, two drams, or three drams, according to the faculties of the powders, and the scope. As to the time, that the nature of the affection must limit, yet 'tis usually taken with an empty stomack. The VSE of the officinal Tablets, as to the manner, time, and quantity, is the same. The form of prescribing, ℞ &c. with s: q. of sugar dissolved in, &c. make Tablets of the weight of one dram, three drams, &c. of which let him take one, &c.
The VTILITY of the strengthening Tablet see before in the strengthening Electuary; as also that of the altering Tablet in the same place, which usually are every where prescri∣bed to stay rheumes falling into the brest; of binders and thickners, of which also one that is prescribed for use, is to be frequently held in the mouth. CHAP. V. Of Pills. THey are so called of the Latines, in regard of the similitude they have with a ball, which with them is pila; but of the Greeks they are called Catapotia, because they are swallowed down whole. It is a solid form of medicine, round like a ball, made of powders, and sometimes gums, juices tem∣per'd with some clammy liquor, chiefly prepared to purge withal, but sometimes also to alter and streng∣then. But for the clearer explication, they are three sorts, Purging, Ʋsual, or Epicratical, and alter∣ing. The purging Pills. Although in speaking properly Pills are purge∣ing, yet because they may be prepared for divers uses, and because those which purge do it either strongly or gently, and are more strengthening, these last are commonly called usual pills, the other purge∣ing
Pills, which are seldom prescribed by the Physi∣tian, because the officinal or shop pilis are wont to be used in their stead; yet shal I hereafter declare the orders for making them. And these are either officinal, or Magisterial; the officinal either purge, or do not purge. Those which do not purge are the pills of Bdel∣lium and Cynogloss, the Hypoglottides white and black; yet these do not properly belong to this place. The purging Pills are those which are most usual, or lesse usual. The more usual are, Aureae, choler, Aloe phanginae, chol. phlegm. Ag∣gregatia, chol. phleg. Sine quibus, all humors, chol. de Agarico, phl. Cothiae, phl. Lucis majores, phl. serous hum. Hermodactil, phleg. serous hum. Indae, melanch. phlegm. Fetidae majores purge the same. The less usual are, Pills of Rheubarb, cho. Assaiereth, ch. Eupatorio, ch. Imperiales, ch. phleg. Ruffi, cho. de Hiera, ch. phleg. Arthriticae, ch. phl. Arabicae, phl. Pil. de 5 generib. Mirobalanor. chol. phleg. melanch. of Mastick, Phl. de Aloe, Saga∣peni, Sarco collae, ante cibum, phl. chol. Stomachi∣cae, de Fumaria, Melanch. de Lapid. lazuli, melan. chol. phlegm. The Magisterial, as to their composition, are made first either of some fit powder, made up with a convenient liquor. This powder, as to its quality, is either some purging simple, yet so that Aloes (which is the basis of all Pills) must alwayes be one in∣gredient) or else some fit corrector, or appropri∣ate director, as is said in the purging Opiate.
Note, that the purer sort of gums may be also added, as Ammoniack, Opopanax. As to the quantity of the powder, one ounce wil suffice, seldom to an ounce and half; for see∣ing the dose of pills is neer a dram, that wil suf∣fice for eight doses, and wil last a fortnight; but let two parts of this powder be purging, and one part correctors. The Liquor to make them up withall, in re∣lation to its quality, may be cute; some fit juyce or muscilage, but more often honey boyled and clarified, but generally some appropriate syrup. As to the quantity, 'tis said, s: q. 2. Or (which is most effectual,) let the purge∣ers be boyled (after the manner of extracts) to four or six ounces, together with their correctors, in some appropriate liquor or juyce, as for the A∣pozems, afterwards straining and pressing them out hard; in six, seven, or eight ounces of this strained liquor dissolve six drams, or one ounce of Aloes Succotrine for a continuance of the use; after coagulate to the consistency of Ho∣ney, then add some corroborating powder to two drams, as also Scammony, if it be to the scope of the Physitian, (because that must not be boyled) to one, two, or three drams. The ƲSE of the officinal: as to the manner, they are to be swallowed whole. As to the quantity, the stronger are given from one scruple in youths, to one dram, in men of ripe age; as are Aureae, Cochiae, Fetidae majores, Ar∣thriticae, Indae, de lapide lazuli, de Hermoda∣ctilis.
The moderate sort from two scruples to four scruples, as Agregativae, sine quibus, de agarico, de aloe, de 5 mirobalanis, de fumaria. The gentler sort from one dram to two drams, as pill. de Rheubarb. assaiereth, aloephanginae, ante∣cibum, mastichinae, Ruffi, de hiera. But if these be used after the manner of the usual pills, one scruple, or half a dram will suf∣fice, two hours before meat, dinner, and supper. As to the time, in the morning, as other pur∣gers. The ƲSE of the magisterial pills, as to the manner and time, is the same. As to their quantity, see the purging opiate. The FORM of prescribing the officinal pills; ℞ &c. i. e. the mass of such and such pills, &c. Diagridium four or five grains, &c. (as a quick∣ner of the rest) in cholerick people; as also four or five grains of the Troschiscks of Alhan∣dall, in phlegmatick; or four or five grains of Casior in cold affections of the head; with such a water make pills in number six, seven, or eight, which being gilded, let it be taken be∣times in the morning, or else just after midnight (if they should draw from the head) with the due care and custody, having taken a light sup∣per; or at going to sleep, if for the head, that the purging faculty, together with the gentle vapors of the supper might be carried up to the head: The FORME of prescribing the magisterial pills, ℞. &c. with &c. make a mass of pills, which annoint with oyl of sweet Almonds or anniseeds, and wrap it in a bladder, and keep them in a convenient box. Take of this mass &c. and make &c.
The ƲTILITY: it is most eminent for purging from the habit and third region of the body; then this form is chiefly to be chosen, for the purgative faculty staying longer in the stomack, by reason of its slow dissolution, and not descend∣ing so quickly into the intrals, hath time to diffuse its virtue to the very habit of the body, with great benefit; but the use of them is chief∣est in phlegmatick persons, & less in the chole∣rick, rather in the winter than the summer; they are effectual also in opening obstructions, for the reason aforesaid, especially if they admit gum ammoniack, for the belly of such is apt to be bound, and is scarce mollified, unless they contain ammoniack; and then a little broth should be drank after it. ƲSƲALL PILLS. These purge truly, but very gently, and are ra∣ther strengthening; and because the use of them is often in a week, and that without any care or custody, therefore are they called usual pills. As to the COMPOSITION: they are made of Aloe succotrina, as the basis, to half an ounce, or six drams, other gentle purgers being added, as rheubarb, agarick, &c. to one dram or two drams, and some strengthening simples, as cinamom, cloves, mastick, compound spices, to one dram or two drams, with s. q. of syrup of wormwood, &c. Note that ammoniack dissolved is generally added in obstructions, to one dram or two drams, so is myrrh. Also in the orm, aloes mollified in the juice of Wormwood, is sometimes
profitably prescribed, and Rheubarb sprinkled with some convenient liquor, til it be soft. The ƲSE, as to the manner, is as above. As to the quantity, and time, half a dram of the aforesaid mass (of which is made four pills) is to be taken; of which let him take two in the morning two hours before dinner, and the other two two hours before supper, twice or thrice a week; in those dayes in which he abstains from the strengthening Opiate, if that be also pre∣scribed; otherwise without this admonition, for they are usually prescribed together, as afore∣said. This is their form, ℞. &c. with &c. make a masse of pills, of which take, &c. The ƲTILITY is great, in bodies very ca∣cochymical, especially the phlegmatick, in whom the stomack is daubed with a continual drossie phlegme, from whence springs the whole series of diseases: for they much strengthen the sto∣mack, help concoction: and if any noxious thing lurk in it, they purge it forth; neither suffer they any noxious thing to be gathered in it: therefore they are profitable in all affections arising from thence, either of the mesentery, Head, Liver, Joynts, &c. Of the strengthening and altering Pills. Although all pills properly ought to be purging, yet the solid form may, and useth to be composed for other in tentions, to strengthen and alter variously, both in first, second, and third qualities, viz. when we would have the medicine stay and delay some time before it descend, either that the medicinal quality
may work more effectually on the part where it is, or that by its delay might be diffused to other parts com∣municating with it, and might be distributed both by secret and visible passages of the body. And these either are retained in the mouth, and are not swallowed; or else are swallowed. Those retained in the mouth, are Pillul. Bechi∣chae, so called for their round form, (or else in a Lu∣pine fashion, and then are they referr'd to the Tros∣chischs:) and from their admirable quality of stilling the cough, and from the manner of using them, they are called Hypoglottides, or Sublinguales, be∣cause they are contained under, or on the tongue, til they leisurely dissolve, and are dedicated to the cough, and affections of the windpipe and breast. These are COMPOƲNDED of a powder of lenifying thoracical simples, as powder and juyce of Liquorice, gum dragant, Arabick, Starch, Penidies, Sugar, White Poppy-seeds, &c. to one ounce, or two ounces, as need requireth, or the time you use them be long or short. And that powder is taken with a sufficient quantity of muscilage of gum dragant drawn with Roserwater, or with the muscilage of Quince∣kernels, &c. or with a pectoral syrup, and made in∣to Troschischs, or pills. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. with the mu∣scilage, &c. make a masse, out of which make pils to be dissolved on the tongue; of which let him frequently hold one under his tongue til it dis∣solve of it self, and be leisurely swallow∣ed. The ƲTILITY is as above, to ease the cough,
the roughness of the Wind-pipe and Jaws, help hoarsness of the voice, and facilitate spit∣ting. Hither belong the Lupine fashioned Tro∣schiscks, which are held in the mouth to stay rheums. But those Pills that strengthen or alter any way are commodiously swallowed down, in the affections of the stomack, proceeding from its crude flatuousness, and those which communicate with it, as the head especially, or those that are neerly adjacent, as the Liver, &c. those made of appropriate strengtheners are convenient in the affections of the head, by the continuance of them, in the stomack especially, if they be taken after meat; for so the fuming quality of them ascends; and so they conduce to the affections of the eyes, against the dimness of sight, made of eye medicines, or ophthalmicks. Or else they are given at going to bed; such are the sleeping officinal Pills, as those of Cynoglosse, which are every where prescribed to stay and dry up rheumes, and to provoke sleep; and hither Lauda∣num may be referred (as most used) to gr. IV. or V. they are prescribed also for fluxes of the belly, of strengtheners and binders, to be taken both before and with meat; as also against the imbecility of the Li∣ver, Gonorrhea, Ʋlcers of the Reins and Bladder, Stone, and divers affections of the womb. But they are COMPOƲNDED of a con∣venient powder, serving to the scope of the Phy∣sitian, as the affections shall suggest, and that prescribed to half an ounce, five or six drams, which is to be made up with a convenient syrup.
The ƲSE, as to the quantity, of one dram of the mass are made six Pills, of which two are taken once or twice a day. As to the Time, they may be taken morning, and evening; before, after, or with meat, as aforesaid in the Candies. As to the Manner, they are swallowed down; and if it be for affections of the lower parts, as affections of the Liver, Bowels, Reins, Bladder, Womb, a little of some convenient Liquor should be drank after them, that thereby the Medicinal virtue might be conveyed to those parts the sooner, to good purpose. The ƲTILITY is enough spoken of be∣fore. CHAP. VI. Of Troschiscks. THey are otherwise called Circulets, and little Cakes, by the Greeks, and Pastils by the Latines, and of some Orbicles. It is a solid and hard form of Medicine, in the forms of Lupines, made of divers powders into a paste with some convenient liquor, which made into little round Cakes are dried and kept. And these are either officinal or magisterial. And both of them either internal or external. The officinal internal ones, are either,
Purgative, as Agaricus troschisatus, trosch. of Alhandal, trosch. de violis. Or altering, either without Opium, as trosch. of Vipers, of Squils, Cipheos, Hidecroy: or with Opi∣um, as trosch. de alkekengi, for the reins and blad∣der; of Amber, for the Womh. Or Cordial, as gallia Moscat. alipta matosc. Or pectoral, as Bechici albi, nigri. Or opening, as trosc. Diarrhodon, and of Rheu∣barb for the Liver, trosc. de Lupatorio, of Wormwood, and de lacca, for the Liver and Spleen; trosc. of myrrh for the Womb. Magisterial, as they were formerly most usual, so are they now scarcely at all prescribed, unlesse for fumings: (for which they are frequent, as shall be said) or for coughs and defluxions, as the pils Sub∣linguales before mentioned; they are also made u∣sually for the ulcers of the bladder and reins, sharp∣ness of the water, and to stop fluxes of blood, seed, and the belly, both to binde and open; and they may also be made to strengthen; n summ, they are pre∣scribed instead of powders, as more effectual; because in this form the medicinal quality doth not so easily vanish, but is preserved by this means commodi∣ously.
They are COMPOƲNDED of a con∣venient powder of divers things taken in a con∣venient Liquor, and mixed til they come to the form of pills, or a paste, out of which they make little round cakes, which (being marked with your mark) are to be dryed in the shadow, and to be laid up for use and these are made to the weight of 1 dram, 1 dram and a half, 2 drams, 3 drams at most, according to the virtue and effica∣cy of the ingedients; but the powder of which they are made is to be chosen out of divers parts of vegetables, especially such as are easily pow∣dered; as also of gums that are powderable, as Cherry gum, Styrax gum, Tragants; and also juyces thickened, as Acacia, Hypocistis: and generally out of all things esie to be powdered. As to the quantity, this sort of powder may be prescribed from an ounce, to an ounce and half, and two ounces, according as your use of them shall continue; but most commonly an ounce and a half wil suffice. That which these are made up withal, is either thin as wine, water, distilled water, the juyce of herbs; or clammy, as the muscilage of gum dra∣gant, or Arabick, drawn with a convenient water. As to the quantity they are prescribed, q. s. The ƲSE, and form, ℞. &c. Make Troschischs as bigg as Lupines, of the weight of, &c. let them be dryed in the shadow; when you use them; break one or two according to their effica∣cy and weight; dissolve it in a fit Liquor; let it be used either inward or outwards, for they are prescribed as is said for both internal and ex∣ternal uses: yet note, that those which are for fumings are not to be dissolved, as neither are those called Hypoglottides. The ƲTILITY is sufficiently expressed; for in this form may be kept both Alterers & streng∣theners. For Troschischs are rather invented to preserve the virtue of the powders entire, than that it should be any otherwise a useful form of a medicine; for we do not use them whole, but dissolved first in a convenient Liquor, except the Hypoglottides, and these for Suffumigaions.
But this form is most profitable, because pow∣ders (especially the cordials) and others that con∣sist of a thin essence, easily exhalable) by this means retain their virtues against the injury of the ayre, nor wil suffer them to be diffused, and as it were centers them, and so produceth a more effectual united faculty. To the Troschischs are to be referred the Muscar∣dines. WHich are little pastils, so called from the musk they contain, cheifly composed for the perfuming the breath, and to exalt venereall moris∣coes; such are these of Gallia moschata, that are most effectual. They are compounded either simply of amber∣greese, musk-grains three, four, &c: as you wil, and q. s. sugar dissolved in rose-water with a lit∣tle starch. Or else more compounded of the powder of some aromatical things of sweet savor, as cin∣namom, Saunders one dram, musk, Ambergreese, gr. three or four, as you list, and sugar q. s. make troschischs, of which let him hold one often in his mouth. CHAP. VII. Of Powders. THe USE of POWDERS is extream necessary, both that solid medicines may come in use of themselves, as also that they may the easilier be mixed with other formes of medicines; but that which the Latines cal a powder, the Arabians call by 3.
names; Suffuff any gross powder, Alcohol the fin∣est powders, and Seiff the grinding of any sort of troschischs, which is done on a stone with a fit water, for affections of the eyes; but a powder is either officinal or magisterial, of which this discourse is. The magisterial is either internal, or exter∣nal. The internall is either purging, strengthening, or altering. Purging Powder. The definition and differences may be sought out of what is aforesaid. It is compounded of Catharticks, and for the most part those that are the pleasantest with their proper correctors, in a proportion often be∣fore mentioned. As to the quantity, to an ounce; an ounce and half is the most is prescribed; and note that su∣gar for the more delicate may be added, but in a smal quantity, or equal to the powder, and that exactly defined. The ƲSE, as to the manner, 'tis to betaken in broth, or some convenient liquor. As to the quantity, the doses of the purgers are to be computed. As to the time, in the morning with custody. The FORM, ℞ &c. Make a powder, of which, &c. The ƲTILITY is to purge, see afore. The strengthening powder.
Although it may be prescribed to strengthen di∣vers parts, according to the scope of the Physitian; yet 'tis either to confirm the stomack, and is cal∣led a Digestive; or the heart, and is called a Cor∣dial, and an Alexiterial; it may be also made for other uses, as to strengthen the Liver, Intrals, &c. The COMPOSITION, 1, of the digestive powder, is in general of stomachical things that help concoction, dissolvers of wind, and binder. But in special, Coriander-seed prepared is usual∣ly the basis, prescribed to an ounce, to which are added things that discuss wind, as Anniseed to half an ounce, or 6 drams; then strengtheners of the stomack, either simple or compound, to 2 or 3 drams at most, with sugar of Roses in tablets, s. q. 2. The Cordial powder, or that which strength∣ens other parts, which is compounded both of simple and compound powders of Electuaries, proper and specifical to half an ounce, 6 drams, or 1 ounce, according as the use of it shal conti∣nue, long or short, yet so that the more pretious Cordial powders be joyned but in a smal quanti∣ty, either to a fourth or sixth part; & these are pre∣scribed either alone, or for the better taste sake, sugar rosat is mixed with them to three or four times their weight. The ƲSE and form of the Digestive powder, ℞. &c. Make a powder, of which let him take a spoonful, neither eating nor drinking after it. But of a Cordial, or other strengthening powd∣er, as hepatical, &c. this is the form, ℞. &c. Make a powder, of which let him take 1, 2, or 3 drams, with water, broath, or other convenient liquor, and that in the morning, the stomack being empty, or else when necessity requires, especially if it be Alexiterial.
The ƲTILITY, is for the strengthening of the principal parts, and others also, and consists for the most part of hot things, yet with the same in∣tention of strengthening, they may be prepared of cooling things. Hither appertains the altering powder, alter∣ing divers wayes, according to the scope, in first, second, and third qualities, as that which is generally prescribed of steel against obstructions, with other openers, to one ounce, or two ounces, with an equal quantity of sugar; of which a spoonful is taken every morning, drinking after it a little wine, or other convenient Liquor, so against the stone or gravel, of stone-breaking me∣dicines to an ounce, an ounce and a half, and Su∣gar, s. q. of which take one dram, or a dram and a half, with a diuretical Liquor: so to provoke the birth and courses; as also to bind the fluxes of blood both by stool, and from the Womb and bladder: against all kindes of fluxes, and to alter divers wayes, when moysture is one cause of∣fending. Thus much of an internal powder. The external powder is also sometimes pre∣scribed, and is either physical, or chirurgical. The physical or medicinal is for the most part strengthening, as is usually prescribed for com∣forting and drying the brain; of proper cephali∣cal things, as Roots, Leaves, &c. prescribed to two ounces, adding to it also, and that frequent∣ly the violet or cypris powder to one ounce, or one ounce and a half, more or less; but for the most part they take of roots two ounces, seeds six drams, flowers three drams, spices two drams.
The ƲSE and FORM, ℞ &c. Make a gross powder, with which let the head be dryed in the morning, which is most usual lafter the wa∣shing of it. The ƲTILITY is to strengthen the brain, and dry the phlegmatick, and to waste the ex∣crementitious moysture of the hairs of the head. The Chyrurgical powder is various, to be pre∣scribed only by a Chyrurgeon, to cleanse, fil, and heal Ulcers, stop the bleeding of wounds, &c. the quantity of prescribing it varies according to the various occasion of its use.
THE SECOND BOOK. OF EXTERNAL REMEDIES. The First SECTION: Of Remedies common to many parts. CHAP. I. Of Epithemes, or liquors to be ap∣plyed to any part.
IF you regard the signification of the name, every external medicine that is applyable to any part may be so called; but now it claims a peculiar kinde of right in design∣ing only those remedies that are externally applyed to the Heart, and Liver, and the nobler parts of the body to alter & strength∣en; and is two-fold, liquid, and solid. The liquid Epitheme. The name is apparent, and it is fluid like water, or a Julep, chiefly composed of a convenient li∣quor, and cordial powders. In it three things are to be considered, the Com∣position, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In the Composition we must regard the matter of which 'tis made, whether liquid, or dry, (as pow∣der) or mean between both: and in either of these the quality, and quantity. The Liquor, as to its quality, is for the most part a distilled water as the basis, such as is proper both for the affection and part affected; and that either alone, or else other things are joyned with it, either chiefly to make it penetrate, or give it the more efficacy, and this is most com∣monly white wine for the heart, Vinegar for the Liver; so also for its greater virtues, there are usually added the juyces of Fruits, as of Limons, or else of Leaves proper for the affection. Sometimes the Liquor is a very liquid decocti∣on, of appropriate things, but seldom. As to the quantity, 'tis usually prescribed to one pint, or 15 ounces; therefore if water be pre∣scribed, it should be to such a quantity; but if o∣ther liquid things be added, let this be the pro∣portion; of water, 8 ounces; of Juyces, from two ounces to three; of Wine, or Vinegar, from half an ounce, to an ounce. The Powder, as to its quality, is either simple, of Cordial or Hepatical woods & barks chiefly; also of flowers, seeds, &c. or compound of strengthening electuaries, and sometimes aroma∣tical troschischs.
As to the quantity, to every ounce of liquor one scruple or half a dram of powder wil suffice, so that to the whole proportion, half an ounce, or 6 drams may be prescribed, so that not above a dram or two of the species of Electuaries may be taken. The things of mean consistence, in relation to their quality; there is sometimes besides the liquor and powder (of which an Epithe me al∣wayes consists,) a strengthening Opiate, or cor∣dial confection, as Alchermes, prescribed to one dram, or two drams. The ƲSE: as to the manner, it is applyed with a scarlet cloth, or some soft linnen dipped in it, gently pressed forth, and applyed warm; and when it either grows cold or dry, 'tis to be re∣newed several times, and continued thus a quar∣ter, or half an hour, twice a day. No quantity for each time is set down. The time is in the morning and evening, if the affection be cold, or it be in winter; otherwise it is to be used 4 times a day if hot, or it be summer; and note this diligently that if the strength be extream weak, after the use of a liquid one, the solid one should be prescribed. The FORM of prescribing, ℞ &c. Make a li∣quid Epitheme to be kept in a glass; at the time of using it take a scarlet cloth, &c. The ƲTILITY: 'tis generally used to corro∣borate, and also to cool, seldom to heat, (for this purpose the solid form is more effectual) it is prescribed against the hot distempers of the heart and Liver, as also to strengthen and resist malignity, if there be any suspition of it: their use is chiefest in Fevers in the Summer time.
Note, that liquid Epithemes may be applyed to the whole breast profitably, in burning and hectick severs, composed of moyst and cooling waters, or decoctions prescribed in a greater quan∣tity; as also in the burnings of the head, Phrensie, &c. see Rose-vinegar. They are also sometimes applyed to the testi∣cles in extream heats; for by their communi∣cation with the whole body, the very habit of the body and the blood is cooled; therefore it is most profitable in the bleeding at nose or o∣therwise, and to this purpose they use a mixture of vinegar and water; to the same end sometimes cooling things are applyed to the hand-wrists, a∣gainst the heat and fervency of the heart, so also to the fieriness of the face, &c. in summ, every thing comprehended under the name of an Epi∣theme may be used to any part inflamed or be∣set with a hot affection; though the word Epi∣theme be properly understood of a thing in re∣lation to the heart or Liver. The solid Epitheme. That is called so that is not fluid like water, though they are prescribed of a diverse consistence, as wel a soft as otherwise. In it note three things, Composition, the Ʋse, and Ʋtility. As to the COMPOSITION, 'tis made divers wayes. 1. Either (and this is most usual) in the form of an Opiate, made of conserves of flowers, powd∣ers of electuaries, (but seldom of a simple pow∣der) and of Confections as aforesaid, with a fit
Liquor, distilled water simple or compound, an appropriate juyce, &c. As to the quantity in general, it scarce ex∣ceeds four ounces; but in special, let there be of conserves, three ounces; confections, three drams; powders, one dram, or two at most. 2. Or else in form of a liniment, especially in hot affections of the heart, as also in cold; they may also be used in affections of the Liver, of oyntment of Roses, ceratum santalinum, &c. two ounces; fit conserves, half an ounce, six drams; to cordial powders, half a dram, or two scru∣ples. 3. Or of [See what Pipio signifies, for it is not a Pippin] a Pippin cut in two, in the middle, and is most usual, which let bestrewed with one dram of the powder of some cordial Electuary, or two drams of the powder of ordinary Epithemes. Hither may be referred Puppies and Kittens cut in halves to be applyed to the head, chiefly in the declination of Phrensies, sprinkled with a di∣gesting and strengthening powder, of the flowers of Roses, Chamomil, berries of kermes, and such like, to half an ounce. The ƲSE: as to the manner, let the solid one in the form of an Opiate be extended on a scarlet cloth wet in a convenient Liquor, and gently pressed; and then be applyed warm to the region of the heart, and that either after the use of the liquid one, or otherwise also. The time is indifferent, it may be renewed twice or thrice a day. The FORM appears out of the composition, ℞ &c. make an Epitheme, &c.
The utility of a solid form like an Opiate is chiefly to strengthen and heat, as also that in form of a Liniment and that made with a Pipio; see before; they may also be made to cool of Conserves, in the form of a Liniment; but that form is chiefly used, and most profitable for the Liver. In general, they are made to alter & strength∣en where the strength is much wasted. CHAP. II. Of Lotions. THe reason and definition of the name is clear; for it is as it were a particular kinde of Bathe, dedicated chiefly to the head and feet; hence I account it two-fold; Cephalical, and for the feet. The Cephalical Lotion. Is COMPOƲNDED of a decoction of Ce∣phalical simples; in which two things are to be considered, the matter, and the Liquor; & in these the quality, and quantity. The MATTER, in relation both to qua∣lity, and quantity; there is taken of roots, to two ounces, or three ounces; of Leaves, from four handfuls, to eight; seeds, from one ounce to two; flowers, pug. 4.
Note, that sometimes spices are added to half an ounce, or six drams, and when you would dry powerfully, unmelted brimstone, half an ounce; and when the head is to be particularly purged, after general means you may add Senna leaves to one ounce, white Agarick half an ounce. The Liquor, as to the quality, is either a Lye made of Vine ashes, or the ordinary Lye of Bar∣bers, adding white wine if you wil, or to the wine add water to 4 ounces. As to the quantity; 'tis said of wine, s. q. or of each a like quantity. The ƲSE: as to the manner, the head is wet with it, in the sun-shine, in a clear day, and if you can, a quiet warm place; afterwards the head is to be throughly dryed with sponges soaked in Aqua vitae; and lastly, 'tis to be covered diligent∣ly with dryed locks of hemp wel fumed with suffumigations. The time, let it be washed in the morning, two hours before dinner, the belly being first evacuated. The Form, ℞. &c. Make a decoction, wash the head, &c. The ƲTILITY is great after purging, where the relicks of the matter imparted is to be dissi∣pated & consumed; as also where the head is to be strengthened, and they are for the most part ad∣dicted onely to the cold distempers of the head and brain: they may also be prepared for other uses, as for outward affections of the head, as tet∣ters, dandruff, lice, filth; made of the sharpest sort of cleansers, with urine and lye, alwayes adding cephalical-herbs.
The lotion for the feet. Is compounded of the decoction of simples, hot or cold, made either in water or Lye, as is fittest for the purpose; the ingredients of the decoction should be in the same dose, as for the cephalical lotion. But note, that (as to the quality of the ingredi∣ents,) because this is usually instituted to pro∣voke sleep, the cooling cephalical simples are to be chosen, and that the heads of white Poppy in number 4, may wel be added. Note also, that where you would dry, heat, and strengthen, and in the swelling oedematous, or phlegmatick affections of the leggs, Salt and Allum may be profitably mingled with it to four ounces, and Quicksulfure to two ounces. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a de∣coction for a lotion for the feet, morning or e∣vening, before meat, or before sleep, if it be to procure it. The ƲTILITY is either to mend their own proper affections, trembling of them, to cal down the humours from the higher parts, if they are made of heating cephalical medicines; also to ease weariness, or (which is most gener∣ally the use of them) to provoke sleep in the raging heat of Fevers, and fervency of the brain.
CHAP. III. Of a Fomentation. IT is called a Fomentation because it doth foment and cherish the parts to which it is applyed, by the heat it is applyed withall, for all Fomentations are in action hot, seldom any cold. And it is two-fold, moist, and dry. The moyst Fomentation. The moyst one is a Liquor fit to be applyed to di∣vers parts by the help of Limons, sisters, Sponges, ser∣ving to diuers intentions. And this is again two-fold, simple, and more compound. The SIMPLE Liquor that is wont to be pre∣scribed for a Fomentation, as to its quality, is either hot or warm water, when we would relax in pains that come from over-much fulness; or Wine, when we would discusse and strengthen; or wine and water together where we would do both at once, or either temperately; or milk in great paines, or oyl common, or other where we would mollifie in relation to the paine, and digest as to the scope; or water and oyl, Vinegar and water, or Vinegar of Roses in hot affections, or Lee of Vine∣ashes in cold affections, if we should digest and dry strongly.
As to the quantity, that is to be defined by the long continuance of the use of it, and the bigness of the part to be fomented: so for the eye 4 ounces wil suffice; for the stomack one pint, or a pint and a half; for the short rib-region and belly, as is usu∣al in obstructions three pints. The Compound is made of the decoction of va∣rious kindes of simples, parts of plants, and a convenient Liquor, in which we must consider quality, and quantity. As to the quality of the matter, there are pre∣scribed roots, leaves, fruits, seeds, flowers, some∣times all together, where a greater quantity is to be prepared, sometimes some few only. As to the quantity, it is various according to the diversity of the parts. As for example, for the eyes, it may be prescribed to the dose of a poti∣on, or the fourth part of the Apozem, for four ounces wil suffice, or six at most; for the stomack, half the proportion of an Apozem, or something more; for the whole belly, the whole dose of the Apozem. The Liquor in which the decoction is to be made, is simple water, or water and wine together; sometimes milk where you would lenisie; Lye where you would digest; Smiths water where binde, &c. according to the scope; as to the quan∣tity, tis prescribed q. s. Note, that sometimes the decoction being made and strained, divers things may be added, as white wine in obstructions of the bowels, to one pint, or a pint and a half; sometimes
Vinegar, in affections of the spleen, to 6, 7, or 8 ounces for penetration sake; Aqua vitae for the stomack, to two or three ounces, and to strengthen also, or appropriate oyls to 4 ounces, half a pint, &c. and it is generally the use in practice to prescribe them after the use of the Apozem in obstructions of the bowels; as ℞ of the decoction prescribed for the Apozem, three or four pints, add to it of wine, &c. make a somentation for the belly. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a decocti∣on for a fomentation, with which let the part affected be fomented with a doubled linnen cloth, shreds, or a sponge wet in it, and a little wrung out again; or else use a hoggs bladder half ful of the Liquor, morning and evening; so as it cools apply another by turns. Note, that in the fomentation of the belly, un∣der the short ribs, 'tis usually said, let the short-rib∣region be fomented in the morning, 2 or 3 hours before dinner, or else before supper for three or four dayes, changing often the fomentation, lest it cool too much: and it is usually prescribed after the fomentation to be anointed with such an oyl, liniment, or unguent hot. The Use is after general purgations, otherwise whe need requires. The UTILITY is large, so that there is hard∣ly any part, which as it may be fomented, shal not receive very much benefit from it; it is used to the eyes affected, both for the pain, and in∣flammation of them, &c. Also against obstructi∣ons of the spleen and bowels, &c. against the pains of divers parts, to provoke the courses; for the cholerick affections of the reins, inflam∣mations of the reins; it rarifies the skin, that the humours contained may be the better digested, attenuated, dissolved when they are thin; and when hard mollified; it turns things to vapours, and helps much by its gentle heat; hence it is u∣sed,
in pains, to relax, mollifie, digest, dry, binde, strengthen, heat, and also sometimes to cool, but then there is rather to be used an Epithem, as in cholerick inflammations, The dry Fomentation. So I cal (from the effect) that fomentation, and baggs which are chiefly prescribed to dis∣solve, from whence they are usually called dis∣cussing baggs, of which hereafter. CHAP. IV. Of the petty Bath.
THis is between a Bath and Fomentation, larger than this, lesser than that, whose use it when a fomentation cannot cover the whole part from which it doth not differ; otherwise ei∣ther in matter or utility; so that it is a half bath, in which the sick set from their thighs, their knees and leggs being lifted up; Or else from the bottom of their feet, up to their Navel or stomack, from whence the Greeks and Latines cal it by names that signifie a setting in; and if the incession be in an open stool, they cal it a Va∣porary, which is chiefly dedicated to the affecti∣ons of the lower parts of the belly, and is called a SEMIOƲPE, or half bath, because it is not a whole Bath, but a bathing tub onely half ful, and is COMPOƲNDED of the same things a Fomentation is, to double the quantity of the Apozem, or to half the quantity of a bath, so that there is nothing else worth mark∣ing. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a Decoction for a half bath, in which let the sick set, from the feet to the Navel, morning and e∣vening, long from meat, having first had a stool to be continued three or four dayes, (according as there is need,) warm without sweating: let him stay in it about two hours, the moisture be∣ing vviped off, let him rest in his bed, the place affected being anointed, (if you wil) with a fit Liniment. Note, that in the affections of the Anus, Womb and bladder, chiefly the matter of the half bath may be applyed to the part affected in a bagg, on which let him set. The UTILITY is the same with the Fo∣mentation, but chiefly to be used in affections of the parts contained in the belly, or lower re∣gion, when for divers reasons we dare not bath the whole body; and is most commonly to ease pain, (which is most usual in nephritical affecti∣ons, made of convenient mollifiers,) to help the Hemorrhoids sweld with pain, the difficulty of Urine; also for the paines of the leggs & hips, of things that mollifie, ease pain, in affections of the bladder, and difficulty of making water, 'tis most admirable; as also in mending, the affections, and distempers of the Womb, either provoking,
or stopping the courses; in all affections of the A∣nus, to mollifie the Belly, ease paines of the co∣lick, &c. A VAPORARY, which otherwise is called a setting over, is prepared when they set not in the Liquor, but the VAPOƲR (from whence it is called a Vaporary, or suffumigati∣on) is received through a hollow stool with a hole cut in the seat, setting a pot ful of the hot decoction underneath, which being cold, ano∣ther is set hot in the place. The MATTER and dose of it for the decocti∣on, is as in the fomentation, to be prescribed in the quantity of a Clyster, or something greater. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a decoction, the steam of which let him receive thorow a hollow stool, a pot being set under of the hot decoction, &c. The UTILITY: it is used only for af∣fections of the Womb and Anus, for paine, and divers distempers, Hemorrhoids, to provoke the courses; they may also be prescribed for divers defects of the bladder; See the moist Suffumi∣gation.
CHAP. V. Of a Bath. IT was most usual of old among the Romans for pleasure, but now a dayes only used for the recovery of health, and resisting of diseases; what it is is manifest, but it is two-fold; the A∣ery Bath which they call a hot house, of which hereafter; and the watrish Bath, when the par∣ties setting in a tub are washed, and this is cal∣led a Bath, viz. the washing of the whole body for the most part for hot and dry distempers of the whole body, seldom for cold ones, for which purpose the Stove is most conveni∣ent. And it is two-fold, simple and compound. The simple is usually only water a little warm∣ed, chiefly in Hecticks, where there are lean and dry bodies, which this tempers by its gentle moi∣sture, and with it also alters the distemper; to this also is sometimes added Oyl, Butter, or Milk to moisten the more; as also in the pain of the Kidnies, and Convulsion; or else of Milk only for the richer sort of people, to the same purpose; or Milk and water; or oyl alone in paines of the sinewy parts, and Reins, convulsion through drought, pricking, and stitches, suppression of U∣rine. &c. or water and Oyl to the same end.
The Compound is made of a decoction, in which are to be considered the matter, liquor, and sometimes the things to be dissolved in it. The MATTER, in relation to its quality, and quantity, are Roots, from three lib. to 5 or 6 at most; Herbs, in number 10 or 12, of each, M. 3, 4, or of 6, 7, or 8, of each a bundle; seeds, from 4 ounces to one pound; sometimes Fruits, to a pound and a half; Flowers 4, &c. ana. P. 4, &c. The Liquor, as to quality, and quantity, is sweet or fair water, q. s. for a bath. Sometimes there are dissolved, or added to the decoction, and that profitably to the various scope of the indications, those things mention∣ed in the Fomentation in a three or 4 fold pro∣portion; so usually for the Hectical is added oyl and butter, ana, lib: 3. white Wine lib. 4. as also sometimes at the latter end of the Dec∣ction in cold affections, in which a bath is very rare. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a Decoction for a bath, which let him enter into morning and evening, when the meat is gone out of the stomack, (or else when need requires as in paines,) (having first been at stool) warm without sweating; let him continue in it from one to two hours, according to his strength; then after his egress, from the Bath, wipe off the moi∣sture, & anoint the region of the Liver & Reins with a cooling Oyntment, which is usually prescribed. The UTILITY is for outward affections of the skin, as the scabbiness, drought, and  of it, &c. as also for internal affections, and
especially a bath of fair water, most convenient for the Hectical and lean people, because it moi∣steneth, and withal mends the hot distemper; they are also convenient in the diary Fevers, as was generally the practise of Galen; for it relax∣eth and openeth the pores by which that which is offensive may be easily excluded; and are also good for the heat of the Liver, and every distem∣per, but especially the hot; onely the moist one is usually remedied, and better by the hot house, (as also the cold one) which fitly resists the morbifical cause. They are also made to heat and strengthen, as generally to help Con∣ception, of Hysterical simples; to procure the menses, of opening mollifying simples, appro∣priated to the Womb: against obstructions of the bowels, Dropsie, Cholick, Stone in the Kid∣nies, weariness, of relax ingmollifying things. Lastly, in every affection that wants cooling and moistening, or heating and moistening toge∣ther. CHAP. VI. Of a Stoveer Sudatory. IT is otherwise called a Laconic, because the La∣conians were wont to use it as the Romans, to bath; others call it a vaporary: In this, the sick par∣ty is not dipped in the Liquor, but onely warmed with either a hot and dry, or a hot and moist vapor, and caused to sweat.
Therefore a stove is two-fold, a moist, and a dry. The moist Is made by the vapour of some decoction, whereby the aire under the Canopye grows hot. It is COMPOSED of a Canopy (with a Bath) erected and placed over the sick, on which are layed sheets or blankets to keep in the vapour. And this is heated diversly by the vapour. 1. Either by stoves fiery hot so placed under∣neath, that the Decoction to be used being cast cast on them, the vapour ascends to the afore∣said purpose. 2. Or else the Decoction is first poured in (yet so that it touch not the sick) and then into it the stones are dropped fiery hot. 3. Or (which is more commodious) the de∣coction is prepared in two Cauldrons, which are heated by turns, and poured into the under tub, as each other cools. This Decoction is prepared of proper Roots, Leaves, Flowers for the most part hot, cephalical, wel sented, of thin parts; and in quantity as the highest proportion of the Apozems, and to be prescribed with water, q. s. The USE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a de∣coction, whose vapor let the sick receive under a Canopy close shut, so let him sweat at his plea∣sure; let him use it twice a day, long after meat, the belly being first emptied, and that for two dayes: let his stay in it be according to his strength; when he comes forth wipe off the sweat, and let him rest in his bed, &c. the use of this is most convenient in the winter, and spring, as of the bath in summer.
The dry Stove. That is so called which onely is heated with the heat of the fire. This is made 1. Either in the manner of an Oven, as in Ger. many, & is usually called a hot house, or laconic. 2. Or else fiery flints are layed under the Ca∣nopy on plates of iron, and so give a heat. 3. Or at this day for the French disease, 'tis made of a frame of wood like the cover of a bu∣rial bear; and with this the sick are covered, and sheds laid over it; & under it are placed little red hot stones, til the sweat follow plentiful, the par∣ty having first drank a draught of the Decoction of Guajack, or some other sudorifick. The USE is as the other; the stay in them according to their strength, which are thus much wasted, so that they can hardly indure one quar∣ter, or half an hour. The UTILITY; it warms the matter of the disease spread over all the body, and attenuates it; loosens the skin, and empties it; it is very ef∣fectual in cold and moist affections, loosenesse of humors, the dropsie, Leucophlegmatia; for it powerfully dissolves the humours, and consumes them by sweat, very profitable for them that are fat, especially those who are cacochymical, if the foulness of humours be either in the habit of the body, or in the veins. In the French Pox 'tis ge∣nerally used dry, and is not to be used at all un∣lesse the body be first emptied, for then the re∣licks are by this way easily quite rooted out.
CHAP. VII. Of Embrocation. IT is not properly a certain Form of Medicine, but only a manner of using it, when we pour on any part some liquor or oyl, and that either pouring it from high, or only rubbing it gently in: for Practi∣sers use the name of Embrocation either way, and usually confound it with irrigation; for  signifies to rain, water, or dip; but be it as it will, here for distinction sake we will distribute it into Ir∣rigation and Embrocation. Irrigation. It is a pouring of Liquor from high, like rain on any part (but chiefly the head) making it distill out of a snowted vessel, and differs from a Fomentation only in form of using it. It is PREPARED divers ways. 1. Either of the decoction of divers parts of Plants, hot or cold, according to the scope in the quantity as for a Lotion, made in water or wine, as your indication requires, boyled to the consumption of the third part; in which being strained to one pound, may be sometimes added vinegar, wine, aqua vitae (according as the af∣fections be cold or hot) two or three drams, &c.
2. Or of Oyl only plentifully powred, but this is better applyed as an Embrocation with linnen rags dipped in it, especially in convulsions, and affections of the nerves. 3. Or of oyl, distilled water, and vinegar in hot affections of the head; see the Oxirrodinum. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞, &c. of the decoctior, lib. one, two or three, make an Irrigation from high with a stream on the part affected, &c. See the Lotions. The ƲTILITY; tis chiefly dedicated to hot affections, especially of the head, the inflam∣mations of the brain and membranes of it, and that on the forepart of the head; as also in pro∣voking sleep, in hot affections and great watch∣ings, though of late the Lotions of the feet be used in its stead; tis very usefull in Feavers where there is a delirium; and for hot affections of the head, for it cools much, because falling from high it pierceth the deeper, and because still a fresh Liquor comes on it; and the part so cool∣ed, is thereby the more tempered. It may also be used profitably to its cold affections, but most of all to the hot, to which it chiefly belongs; and when we would most of all cool in the be∣ginning of inflammations, we do it either with a cooling decoction, Oxirrodinum or Oxicratum in the Erisipelas. In cold affections (though these may be used) we rather use the Fomentation, as also in dissolving an inflammation: in Fractures and Luxations where tis not safe to unty the Li∣gtures, when pain is urgent, this may be used with oyl of violets, or to repel, oyl of roses. [Oyls are suspected in Fractures and Luxations.]
Note that the dripping of bath waters may be referred to this place. Embrocation. It is not taken here for watring a thing from on high, but as it is at this day used, or for a gentle rubbing of the part with oyl, or for the applying of wool or linnen dipped in oyl or other convenient liquor; for Embrecho in Greek signifies both to dip; rain, or water a thing. It is COMPOƲNDED and prescribed, 1. Either of Wool, or Lints (which others call bolstrings) dipped (from whence its name) in oyl only, or in some other convenient Liquor, applyed to the part after the manner of an Epi∣theme, to be often renewed. This Liquor is either oyl alone, or some juices only, or distilled waters only, or else all toge∣ther in this proportion, Oyl, Juices, Water, ana four ounces. 2. Or as at this day Embrocation is understood for a gentle rubbing with the hand made with a convenient oyl; afterwards applying bolsters of hemp-hurds, linnen or cotten, either dipped or not dipped in the aforesaid. It is also made of juice only, or of the others mixed with it, and then the Dose of them toge∣ther, or of each several is four or six ounces. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞, &c. for an Embrocation; first let the part be gently rub∣bed, with it; after apply boulsters of linnen or cotten dipped, or not dipped in the same oyl. Or according to the former manner, ℞, &c.
dip your hurds and bolsters in it, and apply them renewing them often. The ƲTILITY, the Embrocation of oyls is most frequent after bathings; it is also profi∣table to repel, in inflammations, erisipelas, phren∣sies, watchings, pains of the head, to warm all parts of the body, they are usually after bathing, the moysture being first wiped off; but evacua∣tion should always forego the use of them: but they are chiefly profitable in external af∣fections. CHAP. VIII. Of a Liniment. ALiniment is a Liquid Form of Medicines, which is applied outwardly, in consistence thicker than oyle, but thinner than an ointment, whose basis is an oyl, prepared for divers uses. In it three things are to be considered, the Composition, Vse, and Vtility. As to the COMPOSITION, tis vari∣ously made of divers things. 1. Either of oyls and butter melted together without any wax (which some will (very much mistaken) not have in a Liniment.) And the quantity of the whole Liniment is four, six, or eight ounces, according to the great∣ness of the part, and continuance of its use; let this be the proportion of the Ingredients: viz.
three or two parts of Oyl to one of batter, they are seldom equal. Note, that if the scope of the cure require it, to these may be added fresh Fats, old Marrows, Muscilages, one, two, or more together, which seeing they are accounted of as Butter, should be in the same proportion prescribed. Note also, that sometimes, though seldom, powders are added, viz. half a dram of them to a dram of Oyl. 2. Or else (contrary to the opinion of some which wil not admit of wax, with which it may commodiously be made,) it is made of con∣venient oyls and wax; as let an ounce of Oyl have one dram of wax; or which is usually done, wax, q. s. but generally the oyls are prescribed to 4 or 6 ounces; wax, q. s. make a Liniment, to which as is said, you may add a powder, which is usual. 3. Or else some officinal unguent is prescri∣bed double to the oyl, to which may also be ad∣ded the powder if you wil. Generally a Liniment doth not exceed four, 6, or 8 ounces. The VSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a Liniment; with which anoint the part affected, either after fomentation, if that hath preceded, or otherwise. The ƲTILITY: they are for the most part paregorical, to ease paine coming from distem∣per, either hot or cold, to relax parts conden∣sed, to soften them that are hardned, to help tumours, weariness (for which they were of old called ) the hardnesse of the Spleen, Li∣ver; to relax the parts, as the womb in hard birth, in the stone, and to digest and discuss in,
flammations; they are also made to heat, moisten, or dry, though unguents are more effe∣ctual; and to cool, the Embrocation is bet∣ter. CHAP. IX. Of Oyntments. THe Arabians called Cerecloth and Oyntment by the same name, and now adayes they usually confound unguents with Liniments, though an oynt∣ment properly be a topical Medicine, of a mean consi∣stence between a Liniment and a Cerecloth, much like hard Honey, made of Oyls, Powders, and Wax for divers uses. In it three things are to be considered, Compo∣sition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. As to the COMPOSITION in general, they wil have it made of three several substan∣ces, Oyl, VVax, and powder, in this proportion, that the whole masse may contain 4 ounces, half apint, or a pint, according to the greatness of the part, and length of the use; and this propor∣tion of each in general is used; to oyl an ounce, wax two drams; powder one dram; but in speci∣al 'tis thus made diversly. 1. Either without fire and wax against the common opinion, by that way which they cal nutrition, and is prepared by beating things to∣gether, as Oyntment of Litharge, & de Bolo, which they cal Nutritum. But this sort of Nutritum is made of an Oyl, a fit Liquor, and a Powder.
Oyl is taken either alone variously according to the scope; or else with it are joyned either other things equivalent: one, two, or more; the powder is for the most part mineral, burnt, and washed, &c. of which afterwards. The Liquor is the juyce of Leaves, or vinegar, if the intention bears it. Of these three consists nutritum, whose proper∣tion is often recited, but usually only the quan∣tity of the powder is set down; as for example, to one or two ounces of powder, of the Oyl and Liquor, q. s. viz. as much as the powder can drink up. And this is the FORM of Nutritum, ℞. &c. viz. the powder with the Oyl, or those things that are equivalent, one or two, &c. q.s. let them be beaten strongly in a marble mortar with a leaden pestle against Ulcers, leisurely powring to your convenient Liquor by little and little, so make an oyntment. 2. Or with fire, which is most usual in pra∣ctice, which manner is most received and plain∣est; and is prepared of oyl, (or its like) and wax; the oyl being defined for its quantity to two, three, or four ounces, but the Wax, q. s. yet its proportion appears as above. 3. Or (vvhich is more compound, and also received in use, and at the first mentioned) of oyl, Wax, and Powder in proportion aforesaid, which is to be observed in hot Oyntments, in vvhich sometimes you may prescribe a dram and a half of powder to one ounce of Oyl; but in cold oyntments as Ʋnguent. de tutia, & de siccativum rubrum, you may see to one ounce; of oyl, half an ounce of povvder, contrary to the rule.
But be it as it will, in hot ointments ye may prescribe to one ounce of oyl, one dram, or a dram and a half of powder, and the wax indefinitely, q.s. Note that also officinal Ointments are some∣times mixed to one ounce, and one ounce and a half, &c. 4. Or which is very usual and effectual, of Juices and oyls, which must boyl to the consum∣ption of the Juices, neer this proportion of oyl, four, six or eight ounces, according to the use and part, as often aforesaid, and as much of the juices, or something less, to which afterwards is added either wax alone, q.s. or together with that a pro∣per powder in the aforesaid proportion to the oyls, or sometimes over and above; some offi∣cinal ointment to two ounces, may also be joyn∣ed with them. 5. Or (which also is usual) of an officinal un∣guent, a powder, oyl, wax, unguent to two, three or four ounces; powder to half an ounce, or six drams, oyl and wax is said, q.s. 6. Or sometimes without any other addition, an unguent of the shops is alone prescribed to four ounces, and six drams, &c. The ƲSE and FORM, is as the liniment, as to the manner either warm, hot, or cold as the intention requires; and it is often prescribed, let there be added at the time of using it a little vinegar, especially in cooling ones, to help it to penetrate; so also in heating unguents, you may add Aqua vitae. The Time of using it is various according to the several indications. The ƲTILITY is large, and extends it self
to all parts, and affections which do not easily bear other remedies, or when we would deal more effectually than can be done by oyl; 'tis used to alter diversly in the first and second qua∣lities, to mollifie, digest, and cleanse, &c. Animadversions. Note, concerning that common rule, by which for one ounce of Oyl two drams of Wax are ta∣ken, and one dram of powder, as Galen also ap∣pointed, it is valid in heating Ointments, in which the powders nevertheless reach to a dram and a half, but in cold Ointments it is not ob∣served in dispensatories, which few make; nor in Ointments which are to cleanse, dry, replenish, and cicatrize Ulcers, which for the most part consist of Minerals, and are weighty, in which you shal (if you examine) observe that to one ounce of powder, there is of oyl two ounces; wax, half an ounce, five or six drams. And of this sort Mineral powders are, red Lead, Tutty, Lead, terra sigillata, Bole, lap. Calaminaris, Cerusse, Litharge, which two last for the most part make the basis, and are prescribed three times as much as the others. But in the composition of an Ointment these things are to be esteemed for Oyl, and are equi∣valent with it, as divers Fatts, Grease, Marrow, Butter, oesipus, Muscilage, Honey, Turpentine, and such like; all which are accounted of as Oyl, and therefore the quantity of other things is to be proportioned to them as to Oyls, but if you prescribe both oy land other things equivalent, they are usually added alike, or more or lesse as you see occasion.
Concerning wax, in hot Ointments choose yellow; in cooling, the white; equivalent to it are gums, as Ammoniack, Bdellium, Myrrh, &c. and therefore the consideration of them is to be had in the Composition; and mark this, that in winter lesse, in summer more Wax is to be pre∣scribed than the rule allows of. As to the powders, they may be of all kind of things, but commonly they are taken out of ve∣getables, as Roots, Woods, Herbs dryed, Juices thickned, Raisins and gums that may be powde∣red; seldom of Minerals, unless in cooling Oint∣ments, where we must dry, cleanse, &c. and chiefly in external uses; &c. as Ulcers, &c. in hot Ointments never, and very seldom of animals, because they are scarce powderable; for those things taken from them are rather to be melted, as grease, marrow, &c. CHAP. X. Of a Cerecloth, IT hath its name from Cera Wax, and is also cal∣led Ceroneum, though now adayes Chyrurgeons call Plaisters by that name; at first it was made of Oyl and Wax onely, but now adayes they commonly confound the name with Ʋnguents, as Ceratum al∣bum, Resrigerans, or the white cooling Cerecloth: and Ceratum santalinum, or Cerecloth of Saun∣ders, which are Ʋnguents, and are now called Cerecloths.
But properly it is a Medicine of a meane con∣sistency between an oyntment and a plaister, harder than that, softer then this. 'Tis COMPOƲNDED in general of an Oyl, a powder, and wax, in this proportion; Oyl one ounce, powder one dram, or a dram and half; wax half an ounce. But in special, 1. Either properly, as of old, of wax, oyl, (from whence the name) in the aforesaid pro∣portion; but because Galen in his cooling oynt∣ment to one ounce of oyl puts but two drams of wax, it makes it meerly au oyntment: and that which he sets down ten of Method; where for one ounce of oyl he puts three ounces, and cals his solid cearcloth, is absolutely a plaister, per∣haps he more regarded the matter of the Medi∣cine then the form: but the order should be as aforesaid, for one ounce of oyl, half a ounce or 6 drams of wax. As to the quantity; the proportion of the whole masse of a cerecloth is to be defined by the big∣ness of the part, and the continnance of the use, and is usually to eight ounces, or lib. 1. &c. and for private use three ounces wil serve for a large cerecloth; two ounces for a moderate one; or one ounce for a less.
2. Or more improperly, besides wax and oyl, (of which the cerecloth of the Antients) is ad∣ded, 1. Things equivalent to wax only, oyl one∣ly, or of both, with the same caution, and in the same quantities there mentioned. 2. Or powd∣ers onely, of which we have said the cerecloth is usually made, in this proportion; oyl one ounce; powder, one dram, one dram and a half, sometimes two or three drams, but then so much of the wax is to be abated. 3. Or of the aforesaid equivalent things and powders together. 3. Or of officinal plaisters melted in oyl, viz. when the part grieved cannot otherwise suffer it, then of the plaister, two, three, or four ounces, oyl q. s. make a cerecloth. 4. It may be made of all those things of which an oyntment is made; onely observe the due consistencie, and the porportion now set down. The ƲSE and FORM is as of Plaisters, to be spreadon a Leather, or cloth. The ƲTILITY is diverse in general, lest they should drain off without benefit, or the vir∣tues of it be dissipated, or when the grieved parts wil not suffer the hardness of a plaister which they require, as usually in Fractures, or when soft parts in regard of their bending cannot ad∣mit a plaister, as in affections of the Liver, Sto∣mack, Spleen, for which they are usually made in obstructions of the Spleen, for the womb, bones broken or out of joynt, hardness of the bowels, burstness, &c. They are also made where we would heat, moisten, relax, molline, concoct, digest, ripen; they may also be made to dry and bind, seldom to cool; for the cooling cerecloth of Galen is an oyntment.
CHAP. XI Of a Plaister. O Intments, Cerecloths, and Plaisters, as they agree in virtues, so they differ as much in consistence. A Plaister therefore is a topical Me∣dicine, thicker in consistence than the others, but clammy, so that spread on a Linnen, or Lea∣ther, it may stick fast to the skin. The Arabians for the most part cal them Cereclothes; the anti∣ent Greeks called them Plaisters, from  to shape or mould, or from their Emplastick or sticking quality. And it is twofold, Officinal and Magisterial, of which at present. The Magisterial is Compounded (to be brief) of the same things of which an Ointment is; of oyl, wax, things equivalent, a powder, or some or more or all of them, neer this proportion, wch is very doubtful amongst Authors, who for one ounce of Oyl take neer three drams of powders, four oun∣ces of wax, in which you wil find no firm exam∣ple; therefore take it thus. For a plaister less hard, take of oyl one ounce, powder half an ounce, wax one ounce. For a harder plaister, take oyl one ounce, pow∣der six drams, wax an ounce and a half, which is generally used.
For the hardest plaister, oyl one ounce, pow∣der six drams, or one ounce, wax two ounces; for when they treble the wax to the oyl, you must understand it is when there is none, or little powders; and they that appoint the wax four∣fold to the oyl, have no example in the dispen∣satories for it. But in special 'tis made of oyl, wax, and pow∣der, as is said in an unguent, those things being added (if the scope permit) which are clammy, as Rosin, Turpentine, Pitch, Gums; in defining the proportion of which we must consider whe∣ther they be equivalent to the Wax or Oyls, so shal you easily judge them: but whatsoever they are, where Turpentine can be admitted, let it be prescribed, because 'tis clammy, which is requi∣red in a plaister, as also gums, if the scope re∣quire it. 2. Or of Oyls, Juice, Powders, Wax, and things equivalent if need be: see the Ointment. 3. Or of an officinal plaister, powders, wax, and oyl, and generally Turpentine neer this pro∣portion; of the plaister an ounce and a half, or two ounces of the powder, half an ounce or six drams; wax and oyl q. s. adding a little Turpen∣tine, or omitting them, prescribe it to be incor∣porated with Turpentine, q. s. 4. Or else an officinal plaister is prescribed a∣lone in a fit proportion for the part, &c. 5. Or sometimes gums onely are melted with a hot pestle, and spread on a Leather, to 6 drams, or one ounce, as usually in the suffocation of the mother; there may also be added powders and oyls. 6. Or sometimes powders of appropriat things may be prescribed to 6 drams to be made up with ship-pitch to an ounce and half, or Turpentine. q. s. to which may be added gums to one ounce.
The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. with, &c. make a plaister, which spread on Leather, and apply, being first anointed with oyl, or sprinkled with powder if you would not have them cleave too fast. But the figure of the plaister is prescribed in relation to the part, as for he head like a T; for the stomack like a Scutcheon; for the spleen, longish; for the Womb round; for the reins square. The ƲTILITY: it was invented that the virtues of the medicine might stick to the lon∣ger, and not vanish: they are profitable to heat, strengthen, dry, concoct, ripen, for they increase heat by stopping the pores of the skin; they also digest wel, and draw out things fixed in the body, by a drawing quality; they are also usefulto mol∣lifie hardnesses, to strengthen, heal and cleanse Ulcers, to dry and cicatrize, for fractures also, seldom to cool, unless they be sometimes pre∣scribed of binders and repellers to stop fluxes CHAP. XII. Of a Spanadrap. THey call that so, when the cloth is plaistry on both sides; usually they are called tela Gaalteri, perhaps from the inventor; but 'tis nothing else than linnen worn soft with age, in the form of a swath, or otherwise, dipped into a liquid sort of plaister, then taken out, and spread at the ful bredth, afterwards when 'tis cold made smooth.
'Tis Compounded, 1. Either of a fit plaister, adding (if you wil) a little oyl, if it be hard, in which old cloth is dipped, &c. 2. Or according to the indication 'tis pre∣scribed fresh, and that for the most part to stop rheums, and dry; of binders, as Bole, terra sigilla∣ta, sanguis draconis, balaustines, Roses, Mastick; a∣stringent oyl, as of Mirtles, &c. and Wax. Or if it be to clense Ulcers, incarnate, cicatrize, or for fractures, of fit powders, oyl, wax, or things e∣quivalent, of which this plaister consists. And the proportion of them is answerable to the proportion in the fofter sort of plaisters; for the most part of oyl, 8 ounces; powders, 4 ounces; wax, 8 ounces; and if you admit of the equivalent things, 'tis easie to define their quantity; let the cloth that is to be dipped be prepared in pieces 3 or 4 fingers broad, and of a fit length. The USE and FORM, ℞. &c. and make a Spanadrap for the arms, thighs, Ieggs, for they are fittest for those parts; they may also bs apply∣ed to other parts, as Ulcers, but then a plain form wil serve, whereas for the others they must be like an expulsive ligature.
The UTILITY: they are fit for the knitting of broken bones, to strengthen the parts, cleanse Ulcers, heal and cicatrize them, to hinder the courses of the humors to the Leggs, especially those that breed or feed Ulcers, in which respect they may properly be called intercepting Medi∣cines, and be used for expulsive Ligatures; they are chiefly dedicated to the arms, Leggs, Thighs, and also other parts afflicted either with Ulcers, or flux of Rhume: Hither may also be referred those Cere-cloths, that are for beautifying either of hands or face, to get the favor of Girls, made of fit things; thus is made an excellent one; ♃ of Chalk finely ground, one ounce, oyl of white poppy three ounces, Camphire one dram, Borax one dram and a half; Virgins Wax often washed, three ounces, or q.s. make a Cere-cloth for cleansing the face, against the redness and paleness of it. CHAP. XIII. Of a Cataplasme. IT is the Malagma of the Ancients, a Topical soft medicine, almost of the consistency of a Poultis, prepared for divers uses. It is COMPOƲNDED divers ways. 1. Either (which is most usual) of the musci∣lage of divers parts of plants, to which are after added either oyls alone, or with Powders usual∣ly, and that to this proportion: Let there be of Muscilage, or that matter that is driven thorow the strainer, ten drams, or lib. 1. of powders one, two, three, or four ounces; oyl or things equi∣valent, three ounces or four ounces; or else you may express only the quantity of the equivalent things, and set down of oyl, q.s. so that the whole Cataplasme do not exceed, lib. one and a half; it may be much less, according to the bigness of the part, and use.
As to the Muscilage, it is made in respect of the quality, of boyled roots, especially those that be fatty, as Marshmallows, Lillies, &c. leaves, seeds, fruits, especially; to be prescribed in a quantity as for the fomentation, then to be boyl∣ed in a fit Liquor, after stamping all thorowly, and driving them thorow a hair strainer; or par∣ticularly because a Cataplasme is commonly used after a Fomentation, the residency of the decoction that is made is prescribed to be bea∣ten in a Morter, and to lib. 1. of that pulp those things aforesaid are to be added. The Powders in relation to their quality are pulse, as the flower of barley, beans, linseed, fene∣greek seed, and these alone; or also the powders of other things, as to discuss, Ireas, Cummin, Camomil flowers, &c. and these either alone, or both sorts together, in the aforesaid proportion. 2. Or sometimes of fruits, ripe or unripe, as Apples, Prunes, Quinces, &c. roasted under the embers, or boyled in a fit liquor, and bruised, ad∣ding fit powders in the quantity aforesaid, as in the flux of the belly, and dysentery; it is made with the pulp of Quinces, and astringent pow∣ders: so for the eyes made of apples. See Col∣lirium. 3. Or sometimes, in fluxes of the belly, vo∣miting, and to strengthen the stomack a slice of bread steeped in wine, and toasted hot, is prescri∣bed, which being sprinkled with one ounce or two ounces of an astringent strengthening pow∣der, let it be applied to the stomack. Hither belongs the crumbs of white bread steeped in milk to half a pint, to which is added two yolks of eggs, half an ounce of Saffron, and q. s. of oyl fit for the purpose, and is ap∣plied for a Cataplasm in pains.
4. Or (as Chyrurgions do) of astringent powders to one ounce or two ounces, made up with the white of an egg, which they lay on locks of hemp or bolsters of linnen rags, and apply to parts wounded, and Physitians also apply it to the belly in Fluxes. The VSE and FORM, ℞, &c. make a Cata∣plasm, let it be spread in a folded linnen cloth, and applied. And note this, that tis convenient to soment the part first with the decoction, in which the Cataplasme was boyled; it uses to be applied once or twice a day. The VTILITY: they are applied chiefly to ease pain in parts inflamed or others, to soften hardnesses, to ripen humors and turn them to matter, to digest & dissolve the cause of inflam∣mations, to discuss windiness; they heat rather than cool; yet they are usually prescribed of astringent things to stop Fluxes: and are profi∣tably made to provoke urine, of Pellitory of the wall, and oyle of Scorpions, applied to the bot∣tom of the belly, for they relax, mollifie, and empty powerfully. To Cataplasmes may be referred that which is usually called a Pultis. It differs from a Cataplasm in nothing else, sa∣ving that that is prepared of the muscilage of things boyled to pap, and this is usually made of the flowry part of things boyled to the consist∣ence of a Pultis, from whence its name. And it is COMPOVNDED, 1. Either of the Flower of Pulse to four
ounces boyled in a convenient liquor to which afterwards are added oyls, or if the scope requires grease or some other thing equivalent to oyle to three ouncess or four ounces. 2. Or of the crumbs of white bread as before for an easer of pain, as in the cataplasme, and to ripen. 3. Or of a convenient muscilage and powders, and oyles, but this is rather a cataplasme; see be∣fore. The ƲSE and FORME as in a cataplasme, The ƲTILITY is cheifly for paines, to digest and dissolve; see the Cataplasme. CHAP. XIV. Of Rubifiers. THese couched under the several names of Dropax, Sinapismus, Vesicatories, and Phae∣nigmus, differ little or nothing in form from Cere-cloths, Plaisters, and Cataplasmes; they only differ in their effect, and in general may be called Rubifiers, though this name properly be∣long to that called Phaenigmus; of all which briefly thus. Dropax.
Dropax, properly called Pication or Pitching by the Ausients to whom it was usuall, is a topicall me∣dicine in forme of a plaister; seldom of a Cataplasme, prepared to fetch nourishment and life into the parts, or to draw forth old paines and infirmities that are hard to be cured. This is Compounded, 1. Either more simply of pitch to an ounce, or an ounce and a half, and oyl half an ounce, or six drams melted together, and spread on a a Leather. 2 Or more compound, powders that are hot in the first, second, or third degree, being added to the simple, as Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, Ginger the dungs of living creatures, &c. to half an ounce, or six drams. 3. Or as 'tis at this day made both for the attraction and discussion of humours, two several wayes, 1. Of the powder of hot things, spices, and things of thin parts, to six drams. Mustard∣seed, and Pidgeonsdung to one ounce, are made up with pitch and turpentine, q. s. make a plaister for the mould of the Head. 2. To the same pur∣pose 'tis made of Emplastrum de Mnscalaginibus 3 ounces, with one ounce of the aforesaid powders, oyl of Ireos, q. s. make a plaister like the letter T for the mould of the head, or let them be in∣corporate with Turpentine, and make a plaister, &c. they commonly (but amiss) cal them vesica∣tories or blistring Medicines, for they operate without blisters: and 'tis to be done for the most part before the blistering Medicines, and some∣times after them, in contumacious affections of the head, to draw the morbifical causes from within, digest and empty them, which said use of the Dropax is now most frequent, and also most profitable.
The ƲSE of the Dropax of the Antients was to apply it hot to any part, the hairs being shaved off, and pul it off again before twere quite cold, and this was done often till the part were become red, which is usually the bounds of applying the Dropax; then is it to be left off, and that being removed, if it be to draw nonrishment or heat to the part, least either should breath forth, the part is to be anointed with oyle of Camomil, that the pores may be shut. The ƲSE of our Dropax, is chiefly for stubborn affections of the head, and tis spread on a leather like a plaister, and cut in the shape of the letter T, and applied to the mould of the head, the hair being first shaved off, from which you may easily conceive the FORME of prescribing it. It may also be applied to other parts in another conve∣nient forme The ƲTILITY of the Dropax of the An∣cients, is to nourish & revive parts extennated and languishing; nourishment, heat, and spirits being by this meanes called forth; and now adayes al∣so we imitate them profitably in parts overcool'd and paralyticall. They used them also for other things; to dry moyst bodyes, helpe cold and re∣bellious affections; it draws forth humors, that lie deep, and discusseth them; tis profitable in the Palsie, Catharrs, and affections arising from thence, Phthisis, &c. Failing sicknesse, Head-ach, and in other affections of like sort where there is need of drawing forth powerfully, and there∣fore they were called of old  or drawing discussers. The ƲTILITY of our Dropax doth correspond with the latter of these, and is chiefly used in cold and diturnal affections of the head or nei∣ther parts flowing from thence; for it discusseth and draweth powerfully those morbifical cau∣ses that lurk in the brain.
A Vesicatory. The Antients had in use a Sinapisme, usually in form of a Cataplasme, made of Sinapi, viz. Mustard∣seed (from whence its name) which if it were milder, so that it would only make the skin red, 'twas properly called Phaenigmus; but the stronger sort that raised blisters is called a Vesicatory. A Sinapisme was antiently made of the pulp of figgs steeped til they were soft, and the pow∣der of Mustard, neer this proportion: for a strong∣one, one part of figgs, two parts of Mu∣stard seed; for a moderate one, ana, of each like quantities; for a weak one, two parts of figgs, and one part of Mustard-seed; it was applyed to the part til it were red, from whence comes the name of a Phaenigme, as the name of a Sina∣pisme from the composition. But now instead of those Sinapismes Vesicatories are used, so called from their raising blisters, which are also by some called Phaenigmes. The Vesicatory now in use is COMPOUN∣DED, 1. Either in the form of a plaister, and that two wayes, 1. Of an officinal blistring plaister, if it be extant, to an ounce, or an ounce and a half, according to the largeness of the part. 2. Or else taken 2 or three ounces of Emplastrum de Muscilaginibus, and two or three drams of Cantha∣rides; let them be incorporated with Turpentine and spread on a leather, to make a blistring plaister. 2. Or in the form of a Cataplasme, which is
most usual, of two ounces of old leavens, and two drams of Cantharides, with Aqua vitae or Vinegar make a paste for a Vesicatory. But this proportion will serve for a reasonable large place, which otherwise is to be lessened; for if it be (for example) to be applied behinde the ears, one ounce of stuff will suffice. Note that sometimes there are added of the sharper sort of powders, as pepper, ginger, En∣phorbium, to one ounce, or one ounce and a half, Mustard seed to half an ounce. The ƲSE and Form, ℞, &c. make a Vesicato∣ry of a fit bigness, let it be applyed, &c. till it raise blisters, which are to be pricked thorow with a needle, and suffered to run as long as you see fit, and a Colewort leaf a little scalded at the fire, daubed with oyl is to be applied, so suffer it to remain open till the whole humour be eva∣cuated. The ƲTILITY, they are generally used to empty, withdraw by revulsion, and derive divers humors; they are also profitable for humors that are fixed and clammy, so that they cannot be dis∣cussed either by mollisiers, or attenuators; for being thus melted, they are easily drawn forth, and dissolved; they also help in the Dropsie, Scia∣tica, the lasting paines of the head and joynts, all cold stubborn affections, and as it were de∣plorable; it is an admirable revulsive Medicin, famous in Catarrhs, falling on divers parts; use∣ful in stirring up those that be over-sleepy, or le∣thargical, they also help all poisonous stingings, carbuncles, buboes, &c. and are rather a remedy for phlegmatick diseases than the cholerick.
CHAP. XV. Of Sacculets, or little Baggs. FRom their effect they may be counted diverse, viz. discussive or dissolving, strengthening, Anodine or pain easing, mollifying, &c. Whatsoever it be, three things are to be consider∣ed in it, Composition, Ʋse, and Ʋtility. In the COMPOSITION is to be conside∣red the matter of which these Sacculets are usual∣ly prepared, and that which contains the matter. The MATTER, as to its quality, are divers simples convenient for the present scope, shred smal and bruised, as Roots, Barks, Woods, Leaves, Flowers, Seeds, Spices, Gums; one, two, or more, according to your scope. In relation to their quantity, the bigness and proportion of the part to which it is to be apply∣ed, should define the measure and weight of them, as for example, for the heart, an ounce, or an ounce and a half wil suffice, for the stomack two or three ounces; for the whole belly a greater quantity is required; therefore the several quan∣tities of each simple are to be contrived that the whole composition exceed not that quantity that is convenient for the part it is to be applyed to.
That which is to CONTAIN this matter, is a Linnen cloth, or silken one, especially for the more noble parts; of which are made Sacculets of divers shapes, square, Oval, or of some other figure, according to the form of the part; they which are to be applyed to the head, ought to be of the shape of a Cap; they for the stomack scut∣cheon fashioned; for the Liver like a half moon; for the Spleen like an ox tongue. Note, that first sometimes the matter is to be terrified in a Frying-pan, before it be put into the bagg, and be generally renewed with Wine, or A∣qua vitae, q. s. especially where we would dis∣cuss. 2. The more pretious or finer powders, or they which are prescribed for the more noble parts, should be sprinkled among sleive silk, or cotton, that they may lie the softer to the body. 3. Lest the matter should clod, and fal in lumps or to one place, it should be stitched through, and quilted in divers places. The ƲSE, as to the manner, sometimes these Sacculets are applyed dry to the part, as they which are applyed to the head and heart. And sometimes they are wet with some liquor, and that after two sorts; for either they are sprinkled with Wine, Vinegar, or some other Liquor to ac∣celerate their operation; and then are laid on a hot stone or tile, til they are warmed, and then applyed. Or else they are boyled a little in some fit Liquor, after pressed out, and applyed to the place; therefore they are commonly provided by pairs, that so they may be still applyed hot by turns. As to the time when, and how long they are to be worn, or used, the condition of the affection must teach that. The Form appears by what is aforesaid.
The UTILITY: in general they are good to heat, dry, attenuate, discuss, draw and streng∣then, to ease paines, cal forth and consume hu∣mours and windinesse. But in special, your Cephalical Sacculets are u∣sed to divers affections of the head, especially the cold, long lasting and flatuous, and to pre∣vent distillations &c: those for the breast are applyed in the Pleurisie that is spurious and proceeds from windinesse, and other paines of the breast; to the short rib-region in obstructions and swellings of the Liver and Spleen; and to the region of the reins in the pain of them to the belly; in the cholick and iliack passion, &c. Lastly Sacculets are applyed to any parts for Schir∣rous, phlegmaticks, windy swellings, to ease paine as in the gout.
THE SECOND BOOK. The Second SECTION. Of the proper Remedies of certain parts. CHAP. I. Of a Frontall. IN general it may be called any form of Medicine applyed outwardly to the forehead, but in particular it now sig∣nifies a topical cooling, or appeasing, or restbringing Medicine, made of cooling cephalical things, bruised and included in a linnen bagg four or five fingers bredth: this the Greeks cal ; though that word signifie properly a Medicine made of sticking things, as the finest flow∣er, and binding things as bole, Sanguis Draconis, Acacia, mixed with Vinegar and the white of an Egge, and applyed to the forehead against bleeding at nose, or to stop the course of humours flowing to the eyes.
In our usual Frontal we consider three things, Composition, Ʋse, and Vtility. 'Tis COMPOUNDED 1. in a dry form, which is properly a Frontal; as to its quality, 'tis usually of the flowers of Violets, Roses, water Lil∣lies, white Poppy seed, and Lettice seed. As to their quantity, the flowers use to be pre∣scribed to 3 or 4 pug. the seeds to half an ounce. Note, that sometimes to these are added to strengthen and discuss flowers of Cammomil, and Melilot, ana, p. half; the seeds of Coriander and Dil, ana, half a dram. Note also, that sometimes these Frontals are made onely of the leaves of Lettice and Hen∣bane, to 2 or 3 handfuls bruised, and sprinkled with oyl of Violets and Vinegar, or sometimes one handful of these are added to the former. 2. Or else in a moister form, and that 1. in the form of a Liniment of Ʋnguentum Populeon, or of Roses, to 6 drams, oyls of Violets, &c. half an ounce, or of Unguentum Populeon only, 2. In the form of a Cataplasm, of Leaves, Flowers, Seeds, as aforesaid, adding a little oyl and Vine∣gar to it. The USE and Form of the dryer sort is, ℞. &c. bruise them, and fold them up in a thin lin∣nen cloth; make a Frontal, which either moisten∣ed with the vapor of Vinegar, and sprinkled with it, is to be applyed to the forehead and temples at the hour of sleep. That of the Liniment is, ℞c. Let them be anoin∣ted on the forehead and temples at the houre of sleep, and after four or five hours let it be wiped off, and renewed.
That of the Cataplasm, ℞. &c. Make it like a Cataplasm, which foulded between a doubled Linnen cloth, let it be applyed to the forehead and temples. The UTILITY is chiefly to cool, against the burnings of the head, as in Fevers and the Frensie, to procure sleep in long wakefulness; which in those affections do much prey on the strength, and trouble the minde; also to repress vapours in Fevers, sometimes to repel, and for paines of the head, &c. CHAP. II. Of an Oxirrhodine. SOme refer this to the Epithemes, some to the Em∣brocations, taking its name from Vinegar, and Oyl of Roses; yet seeing 'tis a form of Medicine which seems wholly dedicated to the head, I wil adjoyn it for the liquid Frontall. 'Tis Compounded, 1. Either more simply of four parts of Oyl of Roses, and one of Vinegar, bea∣ten wel together, so that the whole composition do not exceed 8 ounces, or lib: 1. at most. 2. Or more compound of oyl of Roses, and o∣ther cephalical oyls, with Rose vinegar, and coo∣ling cephalical waters to this proportion, of oyls 4 or 6 ounces; Vinegar, 2 or 3 ounces; Waters, 4 ounces: let them be beaten wel together. 3. Or instead of waters with Juyces of the same things, prescribed in the same quantity.
The Vse and Form, &c. beat all wel together, let Linnen clothes dipped and wet with this mixture be applyed to the head, forehead, and temples, changing them often. The ƲTILITY: 'Tis excellent in the fren∣sie, and diliniums, or ilness of head, to repel thin humours, and vapours from the head; and in bur∣ning Fevers where you fear an alienation of the mind. CHAP. III. Of a quilt Cap. THis is dedicated to the cold and moist af∣fections of the head. 'Tis Compounded in relation to its quality, of cephalical simples wel sented, either roots, dryed leaves, flowers, woods, spices, (as Cloves and Cin∣namon, &c.) seldom of seeds; and of gums (as Benzoin,) and sometimes Styrax, because easily powdered, Musk and Ambergreese may be added for the richer sort. And this is their usual proportion, of roots one ounce, dryed Leaves two or three handfuls, which may also be prescribed by weight to half an ounce, 6 drams; flowers, to p. 2, 3, which may also be appointed by weight, to two or three drams, or half an ounce; gums to one: or two drams; Musk half a scruple, or a scruple, &c. so that the whole composition do not exceed three or four ounces. Note, that some wil add those sweet pow∣ders which we cal Violet powder and Cyprus pow∣der to half an ounce.
The USE and FORM, ℞, &c. Make a powder, which mix with fine cotton, or sleive∣silk, so bast it, and quilt it between two silks, and make a quilt to be worn on the head, or sewed to the inside of the Cap; sometimes two are prescribed, and then the quantity of the pow∣der is to be doubled, and 'tis said, make two Caps, of which let him wear one in the night, and the other sowed to his cap for the day, and when they grow fatty with sweat, &c. let them be left off, and new ones made. The ƲTILITY: is famous in cold affecti∣ons of the brain, & moist ones also, from whence spring divers diseases of the nether parts; but they are chiefly prescribed after general pur∣gings to draw a way the relicks of the morbifical matter for cold and lasting affections of the head it self, for Catarrhs, to retain, consume, and stop all defluxions, to cherish the animal spirits, and to strengthen the head and brain, (therefore they ought to be medicaments of thin parts, that they may the easier penetrate the skul;) least it should either receive or ingender new impuri∣ties, &c. CHAP. IV. Of a Collyrium. IT is a topical eye-Medicine, addicted particularly to the affections of the eyes, called a Collyrium by the Greeks from its virtue to stop rhewmes. And it is two-fold; the moist which is now onely called a Collyrium; and the dry, properly called Se∣ife by the Arabians.
The moyst Collyrium. This is twofold, the Liquid, which in form of a Liquor is dropped into the eyes; and the grosser which is anointed on, of the consistency of honey or a Liniment. But vapors are not said to be any of the sorts of a Collyrium; which seeing they are nevertheless prescribed in affections of the eyes, I will first speak of them: so that I shall aecount a moist Collyrium threefold: one like vapors, another as liquor, the last like honey. The vaporous is not so much a form of a Collyrium, as of a Medicine preparing the humors and eyes, that the vertues of other things may be received to the better purpose; as in suffusions, spots, &c. It is al∣so prescribed by it self to discuss, which is altogether the best way, as also when the sight is to be cleared, &c. Tis COMPOSED or made, 1. of the breath of ones self, or another, as of a boy having washed his mouth, and chewed fennel seed, &c. breathed into the eyes, which is often to be done, and continued sometime, as need requires. 2 Or else may be prescribed a decoction, to the quan∣tity of a Clister, made of leaves, seeds, flowers, sharpening the sight, discussing and rarifying, and that in white wine, often in water, sometimes the urine of a boy Childe being added to two ounces.
The ƲSE and FORM of the decoction, ℞, &c. make a decoction in, &c. for a suffumiga∣tion, let him receive the vapor or fume of this to his eye, either through a narrow-mouthed Pot, or a Tunnel (other vents being closed) morning and night, long from meat, for so ma∣ny days as there is need; afterwards let the eyes be fomented with a spunge, dipped in the deco∣ction, or with little bags filled with the ingredi∣ents, which let be applied warm by turns, for a quarter or half an hour. The ƲTILITY is expressed: it may al∣so be made to binde, as in the dilation of the apple or pupil of the eye, of convenient things, and in the running of the tears; but the first use is most frequent. These for a vaporous Collyrium. The LIQƲID one is absolutely called a Col∣lyrium, though antiently Collyriums were properly dry, in the forms of Troschischs which they dissolved in a fit liquor at the time of using them. But tis COMPOƲNDED diversly. 1. Ei∣ther of a distilled water alone, simple, or com∣pound. The simple may be prescribed, either one, two or more to four ounces, make a Colly∣rium. The Compound which is magisterial, and chiefly addicted to digest, discuss, cleanse, sharpen the sight, and take away suffusions, and is to be prescribed by the Physitians, and is made in relation to its quality, of things that sharpen the sight, leaves, seeds, as also Cephali∣cal heating things, as leaves, seeds, spices, as Ginger, Pepper, sometimes adding Gall, the Ʋrine of a Young Boy, White Wine, Honey, &c. As to the quantity, let there be of sight sharp∣ning leaves, M. six or M. eight; seeds one ounce & a half, or 2. ounc. Cephalical leaves, M. 2. spices
half an ounce, six drams, Gall two ounces, Urine lib. half, or lib. 1, 2. Honey lib. half, Wine lib. 2. The FORM, ℞. &c. Let them steep eight days in a glass vessel, in a warm place, or horse dung: afterwards distil them in Balneo Mariae; put the distilled water in a glass bottle, and keep it for your use; which is as that of others. 2. Of Juices onely, and chiefly of Leaves cla∣rified and infused into the eyes, or applyed with linnen raggs wet in them. 3. Or of a Decoction onely, of Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, fit for the purpose to be prescribed in the quantity of a potion; for four ounces wil suf∣fice for a Collyrium. 4: Or of an infusion onely, of metalline things, as of Antimony 1 dram, in 4 ounces of water, which is admirable to clarifie the sight, so also gr. 1.2.3. of Vitriol in Rose or Fennel water is admirable against the redness and pain of the eyes. Or else made of proper vegetables infused either in a di∣stilled water, Juices, or a decoction, &c. to 4. or 6 ounces, the Liquor afterwards being strained, and filtrated, is to be kept in a glass for use. 5. Or of a distilled water, Juice, Infusion, Deco∣ction, 2, 3, or all of these together, mixed accor∣ding to your intention, to 3 or 4 ounces. 6. Or other liquors are used alone according to your scope, as ƲƲine, VVater, whites of Egges, in paines, &c. 7. Or some convenient powder made of pro∣per eye medicines added to the aforesaid Li∣quor, several or mixed. As to the quantity of the powder, 1.2 or 3 drams is to be the most; those that are strong should not exceed 1 dram so with 4, 5, or 6 oun: of Liquor make a Collyr um.
Note also 'tis best to strain a Collyrium for the roughness of the powders, unless it be to scoure. The ƲSE and FORM; ℞. &c. make a Col∣lyrium, a few drops of which, 2 or 3 is to be drop∣ped into the greater corner of the eye, or and be∣sides (which seems best to me) apply a Linnen cloth dipped in the same Liquor to the eyes, and change them often, so let it be as it were a fomentation, or an Epitheme. Or when the Li∣quors are gentler, let the Patient lie forward, and apply the Collyrium in a cup fitted to the eye, so that it may as it were bath the whole eye. The ƲTILITY, of the liquid moist one chiefly is to cool and quench the burnings of the eyes, to drive away paines and inflammations in the beginning; afterwards to discuss them; also to repel and stay rhewms, to dry and consume teares, to cleanse off any filth from them to sharp∣en the sight, and discuss gross humors. Thus much for the liquid Collyrium. Here follows The COLLYRIUM like Honey, 'tis so called because 'tis of the consistence of Honey, and that three-fold, in the form of a Liniment, a Pultis, and a Cataplasme. The Liniment fashion Collyrium is made, 1. Either of the powder of some fit things made into an Alcohol, and a fit thing to embody it withal, which is various according to the scope, as a fit Muscilage, honey, butter, oyntment of Roses, &c. according to your indications. As to the quantity, let the whole composition be an ounce, viz. of powders, 2 or 3 drams, and half a ounce, or six drams of that with which they are imbodied. 2. Or without a powder of the muscilage of
fit seeds, as of Quinces, &c. but the former way is the more usual. The Cataplasm and Pultis is for the most part made onely to ease paines, and that of two oun∣ces of the crumbs of white bread soaked in q. s. of milk, to which is added sometimes the musci∣lage of Fleawort, to half an ounce, Opium, gr. 2 &c. 2. Or of onely the pulp of a Pippin soften∣ed at the fire, or boyled in Milk, to two ounces. 3. Or of both together, 4. Or to repel, of the pulp of Quinces boyled to two ounces. 5. Orchief∣ly to discuss, after the manner of cataplasmes, of the muscilage made of the residence of the sight-sharpening decoction bruised and dri∣ven through the strainer; see the vaporous Colly∣rium. The ƲSE and FORM of the Liniment, ℞. &c. Make it like a Liniment, with which a∣noint the corners of the eyes, that it may leisurely penetrate to the inward parts. Or else it may be applied with a pencil to the eye-lids at the place affected. Of the Cataplasm, ℞, make it like a Pultis, or a Cataplasme, lay it on a fit linnen cloth, wet in a fit liquor and apply it.
The ƲTILITY of the Liniment is special where we would help the affection of the eye-lids, or cleanse, to which purpose tis most use∣full, and also to dry; it may profitably be used to discusse, and for pains, but then it is better in the form of a Pultis: Collyriums are made in this form that by this means the powders sticking the longer, may work more effectually on the part; and if there be any sharp medicines, they are thus allayd. The Cataplasm and Pultis are used only to ease pain; they may nevertheless be applied to discuss, and repel, as aforesaid. Thus far of the moyst Collyrium: here follows the dry. The dry Collyrium. This useth to be prepared two ways, in the form of powder, and of a Troschisck. The POWDER is made of simples, levigated into a very sine powder, aad is properly called by the Arabians Seife. It is COMPOƲNDED of Ohpthalmical simples reduced to a very subtle powder, called Alcool, to be prescribed to half an ounce, or one ounce at most. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞, &c. Grind it on a stone with some convenient liquor, to a most subtle Alcool; after dry it, of which let gr. two or three be blown into the eye through a small quill, after it let the eye-lid be gently rubbed for some space: or else that Alcool may be mixed with some convenient Liquor, and so made into a Collyri∣um, or of it may be made a Liniment as afore∣said. The ƲTILITY is great, and chiefly to cleanse off spots, suffusions, &c. if powder only be blown in; as also to cicatrize or heal: or if it be dissolved in Liquor, as is said, it may be for divers uses, though this be less usual. TROSCHISHS, are usually made with∣out saying in Troschischs, of the Alcohool, of divers powders, to six drams, or one ounce at most, which are made up with a convenient Li∣quor. See Troschischs. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞, &c, with, &c. make Troschischs as big as Lupines, or Pastills to
the weight of one dram, dry them in the shade, grinde one of them, dissolve it with the aforesaid things, to make a Collyrium or Liniment. The ƲTILITY: they may be for any intention, seeing that these Troschischs are onely a conve∣nient form for preserving the virtues of the me∣dicines, but they are generally used to dry and cleanse, &c. and for the inflammation of the eyes, with Opium, as trosch. albi Rhafis, which also are prevalent for the redness, to digest inflamma∣tions, diminish scars, and other intentions of like sort: In this form fit powders may be kept, vvhich are ready at hand for use either in a Lin∣niment or Collyrium, or a powder according to the variety of the scope, of which before. CHAP. V. Of a Gargarism TIs a Liquid Medicine dedicated to the affe∣ctions of the Mouth, Gums, Jaws, Larinx, and sometimes of the head, by gargarizing as they cal it, washing of the Jaws, and top of the throat, without swallowing it down. 'Tis Compounded of VVATERS, and things to be dissolved. The waters are distilled in quantity to a pint, or a pint and a half. The things to be dissolved, are alwaies some fit syrup to three or four ounces, sometimes accor∣ding to the scope,
Diamoron, Dianucum, Honey, to one ounce and a half, or two ounces; also some∣times some juice convenient for the affection, as Vinegar, Verjuice, in repellers to 2 or 3 ounces. 2. Or of waters and Juices chiefly cooling, of the first sort 8 ounces, of the latter 4, with the a∣foresaid things that are to be dissolved. 3. Or (which is usual) of the decoction of di∣vers parts of plants, according to your scope, more or fewer, neer the proportion of a Clister, made in a fit liquor, in lib. 1. or lib. 1 and a half, in which let the aforesaid things be dissolved. The VSE and FORM, ℞. &c. make a Garga∣risme, with which wash the mouth often an hour before dinner and supper, or else at any time if need be, cold if to repel, warm if to digest. The VTILITY, is various according to the va∣riety of the affections, to repel in the beginning of inflammations, for every hot distemper of the mouth, for defluxions, to cleanse, to digest in in∣flammations, for the il savour of the mouth, for divers affections of the Jaws and mouth. Some∣times though seldom 'tis made to draw phlegm out of the head, of the decoction of cutting, clean∣sing, cephalical things, of thin parts; but mastcato∣ries are better for this.
CHAP. VI. Of an Apophlegmatisme. IT is a sort of the Caput-purgiums, or head-pur∣gers, as also is the Errhinum, dedicated to the phlegmatick affections of the braine, to draw forth forth flegme from it, from whence it hath its name: as for that which some do in calling them Masticatories, 'tis abusively, for there are liquid Apophlegmatismes, yet 'tis of late received for a practical use, because the solid form of an Apophlegmatisme is the the more vsual, so that by the word Apophlegmatisme they sim∣ply understand a Masticatory, as you may easily per∣ceive. But be it as it wil, 'tis two fold dry and liquid. This Form of Head-purging Medicines is properly called a Masticatory, but commonly called also an A∣pophlegmatisme. 'Tis COMPOUNDED or prescribed, 1. Of fit phlegm-purging simples; (see the matter) as u∣sually (Pellitory of Spaine, &c.) steeped a night in an ounce or two of Vinegar, which let him chew in the morning. 2. Or else of the powder of the aforesaid sharp things of thin parts, to 3 drams, or half an ounce, which is mixed with wax, q. s. Or else with only Mastick; others do otherwise, but wax is most con∣venient, for so the powder holds the firmer toge∣ther.
3 Or the aforesaid powder is included in a thin, but strong linnen cloth, and is tyed in a knot, for which usually one ounce of Mastick is taken for a basis, and 2 or 3 drams of other sharper things, these are prescribed, make them into lit∣tle knots, &c. The USE and FORM of the second man∣ner, ℞. &c. with &c. make pellets, or spetting balls, or globulets like great pils, or tros∣chischs in the form of Lupines, hazzle Nuts, &c. of the weight of 2 scruples, one dram, &c. Make chewable cakes, of which let him chew one, and rowle it up and down his mouth every morning, when his stomack is empty: and that for half an hour holding down his head, often spitting out that that dissolves from the pellet; after let him wash his mouth with warm water, wine, &c. that the relicks remaining may be washed often a∣way; it may also be reiterated two hours before supper. The ƲTILITY: 'tis singular after general evacuations for the particular purging of the brain; it draws away the relicks of phlegmatick humors, especially from the brain, and chiefly from the center and foremost ventricles of it, as also from the adjoyning parts to it, it also purgeth the parts neer the mouth as gums, jaws, teeth, (in the ach of which 'tis usual) mouth, throat, and whethersoever the heat of it it can diffuse it self. Lastly, it melts, cuts, and draws forth plegm, and is excellent in cold and inveterate affections of the brain. The liquid Apophlegmatisme. It is like the Gargarisme, which may be called the purging gargarisme.
'Tis Compounded of the Decoction of Cepha∣lical things that attenuate and cut, whether roots, leaves, seeds, flowers, neer the quantity of a gargarisme, adding also things that draw forth phlegme; to an ounce, an ounce and a half, or two ounces, made in wine or Mead. Note, that it may be made more purgative by adding in the decoction Senna, Carthamum, and sometimes Turbith, to half an ounce, or 6 drams. The quantity of it, and of the things to be dissolved is as in a Gargarisme. The USE and FORM is the same; for it is re∣ally a purging gargarisme. The ƲTILITY is the same as of the masti∣catory; yet because when gargarized, it enters farther into the Throat, and it also draweth far∣ther from the almons of the ears, and ousle, and 'tis also thought to draw more powerfully from the brain. CHAP. VII Of Dentifrices. THis Remedy though it seem onely beauti∣fying, yet 'tis often prescribed by Physitians for other affections.
'Tis Composed, 1. Either in the form of wa∣ter, with which either the teeth are washed, or else they are rubbed with a linnen with it; hither be∣long the spirits of Vitriol, and Sulfure in a smal quantity diluted in the water, with which the teeth may be rubbed. It marvelously cleanseth and whiteneth them, and preserves them from rotting: yet it must be done warily, for it makes them apt to break. 2. Or else in the forme of a liniment of six drams, or 1 ounce of powder with a s. q. of hony of Roses; so make it of the consistency of an Opi∣ate or a Liniment. 3. Or in the form of Troschischs like a suppo∣sitory, with which being dryed and hardened, let the teeth be rubbed; These are made of an ounce and a half, or two ounces of powder with the muscilage of gum dragant, q. s. make Troschischs like suppositories, and dry them. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make &c. with which either let the mouth be washed, &c. or a∣nointed, or let the teeth be rubbed afterwards, let the the mouth be washed with a convenient liquor, water, wine, &c. The UTILITY; 'tis prescribed chiefly to whi∣ten the teeth, cleanse and fasten them, also to re∣medy the scates and rottenness of them, to streng∣then and incarnate the gums, and defend them from defluxions: Note, that as to the matter of them there is u∣sually and profitably to cleanse, Tartar, Coral, crust of bread burnt, Salt, Scuttle-bone, Pumice∣stone, &c. to which for the richer sort sweet smel∣ling things, as Musk, Ambergreece, should be added.
CHAP. VIII. Of Errhines, or sneezing Me∣dicines. 'TIs a Medicine in general which is drawn up in the nose, (from whence its name) either for affe∣ctions of the head or the proper affections of the no∣strils, to purge the first, to alter the others diversly, so that I may rightly esteem it two-fold, purging and altering. The purging Errhine. 'Tis dedicated to purge the brain of divers vitious humours, which it doth either without sneezing, and then is called absolutely an Errhine, which they other∣wise cal a he adpurge, or with sneezing, and then is called a Sternutatory or sneezing Medicine. Of that which is called absolutely an Errhine. It emptieth the brain without sneezing, and in re∣lation to its form is threefold, Liquid, soft, and solid. The Liquid is compounded 1. Either of Juices onely of head-purgers, which is pressed out of 4 handfuls of the leaves bruised, and strained with four ounces of white Wine; this Liquor is kept in a glass bottle for use; this is otherwise prescri∣bed thus more briefly. ℞. of the Juices newly drawn out of the leaves of green Herbs with white wine, &c, four ounces, eight ounces, seldom 'tis prescribed to lib: 1. unless for a continual use, and in diets.
Note, that sometimes to make it the more ce∣phalical, Betony, &c. may be joyned with it, or a little of some cephalical decoction, and that it may the more penetrate, one ounce of Aqua vitae may be added. 2. Or altogether of a decoction of cephalical things, as the Apophlegmatisme is, the leaves of head-purgers being joyned, of which strained, take 6 or 8 ounces, in which either nothing is dissolved, or sometimes fit juyces to 2 or 3 oun∣ces, Aqua vitae, &c. Note that some to purge the more wil-dissolve purging opiates in it, but 'tis better to boyl some fit purger with the rest of the things. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make an Errhine, or a head purge, keep it in a glass bottle; let it be used warm in the morning, two hours before dinner, or also before supper; snuff it up out of the palm of the hand; the mouth being ful of water, continue this 3 or 4 dayes, 3, or 4 times at once, or if a diet be appointed, let it be continued the whole time of the diet. The SOFT Errhine is compounded 1: In the form of a Liniment of divers juyces, and oyl of Iroes, ana, two ounces, boyl them to the consumption of the juyces, add wax, q. s. make a Liniment, to which may be added a dram and a half of sharp powders; or which is best, half a scruple, or a scruple of Elaterium. 2. Or in the consistence of an Opiate, of two ounces of the aforesaid Juyces, Wine an ounce and a half, Honey, q. s. boyl it gently to the con∣sistence of an opiate, N B, that besides sharp or or purging powders, as Elaterium, Colocinthis may be added to one scruple.
Note also that the Opiate may be made with∣out Juices of two drams, or 3 drams of powder, honey, q. s. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞, &c. make &c. and with your finger or a feather, anoint the inside of your nostrils, and holding forwards your head, let the humors be drawn forth; tis best after it to wash the nostrils. See Errhinum. The SOLID is compounded, 1. either in the form of a powder, of fit things to two drams, 3. drams, half an ounce. 2. or in a solid form, and is properly called a Nasal, of the powder of such like things, two or three drams; make it up with a fit muscilage, or turpentine, q, s. and wax, make a Nasal in the shape of a Pyramid. The ƲSE and FORM of the Powder, ℞, &c. blow up a little (as for example) half a scruple, or a scruple with a quil into the Nostril. Of the Nasal thu, ℞, &c. make it in the figure of a Pira∣mid, which being anointed with oyl, put it up in the Nostrils. The VTILITY is after general purges, in afe∣ctions of the head, especially the cold and last∣ing ones: and also in them that proceed from choler, and watrish humors, from whence of∣ten spring very sharp pains; and for all affecti∣ons arising from the foulness of the brain; there∣fore in diets it is most usual and most profitable; it purgeth the foremost ventricles of the brain, and the meminges or coverings of it; but tis warily to be prescribed in affections of the eyes. The sneezing medicine. Tis COMPOUNDED of the Powder of snee∣zing simples, to one dram and a half, or 2. drams, for they are strong.
The USE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a fine pow∣der, whose steam is either to be drawn into the Nostrils, or especially when cephalical things are mixed with it in equal quantity, a little, as gr. 1, 2, 3, by the help of a quil may be snuffed up in the morning, or at other times, when the brain is benummed, or when the birth is to be provo∣ked. The UTILITY is remarkable to empty the brain of gross vapours, and slime from the fore∣parts of it; and is profitable in lasting and sleepy affections, to expel the birth, having first taken medicines to that purpose; it powerfully draws from the tunicles of the brain, and is profitable in affections of them, proceeding from cholerick humors. The altering Errhine. I call that so which is used to cure divers affections of the nostrils, and this is also three-fold, liquid, soft, solid. Tis Compounded, 1. Either of convenient Jui∣ces drawn out of Leaves with water, or some fit Liquor, to 6 or 7 ounces, in which afterwards is dissolved Honey, or some convenient syrup, to an ounce and a half, or two ounces, and sometimes a powder to half an ounce. Or of some fit decoction to the quantity of a Clyster; in which also is dissolved honey, or some proper syrup to two or three ounces. 2. Or in the form of a Liniment of fit things as above.
3. Or in a solid form, viz. of a Turund as they cal it, of a powder chiefly of binders and dryers, to three drams (viz. for one) and the white of an egg, some fit juice, or honey to make them up withal; make them up into a Turund or Pyramid∣fashioned Tent (adding if you will the hairs of an Hare) and put it up in the nostrils. The ƲSE and FORM is as that of the purging Errhine; yet the use of this may be at any time; and particularly, when they go to bed, let them put in one; in the morning another. The ƲTILITY is great, in particular affecti∣ons of the Nose, as in the Ozena, Polipus, Ulcers, stench, bleeding, to which Turunds are used, in the form of a Liniment. CHAP. IX. Of Suffiments or Fumes. SVffiments differ from Adoraments or sweet-scented perfumes, in this, because the last cast their scent without fire; but Suffiments do not part with theirs without the touch of fire: And this is twofold, one for pleasure, another for health sake; and either of these may be dry or moyst; that is called a Fume or suffiment, this is rather to he called a vapor. The Suffiment for pleasure. This is chiefly dedicated to grace the Court, and for pleasures, consisting of sweet-scented things, and is either dry or moyst.
The dry is COMPOUNDED, 1. Either in the form of a Powder, the matter of which is either well-scented Gums, as Stirax and Benzoine chief∣ly, and also roots, as Acorns, &c. Barks as of Citrons, Orenges; Woods, as Lignum Aloes; Leaves, as Margerom, &c. Cephalical flowers and spices, as Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, &c. Also Camphire, Musk, Amber-greece, Civet, &c. Of these more or fewer. As to the quantity, the Dose of the whole may be from one ounce to two ounces, according as the things are costly (but if it be for the perfu∣ming the head-cloathes, it may be prescribed to four ounces, of the cheaper sort) Therefore of this quantity, viz. one ounce, two ounces: let there be of gums, half an ounce, or four drams, of powders three drams, &c. or of each, alike parts; Ambergreese, Musk, Civet; as you think fit. 2. Or in the Form of Troschischs, the afore∣said powder being made up with gum-fragrant dissolved in a fit water, make Troschischs, &c. of the weight of one dram: so let them be dryed. 3. Or in the form of Cypress Birds, as they call them, of sweet Gums, three ounces, the aforesaid powders, half an ounce, or six drams, Charcoal of Willow-wood two ounces, or three ounces with Gum-tragant dissolved, or Labdu∣num melted q. s. make Cypress birds, Caldles for Fumes, &c. Musk and Amber-greese may be added at your pleasure.
The USE and Form of the Powder, ℞. &c. Make a powder, to be cast on bright Charcoals to perfume Chambers or cloaths. Of the Tro∣schischs this, ℞, &c. make &c. cast one, or two on the coals; so for the birdlets, ℞. &c. light one of them for a fume for the chamber. The ƲTILITY: though they seem onely intended for pleasure, yet seeing they consist of precious cephalical and cordial simples, they cannot but cherish the brain, heart, and spirits of them, and drive away malignity. The moyst is at this day usually prepared, and they cal it a Cassolete. 'Tis COMPOƲNDED best of Gums, as Storax, Benzoin, to two ounces, and if you wil of some of the powders to two or three drams; these are all dissolved in some sweet water, as of Roses; and then Cassolets made for a long use like paste, and dryed; at the time of using them a Cassolete is sprinkled with some sweet water, and then heated over the fire it breaths forth a very fra∣grant perfume: and to make it the more delight∣ful, you may add gr. 3 or 4 of Musk. The Ʋtility is the same with that of the dry one. Suffiment for Health. That Fume that is addicted to the conservation of health is from its effect two-fold; one strengthening the principal parts, and refreshing the spirits, almost of the same things as that for pleasure; The other altering, as drying the brain, cleansing the Lungs, moving the courses, helping suffocation, &c. From the forme 'tis also two-fold, dry and moist.
The DRY in general is made of things which breathe forth a Fume, and that wel-sented, as Ladanum, Storax, Benzoin, &c. as aforesaid, and sometimes ill-sented, as Galbanum, assa Foetida, Castoreum, &c. the use of which is from beneath; in affections of the Womb 'tis also made of the powders of things serving to the scope, as of Roots, Woods, &c. therefore in general 'tis made of gums and powders. But in special 'tis compounded first in the form of a powder of the aforesaid things, from one to two ounces, according as the use is, to continue long or short; and particularly let there be of gums, 2 ounces, of powders half an ounce &c. sometimes more, sometimes less, as you think fit. Note, that in the affections of the Womb are usually taken among the powders Gallia, and A∣lipta Moscata, and sometimes the powders of strengthening electuaries to one dram. And sometimes a Fumigation or Suffiment is made only of Tobacco cast on coals, or else of the smoke taken by a pipe or tunnel; it purgeth the head and brain wonderfully from cholerick and phlegmatick excrements. 2. Else in the form of Troschischs, see before. The ƲSE and FORM of the Powder, ℞. &c. Make a powder, of which cast &c. on bright coals, (and if it be for the head) receive the smoke at the mouth; or else smoke the headclothes with it if it be for the diseases of other parts springing from thence, as the Phthisis, &c. if it be for the breast receive it with open mouth, if it be for the Womb, and other cavities, receive the smoke by a tunnel, as also thorow a hollow stool; if it be for paines of the joynts, fume wel cotton, &c. and apply it. But of the Troschischs ℞. &c. Make Troschischs; see before,
The VTILITY is, as is said, either to streng∣then, or alter diversly, usually to dry the brain, and consume Catarrhs, & strengthen, for Phlegm contained in the breast, in divers affections; to dry the ulcers of the lungs, of Tobacco, Coltsfoot, Brimstone, &c. to provoke, or stop the courses, of fit things, as also to stay the Fluxes of the bel∣ly, as the dysentery, against fits of the mother, of ill-scented things to the superior, and sweet scented things to the inferior parts; to dry and strengthen the womb, and help conception: for Ulcers of the ears, nose, mouth, lungs, womb, &c. for the French Pox of Cinnaber, as is usual (whose fume received in a close place, cures that filthy disease by a spetting Flux) and all affecti∣ons depending thereon, as Ulcers, pains. And tis usually made in the form of a powder or Tro∣schisch; as ℞ Cinnaber, one ounce and a half, Gum, balf an ounce, four dram of a strengthen∣ing powder, two drams, three drams, make a pow∣der, or else with turpentine make Troschischs. The MOYST Suffiment is otherwise properly cal∣led a vapor, and is made of a liquor fit for the pur∣pose, sending forth a vapor by the help of boyling it. Tis COMPOSED, 1. Either of a simple li∣quor, as vinegar, wine, Aqua vitae, or Rose wa∣ter, &c. Note that sometimes red hot flints, are quenched in the vinegar, for the discussing of hard Oedematous swellings; as also red hot tyles to be quenched in vinegar, and the vapor received, as is usual in the time of the pestilence. 2. Or of the decoction of fit simples to be pre∣scribed in the quantity of the fomentation, or according to the ampleness of the part. There∣fore in affections of the ears, a third part of that will suffice.
The ƲSE and FORM, ℞, &c. make a decoction, whose vapor let them receive in affections of the womb, and others also thorow a hollow stool, and a leaden Pipe, or Tunnel; see the Insession: in affections of the ears, by a Pipe or Tunnel, which they vulgarly call an EMBOIE. The UTILITY is great, especially in affe∣ctions of the Womb, in staying or provoking the courses, of mollifiers and attenuators; in the dysentery of binders, in divers affections of the Anus, or Fundament, in stopping and easing the Hemorrhoids; they are also prescribed for affe∣ctions of the ears and eyes. In general they may be used to dry, binde, relax, mollifie, discuss, open, &c. CHAP. X. Of Odoraments, or Perfumes. THey are prescribed partly for delight, partly for health, but chiefly to alter the brain, refresh the animal spirits, to put away ill sents, and infectious ayre; for the increasing the vigour and spirits of the heart also, the sent of them being attracted with the breath into the Lungs, and thence to the heart. They are made of sweet smelling things, and are ei∣ther dry or moist. Dry Perfumes. These are Compounded, 1 In the forme of a powder: see the suffiments: but the quantity of this is to be limited according to the manner of using it; if it be for the greater baggs,
'tis best to use the Violet or Cipreos powder: but for the lesser sort two or three ounces wil serve, yet so that the quantity of the gums be diminished; see above: which in a box bored ful of holes, or other∣wise you may hold to the nose in a little knot, or bagg of silk. 2. Or in the form of a Pomander, of the pow∣der aforesaid in Suffiment for pleasure, to one ounce, an ounce and a half, or two ounces, adding Musk: Ambergreese, Civet, to grains 6. half a scruple, or a scruple, as you please; And 'tis made up either with Gum tragant dissolved in Rose water, so make two Pomanders to be carried in the hands, or which is better, let them be in∣corporated with Ladanum dissolved: so make a Pomander, which anoint with some sweet oyl. Note also, that tis better for your Musk; Amber∣greese, Civet, not to go into the Composition, but to wipe the outside of it over with them dis∣solved, as also with oyl of Cinnamom, Cloves, &c. alone or mixt, and to renew them often. 3. Or in the form of Globulets or beads, made of the same masse as the powders are; but the pro∣portion of it must be according to the quantity you intend to make; to which the Apothecaries to increase the quantity of them add willow charcole finely powdered. 4. Or in the form of a perfumed sope, for the washing of the hands and head, of Venice sope, or other white sope to 4 ounces; sweet powder six drams, and if you wil, Musk or Ambergreece gr. 3, 4 &c. with a sufficient quantity of Rose water in∣corporate, and make bals great or little. The VSE: let the sent of them be often snuffed up, but the scope is onely to cleanse the hands and head from filthiness, &c.
The ƲTILITY is expressed at first. Moist Perfumes. They are Compounded, 1. in the form of sweet water; and this is either simple, as Orange-flower water to 3 ounces, of which you may add of Musk, or Ambergreese gr. 2 or 3, The Compound is made of Odoriferous things liquid, as Rose∣water, Orange-flower water, &c. 4 ounces, Cinna∣mon water one ounce, and dry things, as of sweet powders to 2, 3, or 4 drams, and if you wil, some few grains of Musk and Ambergreese. 2. Or in the Form of a Liniment, which now adayes they cal sweet balsam, of white wax often washed and melted, one ounce, of some conveni∣ent chymical oyls one dram, and if you wil, Musk, Civet, Ambergreese, some few grains, or more coursly, of half an ounce of sweet powder, wax 3 drams. oyl of Ben, or of sweet Almonds, q. s. so maken Liniment, adding Musk, Ambergreese, &c. to some few grains. The VSE of the water is to wash the hands, beard, and hair of the head chiefly: The use of the Balsam and its utility is the same as that of the dry perfume; the hand also may be lightly smeared, and the inside of the nostrils to avoid stenches; to comfort the brain and heart, and the spirits of both.
CHAP. XI. Of the Scute. IT is in general a topical Medicine for the stomack, made in the form of a Scutcheon, which seeing it is usually made both of plaisters, and baggs; custome hath so far prevailed, the strengthening bagg is often used for the Scute. 'Tis COMPOƲNDED therefore 1. in the form of a bagg, of the powders of heating stomachical stomachical things, observing these rules in every thing that are set down for your Quilt Caps, from whose Form it onely differs in the use, so that the proportion of the powder be also two ounces. 2. Or in the form of a Plaister, of the mass of some stomachical plaister, as Empl. de Mastiche, 2 ounces, and of some stomachical powder, to half an ounce; to which also are sometimes added wel sented gums to 2 drams, and are all made up with Turpentine, q. s. The ƲSE and FORM of the bagg, ℞. &c. make a gross powder, which is to be taken in per∣fumed cotton, or in the wool of a scarlet die, and with a silken fold, make a bagg scutcheon fa∣shioned to be quilted all over, which being hung about the neck, let it be alwaies kept to the regi∣on of the stomack, let it be sprinkled sometimes if you think fit with a little Aqua vitae.
Of the Plaister, ℞. &c. make a scutcheon-fashi∣oned plaister, spread on Leather; let it be apply∣ed to the stomack a little smeated with some fit oyl, or sprinkle it with powder. lest it stick too fast. The UTILITY is great to strengthen the sto∣mack after purging: to correct a cold distemper, help concoction, strengthen it, and stay vo∣miting. CHAP. XII. Of a Pessary, and Nascall. IT is a Medicine to be put into the secret parts for helping divers affections of the ƲƲomb, and from its various form was diversly called of old. Tis now called a Pessary, and is in shape the length of the fore-finger, the thickness of a thumb, and is o∣therwise called a Pesse, and those which are made like knots or nodes, are called Nascals, They are from their effects two-fold, purging and altering. The purging Pesse Is COMPOUNDED, 1 either of a pur∣ging Opiate alone, to an ounce and a half, or two ounces, viz. for 2 (for two are alwayes to be prescribed, that when one is taken forth, another may be put in) let it be incorporated with some juyce, as of Mercury, &c.
Note, that sometimes powders may be added to the Opiate, either sharp hysterical opening powders to a dram and a half, or two drams, or else the powder of purgers, simple or compound, to two drams; let them be incorporated with juyce; also instead of them gums, as Ammoniack, Mirrh, &c. are often added to two drams. 2. Or of the powder of Catharticks, and of compound Electuaries, as Hiera picra, to 6 drams, or one ounce, together with a dram and a half, or two drams of hysterical altering things; so with honey, or a juyce, or both q. s. let them be incorporated. 3. Or of juyces and honey boyled to the consi∣stence of an Opiate, adding purging powders to this proportion, of Juyces two or three ounces, honey an ounce and a half, powder half an ounce. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. with red Saun∣ders, or a silken fold, make a pesse. or else mix it with a little cotton, and wrap it in a silken fold, and make a pesse of the fit bigness, which is to be put in, which being tied to the thigh with a thread that it may be drawn forth again at pleasure, which is usually done after 4 or 6 hours, the dregs may be cleansed from it, afterwards that or another is put in again, therefore they use to have two at evening when you go to sleep. Note, that before it be put in, that or the interior parts of the Wombs entrance is to be anointed with some fit oyl, the use is to continue three or 4 dayes
The UTILITY is after purgations, and chiefly in cold distempers: in which are heaped Phlegmatick excrements & dreggs; from whence often proceeds barrenness &c. also sometimes when a diet is prescribed, then they are to be con∣tinued as long as that is appointed▪ And 'tis the best course to compound them of purgers and strengtheners, of each equal parts. They are also useful to provoke the Termes, for they draw much, especially if you add Musk or Civet to them; 'tis most profitable and usual to make it of pur∣gers and strengtheners as aforesaid, to help con∣ception, one of which let be worn in some time before the Woman accompanieth with her Hus∣band, and afterward let her put in another of on∣ly strengtheners and binders. Of the altering and strengthening Pessary. Pessaries which do not purge are prescribed two wayes, either to strengthen the Womb, or to alter di∣versly. 'Tis COMPOƲNDED, 1. in the form of an Opiate, a powder made of fit hysterical oors, leaves, spices, &c. which are to be incorporated with fit things. The quantity of powders is six drams, or one ounce, sometimes an ounce and a half, and that which makes them up, either honey or some juyce, q. s. and then usually cotten is daubed with that mixture, and rowled round for a pessary; but when 'tis made with honey because 'tis of a thick∣er consistence, there is no need of Cotton, and the pesse is made with silken covering, &c. it may al∣so be made up with a fit syrup. Note also, that it may be profitably made with juyces boyled up with honey to the form of an Opiate.
Note also, that sometimes an officinal Opiate may be prescribed, as Triphera Persica sine opio to half an ounce, and powders to two drams, or half an ounce after the manner of Opiates. 2. Or in the form of a Liniment of six dram, or an ounce of powder with Oyl of Spikenard, and wax, q. s. make it a Liniment with which a cotton is daubed, or carded wool, and is formed like a Pesse, to be covered over with a thin silken fold. 3. Or in the form of a Suppository, of honey an ounce and a half, or two ounces, boyled with a convenient juyce to 2 or 3 ounces, adding if you wil half a dram of powder. 4. Or of onely oyntments fit for the purpose, mixed with a cotton, or otherwise; where you would bin de, of Ʋnguentum Connitissae, and a fit powder, ana, an ounce. 5. Or of a handful of green herbs bruised and incorporated with a juyce or honey, adding if you wil half an ounce, or six drams of powder. 6. Or of Cotton only, especially in the fits of the Mother, rubbed with half a dram of Civet, or Musk dissolved, and with other Odoriferous things suddenly put up. Also a cotton may profitably be used for a Pessary to other scopes, imbued with fit juyces to 2 or 3 ounces, which is effectual where we would bind, to which may usually be added powders to half an ounce, 6 drams as above, or other conveni∣ent things, as buster, grease, fat to mollifie, &c. The USE and FORM: see the purging Pess; the solid pessary should alwayes be wrapped in a thin silken sold, that it may the easier be drawn forth, for else 'twil dissolve; also when
you would bind and dry, it ought to be renewed often. The ƲTILITY is to strengthen the womb, as is said, also to alter diversly, as for its inflam∣mations, to mollifie its hardness, and for divers distempers; for all fluxes from the VVomb, the falling of it forth, fits of the Mother, to expel the Birth, and after-birth, to provoke the Courses; but those are for the most part also purgers, which must not be used unless after universal purgati∣ons; also for Ulcers of the passage or neck of the Womb, and for suffiments for the VVomb. This of a PESSARY: Here follow, a NASCAL. Some will have them the same thing that a Pessary is; others will have it signifie a node or pencil, 'tis invented for Virgins sake, who for shame or modesty refuse a Pessary; or for Women who cannot admit them, as when they have Ʋlcers. Whatsoever is the reason, they are COM∣POƲNDED in the manner of a Node, or Pencil, and are very soft, of fine locks of cotton or wool moistened, either with some fit juyce, or oyntment, or other things aforesaid, the quan∣tity of which is scarce limited; generally a flock of VVool is prescribed to be imbued with q. s. of such a thing. Such are made for fits of the Mother, a flock of cotton being sleightly rubbed with Givet, or Musk dissolved in nard oyl, as above. The ƲSE is as of Pessaries. The ƲTILITT in Virgins is the same as of the other in VVomen; they are made for Ulcers in the neck of the womb, and paines of it.
CHAP. XIII. Of a Suppository. TIs a topical Medicine used to the fundament, or anus, three or four inches in length, slender and round like a smal candle; of old in the form of an a∣corn, from whence they were called of the Greeks Bala∣noi; at this day tis commonly called a Suppository, chiefly to move the belly to stool, and for some other af∣sections. And 'tis either simple, or compound. The Simple. This is made either of the stalk or root of Beets, Colewort or Marshmallows, the outward rind peeled of, to which is added sometimes salt (to augment the provocative virtue) rubbed on the outside, so smoothed over with oyl they are put up; also of the stalk of a Leek anointed with butter, or white sope sharpned like a suppository; also honey alone boyled to a hard consistence, for so it becomes more sharp. The Compound. This is made of Honey as the basis, boyled til it wil not stick to the fingers, then adding pow∣ders to it neer this proportion, as to one ounce you may add one dram, or 4 scruples of powder at the most, according as the powder is lighter in weight, or stronger in operation; which quantity wil serve for two or three suppositories.
But the Honey is boyled by it self, or with fit juyces to irritate, or for other purposes, of which let there be an ounce, or an ounce and a half. The USE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make suppositories, one of which let be put up, first being anointed with oyl, or butter when need requires; so that if they be purgative, once or twice a day wil suffice; if onely to alter, they may be used oftener; if they consist of Narcoticks for paines, let them not stay too long lest they induce a Palsie, (and therefore thy use to be fastened to a thread, that they may be drawn forth at pleasure,) neither ought they often to be used. The UTILITY in general is two-fold, ei∣ther to provoke the expulsive Faculty to stool, o else for the proper affections of the Anus, and streight gut. The Belly is to be moved with a suppository, either when the age of the Patient wil not receive a clyster, as in sucking children, or in humorous people, whose custom and waywardness wil not admit of one, as usually in Virgins; also when clysters put up work not, as in the cholick is seen; or when purging Medicines taken down do not move as they should, or when the dung staies in the belly only for want of irritating; or when it is so hardened in the streight gut that you can∣not put up a clyster. And lastly, when the expul∣sive Faculty is unmindful of his office, and slug∣gish.
Also to revel or withdraw when humours tend wholly up to the head and midrise; or other∣wise, when for revulsion sake they are to be drawn down, or purged forth, as generally in cold and sleepy affections of the head, in which the expulsive faculty benummed, is by this means excited, or also when Clysters offend the sick, &c. And bsides this scope of purging, they are made for the proper affections of anus, and streight gut, of honey as the basis, and other matter serving to the intention, after the manner aforesaid: so to open the hemorrhoids, with sharp things, to stop them with other fit things: also for Tenesmus, Ascarides, Ulcers, the Relaxa∣tion and Palsie of the Sphincter, and pains, with appropriated powders, mixed with honey in the aforesaid proportion. And mark that concerning the matter of laxa∣tive Suppositories, some are gentler, as the simples afore recited, for infants; others stronger, which consist of Salt, Mouse-dung, purging powders; simple as Aloes, Agarick, Senna; or compound, as usually Hiera Piera, and also other strong things, the use of which is chiefly in the sleepy affections, as Sal Gem, Sal Ammoniack, Salt Peeter; and Purgers, simple as Coloquintis, or com∣pound as Hiera diacoloquintida, to half a scruple, or one scruple: also if for pains, opium be ad∣mitted, tis to be done warily, for fear of a Palsie, and you should scarce ascend to half a scruple.
CHAP. XIV. Of a Clister. IT signifies a washing from the Greek word Elyzo, and in Greek is called Clyster, and from its be∣ing injected, Enema, from Eniemi to inject; in ge∣neral it signifies any Lotion or Injection into any part, but particularly, that which is injected by the funda∣ment. And this may be accounted threefold, purging, al∣tering, and strengthening. A Purging Clister. Is COMPOVNDED, of a fit liquor, in which together with honey, sugar, and oyl are dissolved divers purgers; and therefore so many things are to be considered in the composition, but chiefly two; the liquor of which tis made, and the things to be dissolved in it. The Liquor as to its quality is either the com∣mon decoction for Clisters usual in the shops, or a Magisterial decoction prescribed, according to the urgent occasion and intention of the Phy∣sitian, of convenient things: and is either Al∣tering or Purging. The Altering which is most usual, is compo∣sed of fit mollifying things, heating or cooling, according to the intention, of roots, leaves, seeds, fruits, flowers, neer this proportion, as of roots, two or three ounces, leaves four handfuls, seeds six drams, or one oune, or an ounce and a half at most, fruits pa. eight, flowers pugil. three.
If you would make it purgative, you may do it by adding for phlegme, of Carthamus seed brui∣sed 6 drams, or one ounce, Agarick tied up like a node in a ragg, 3 drams, Elect-Turbith 2 drams, for Melancholy 1 ounce, or 6 drams of Senna, Po∣lipody an ounce, which is very rare, all which are to be added after the roots, and are pre∣scribed to be boyled after the seeds also; all these are boyled in a convenient liquor, or in wa∣ter only. (But this is rare to boyl in purgers, be∣cause purgers are afterwards dissolved in it, which wil be sufficient.) As to the quantity of the Liquor, it varies accor∣ding to the age of the party very much; for 3 oun∣ces wil serve for a child of 4 or 5 moneths old; if one bigger, 5 or 6 drams; for people of ripe age usually lib. 1. for great men lib. one and a half. But here we must observe in them which are with child, or Hydropical, troubled with wind, and in old Folks we should rather take lesse, so that the whole Clyster exceed not 12 ounces; also when we would have it kept long in the bo∣dy. The things to be DISSOLVED, in relation to their quality, are either alterers or purgers; the Alterers which are generally dissolved, are Honey and Sugar, and alwayes oyl, yet it may be left out when the expulsive faculty is to be sharp∣ly provoked, or where we would draw powerful∣ly. To these are sometimes added Salt, usually sal gem. where it should be more provokative, as in sleepy affections.
But the purgers are officinal electuaries, either onely lenifying or purging, according to the va∣riety of the humor to be purged, and the diverse constitution of the body. Sometimes instead of them are dissolved pills in the drowsie affections. As to the quantity, Honey and Sugar are dissol∣ved to two or 3 ounces at most; in them of ripe age, in children a fourth part wil suffice, and less in infants. Oyl, in those ripe of age 3 ounces, salt to half a dram, or a dram. Electuaries to double the dose in which they are given by the mouth; but usually they are proportion'd to an ounce and a half, unless they are very gentle, or you would have it work very strongly, then you may add 2 ounces; in Infants you may prescribe a quarter of that proportion; but if you prescribe pils (which is seldom) do it to two or three drams. The ƲSE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make a Decoction, take of the strained liquor, &c. in which dissolve, &c. make a Clyster to be injected long after meat when the stomack is empty; yet it may be prescribed at any hour when need re∣quires, as in the sleepy affections. The ƲTILITY. 1. To purge forth the ex∣crements of the belly, and draw forth divers ex∣crementitious humours, from whence soever then are accumulated. 2. To evacuate the adjacent parts, as Reins, Bladder, Mesentery, and Stomack from them; also to empty the more remote parts as the head and breast, &c. for the nether parts, being cleared and emptied by a certain consecu∣tion of the humours, the uppermost are also dis∣burthened: and for this cause they are esteemed as revulsive Medicines.
The altering Clyster. This is also COMPOƲNDED of a fit Liquor, and proper things to be dissolved in it. The LIQƲOR, as to its quality is various, according to the scope, and is either simple or Compound. The simple is sometimes Milk, or the broth of a sheeps-head, and appurtenance, for a fit Liquor, as in the dysentery, Cholick, &c. Sometimes of Oyl onely, as in windinesse, and the cholick, and of strong VVine, or Hippocras in the same affections. Sometimes of chalibiated Milk for an astrin∣gent, and sometimes otherwise of the decoction of the decoction of Barly, or with it of bran, Ro∣ses for a cleanser, which is usually done: those 3 being prescribed, ana, p. 1. The Compound Liquor which is generally in use for these sorts of clysters, is the decoction of di∣vers parts of plants as aforesaid, more or fewer, which respect both the part affected, and the affe∣ction, in the same proportion as is said in the purging clyster. As to the quantity of the liquor, see there also. Things to be dissolved in the altering Clyster, in relation to their quality, are very various ac∣cording to the variety of indications; though they be seldom altering without purging, unless the indications do wholly disswade, as in the pain-easing, and nourishing Clyster, &c. Usually there are dissolved Honey, Sugar, Oyl, in the dose aforesaid: sometimes there must not
be oyl, but only sugar and honey, as in the clean∣sing Clyster; and on the contrary in the Emol∣lient Clyster oyl is to be preferred: as also Butter, if you will, and such like fat things. Besides these, or sometimes without them ac∣cording to the urgency of the indications, juices are dissolved, as in the astringent Clyster, made of leaves (which are also profitable in purgative Clysters, of drawing medicines) also astringent powders, as is generally used in the fluxes of the belly, and dysentery: sometimes Goats suet in the dysentery and pains, to daub as it were the inside of the entrails, least the sharp humors in their passage should more ulcerate. Note also that the yolk of an egg is to be dis∣solved, else it will soon harden; sometimes urine as in the dropsie Ascites, so also Philonium in a Narcotick Clyster. But for a nourishing Clyster, fit Conserves are convenient, white Sugar, Consumption broths, also confection Alchermes, when you would strengthen powerfully; and Tracle also, of which must be well noted, that in the overworking of Physick, and in the Epidemical dysentery, it works mi∣raculously and suddenly. As to the quantity, tis also diverse according to the diversity of the things that are to be dissolved. Honey and Sugar to 2. or 3 ounces. Butter and other fat things to 3. ounces. Iuices to 2. or 3. ounces. Powders to six dram, or one ounce, more or less, according to their efficacy. Suet to half an oun. or 1. oun. in whose place also you may use an ordinary candle, by the anointing of which, we see execriations pre∣sently healed.
Ʋrine to 2 or 3 ounces. Philonium to two drams from one. Conserves, from half an ounce to an ounce. White Sugar, two or three ounces, as also nou∣rishing compositions. Confections, from 1 dram to 2 for the richer sort. New Treacle, from half a dram to a dram, or somewhat more. Yolks of Eggs, in number 1. 2 in a Clyster, to ease pain, gently cleansing and nourishing: The ƲSE and FORM see before, but it may be injected at any convenient hour when need requires. Note, That nourishing Clystes ought to be pre∣scribed in a greater quantity, and often to be re∣peated, and to be kept longer than ordinary, in others observe the contrary.
The UTILITY appears diverse in the affe∣ctions of the gutss especially in the greater; next in the affections of the neighbouring parts; they are made also to alter the intestines diversly, and the whole body, as to cool in divers affections, and temper the heat of the adjacent parts, to mol∣lifie the excrements, lenifie the acrimony of hu∣mors, to ease the paines of the guts, Reins, Blad∣der, Womb: to discuss windiness, and cleanse both excrementitious humors, and the Ulcers of them which have the dysentery, and to heal them: to bind and stay fluxes of the belly, draw forth, and kil Wormes, and to nourish: so that there is almost no affection, or part of the body which may not receive benefit by a Clyster, especially by that which purgeth the belly, and therefore they are profitably prescribed to precede every purga∣tion, that the succeeding purge might work the easier and quicker, without either griping or vo∣miting; when otherwise many impurities may be left behind, which either may return to divers parts, or at lest offend them with the putrid va∣pors that proceed from them, contaminating the good juyces and spirits, and clowding and op∣pressing the natural heat. CHAP. XV. Of divers Injections. BEsides those Injections that are made into the fundament, others also are prescribed for divers parts of the body; as into the Ears, Womb, Bladder, Yard, Ʋlcerous cavities, especially Fistuloes, and are by a general name also called Clisters. Of that into the Ears. They are COMPOUNDED 1. Either of oyls only, or juyces, waters decoction fit for the purpose, according to the variety of the affe∣ctions. 2. Or of 2 or 3, or more of the aforesaid mix∣ed together, in which sometimes things serving to a diverse scope are dissolved; but in a small quantity, and these which are almost liquid themselves. As to the quantity of liquid things, Of Oyls, half an ounce, an ounce, or six drams wil suffice, according to its efficacy, and the con∣tinuance of its use.
Juices, VVaters, Decoctions, one or two ounces, either several, or mixed, according also to their efficacy, and the use, wil be enough. As to the quantity of things to be dissolved, it must be smal because of the exquisite sense, and smalnesse of the part; if they be powders, half a scruple, or a scruple; if fat things, two drams; Ho∣ney, half an ounce, &c. wil be sufficient at most. The USE and FORM, ℞, &c. drop into the ear two or three drops, according to the fa∣culty of the Medicine, and sometimes the ear is to be filled with the Liquor: but a little after holding down the head, it is to be cleansed, as chiefly when we use the Decoction; If it be Oyl only, some few drops are poured in, after the ear is stopped with perfumed cotton, especially if it be a cold affection. The UTILITY: 'tis chiefly used for in∣flammations, Ulcers, noyses, deafnesse, Worms, and other particular affections of the Ears; See the Magazeen Physical. Of that into the Womb. They are otherwise called hysterical Cly∣sters; and the pipe by which they are injected into the Womb, is by the Greeks called a Metrenchi∣te, and the medicines from that Metrenchiticks. They are COMPOUNDED 1. In relation to their quality, as of the decoction of roots, leaves &c. in the quantity, as for a Clyster, of wch li∣quorstrained, take 3 or 4 ounces, make an Injecti∣on; yet they reserve one pint for many Inject∣ons.
Note, that thus is made the Injection simply; but sometimes, and that usually, other things are added diversly; according to the scope, as is said in an altering Clyster, and that to half, or a third part of the quantity of that. 2. Or of the juice of Herbs clarified. 3. Or of distilled waters. 4. Or of some other simple Liquor; See the Clyster. 5. Or of those mixt together, so that 3 or 4 ounces may suffice for an injection, in which if a∣ny things serve to the same intention: you may dissolve them in the aforesaid proportion. The USE and FORM, ℞. &c. Make an injection into the Womb by a Metrenchite, or Womb Clysterpipe. The VTILITY may be for divers affecti∣ons of the Womb, as inflammations, ulcers, paines, windiness, to heat, cool, to provoke the courses, or stay them, bring down the after∣birth, for the falling out of the Womb, and to cleanse it from divers impurities; see for matter among the hysterical things in the following physical Magazeen, or other tables. Of those for the Yard and Bladder. These are Compounded of a convenient liquor, as hath been often said, simple or compound; See the altering Clyster; they are also made of Emul∣sions, as in the running of the Reins, sharpnesse of the Urine, &c. As to the quantity, three ounces or four ounces wil suffice.
Note, that in this sometimes nothing, some∣times honey chiefly, or some fit syrup is to be dissolved to an ounce, and sometimes the pow∣ders of divers things, but ground to an exact Al∣chool, to a dram, a dram and a half, or two drams. The ƲSE; ℞. &c. Make an injection by a sy∣ringe; sometimes when the way to the bladder is stopped, 'tis prescribed to be done by a Cathe∣ter. The ƲTILITY, 'tis chiefly to cleanse, both slime sticking to the orifice of the bladder, and also filth from Ulcers, for paines, exulcerati∣ons, excrescences of the flesh, &c. for heat and inflammation, as usually in the virulent Gonor∣rhea, and dry Ulces, &c Of those for Ʋlcerous Cavities, and Fistula's. They are COMPOƲNDED of a fit Li∣quor, proportioned to the largenesse of the Fistu∣la, in which are dissolved fit things, and that somewhat plentifully, where we must imitate o∣ther particular Injections, viz. to the quantity of the Liquor. and things to be dissolved. The ƲSE: make an injection by a Syring. The ƲTILITY: for the lessening of the callous, or hardness of Fistulaes, but chiefly for cleansing them, to breed flesh, and cicatrize mat∣ter, for which you may see in his proper place. God be praised. FINIS.
An Appendix of the doses of Purgers given in substance, of which there is frequent use in the treatise of the Composition of Medicines. Cholagogues, or Medicines purging Choler. The gentler sort. Cassia, from half an ounce, to an ounce and a half, and two ounces. Manna, 1 ounce, 2 ounces, 3 ounces. Tamarinds, 1 ounce, 2 ounces, 3 ounces. Juice of Roses, one ounce, one ounce and a half, two ounces. Moderate Purgers. Aloes, one dram, two drams, two drams and a half. Rheubarb, one dram, one dram and a half, two drams. Citrine Myrobolanes, two drams, three drams, half an ounce, five drams. The vehement sort. Scammony, gr. six, fifteen, one scruple. Paulus & Etius, to one dram, Mesues, gr. 12.
Melanagogues, or Medicines purging Melancholy. The gentler sort. Senna, 2 scruples, 1 dram, 2 drams, some to three drams. Polipody of Oak, 2, 3 drams, half an ounce. Epithimum, 2, 3 drams, half an ounce. The more violent sort. Black Hellebore, gr. 15. half a dram, two scruples. Mes. one dram. Lapis Armenius lotus, half a dram, a dram, a dram and a half; unwasht a dram only: Lap. Lazuli lotus, half a dram, a dram and half. Mesues, from two drams, to two drams and a half. Phlegmagogue, or purgers of Phlegme. Gentle. Carthamus soed, a dram, half an ounce, six drams. Moderate. Agarick, 2 scruples, 1, 2 drams. Violent. Turbith, 2 scauples, 1 dram, 4 scruples. Mesues 3 handfuls, from one dram to two. Hermodactils, 2 scruples, a dram, a dram and half. Mes. a dram and half to three drams. Mechoacan, 2 scruples, a dram, a dram and half, or two drams at most. Jalap, 2 scruples, 1 dram, 4 scruples at most. Coloquintis, gr. 6.15. one scruple. Dioscorides to two scruples. Opopanax, to halfe dram, and a dram. Sagapene, half a dram, and a dram. Euphorbium, gr. 3, 8, 12.
Hydragogues, or purgers of Watrish humours. Gentle, as of dwarf Elder, or Danewort, The Seed, one dram. The Bark two drams. The Juice, half an ounce, six drams. So Elder in the same manner. Vehement. Soldanella, a dram, a dram and a half, two drams. Juyce of Ireos, half an ounce, 6 drams, 1 ounce. Elaterium, gr. 6. half a scruple, gr. 15. Esula prepared, the same. Mechencan and Jalap, Of these see in the Phlegma∣gogues. FINIS.
THE PHYSICALL MAGAZEEN OR A Systeme of the Matter of PHYSICK, CONTAINING A Series, or Scrol of Medica∣ments, Universal, and Particular, Simple, and Compound; Fitted to the method of Phy∣sick, and forms of prescribing Remedies. By Doctor JACOB A BRUNN. Phil. ac Med. Doctore, and in the University of Basill both Practicer and publick Professor of Physick. In good will to the new Students of Physick LONDON: Printed for Nath, Brooke, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1657.
The PREFACE to the Students of Physick. AS an Artificer can bring nothing to perfection being destitute of a fit matter to workon, al∣though he be skilful in the manner of effecting: so a Physitian can do nothing for the health of the sick Pa∣tients, nor prescribe any forms without a plenteous fur∣niture of Medicaments fit for this purpose, though he be never so wel skill'd in the way of compounding them. Hence appears the necessity and Ʋtility of the Physical Matter, of which you may find plenty in this ensuing systeme, taken out of divers parts of Plants, (viz. Roots, Barks, VVoods, Leaves, flowers, Seeds, Fruits, Spices,) and humors of them, (viz. Juyces, Raisins, Gums;) Also out of living creatures whole, as wel as the parts & humors of them (Fatts, Suets, Mar∣rows;) as also out of their excrements; as also out of things growing bothin sea & land, as metalline things earths, divers serts of stones, and things belonging to the sea: alsocompound things of the shops contracted together, and digested into certain classes, according to the series of directions for curing. So that from hence as out of a most plentiful Magazeene, and a most subtil matrix, (having the method of Physick for your guide) a nu∣merous store of Remedies may be had in readiness; so make that Polydaedalian heap of compound Medicines. You therefore ye disciples of Aollo receive this our Labour in good part, as a thing undertaken meerly for your sake.
THE PROOEMIUM, OR PROLOGVE Concerning the Name, Definiti∣on, and distribution of the Materia Medica, or matter of PHYSICK: THe word Matter of Physick is an ambiguous terme, signifying chiefly two things, 1. The subject of Physick, or the Matter on which the Physitian works, and this is the Pas. five matter. 2. The Active matter, which compre∣hends under it the instruments of healing that are in being separate from the understanding; a∣mongst the natural things, or the Matter of Me∣dicinal helps: which matter I shal rightly with Galen, 1. Alim. fac. chap. 1, distinguish from the help or remedy it self, which is the image or re∣presentation of the aforesaid matter remaining in the mind of the Physitian, representing the very same thing to the life. In this latter signi∣fication 'tis used either generally, for all things yt may be instruments of health, with which it is preserved or restored; whose engines are three∣fold, Aliments or Food, Medicine, and manual o∣perations;
or more specially, because the cure of diseases is most usually perfected by the help of Medicaments, therefore Physitians by the name of Matter of Physick understand the whole series of medicinal things, either simple or compound; thus much briefly for the name. Therefore the Medicinal Matter, or matter of Physick is the orderly series of Medicaments sim∣ple or compound, fitted to the method of Phy∣sick, and to the prescribing forms of Medicines. As to the distribution of this Physical Matter, I first distinguish it thus; either it is uniuersal, re∣specting no certain part, or particular, regarding some certain part; or affection of the body. The Ʋniversal is subdivided into 3 other parts; the first respects the Morbifical cause where ever it be; the second the chief heads of diseases; the third the common symptomes, and those that are most urgent, which require sometimes the help of the Physitian, distinct from that of the cause, or the disease. The Particular shall consist of four Sections; the 1. Of the remedies belonging to the Head. 2. Of remedies for the Breast. 3. Of remedies belong∣ing to the belly, or inferior cavity. 4. Of reme∣dies of the limbs.
THE FIRST BOOK. OF THE Ʋniversal Matter of PHYSICK. PART 1. Of Remedies respecting the Morbifical cause. THis part consists of Four SECTI∣ONS; The first contains Medica∣ments, respecting the morbifical cause as it offends in quality. 2. Such Medicines as respect the Moifical cause offending in quantity and substance. The 3. contains such Me∣dicines as respect the cause offending in moti∣on. 4. Those medicaments that respect the cause offending in quietnesse.
SECT. I: OF ME DICAMENTS That respect the Cau∣ses offending in quality. A Type of this Section. Medica∣ments that respect the cause offen∣ding in quality, are refer'd to the cause of∣fending, ei∣ther in the Mani∣fest quali∣ties, & thatei∣ther in the First qualities, as Alterers. or se∣cond qua∣lities viz. Grosness, as Attenuators of the hum. Grosness, as Cutters of the hum. Thinness, as those which thieken the humors. Hardnes, as Softeners. Hither also belong they which dissolve clotted blood. Clamminess, as Cleansers. Sliminess, as Cleansers. Acrimony, as Mitigaters, or Lenifiers. Occult qua∣lities, as Alexipharmacal Medi∣cines.
Alterers, called in Greek . Latine Al∣terantia. Although Alterers generally taken be a terme for all those Medicaments that work on us, not onely by the first and second qualities, but also those that change us by their substantial or occult qualities, yet have (for eminency sake) being specially taken, signifie such a Medica∣ment, that by his quality corrects and amends the excess of the first qualities of the morbifical cause, whether it consist in the humors, or other contents, or in the parts of the body them∣selves. There are so many kindes of Alterers as there are several distempers, that every distemper might be opposed by its peculiar contrary Alte∣re. There are four degrees of contrary qualities in every altering medicine; and so many several mansions in each degree. I here set down no
mat∣ter for Alterers, as wel because it seems superflu∣ous; for whether the humours are to be altered, or the parts, we never use alterers so general and underterminate, but such as respect the determi∣nate humour and part; as also because it is not so necessary for this method of composing Medi∣cines, according to their external formes, as that wherein there is no such matter made of the several degrees and mansions, as is in the o∣ther method of compounding them, which consi∣ders them according to their internal form, and teacheth the manner of composing a Medicine, such or such in a certain degree; as for example, hot in the second degree of divers simples, both hot and cold in the first, second, and third de∣gree, so proportionably mixed together, that the degree desired may bear the dominion in the composition. Attenuaters, in Latine Attenu∣antia, Graece . These are those Medicines which attenuate, and separate thick and compacted humors, that in the same weight they extend to fill a greater space; these in general should be all of them of thin substance, that they might thereby the easier penetrate, and mix themselves with the substance of the humour. But in special, some of the attenuaters are cold, as juyce of Limons, Vinegar, Oxymel, but of very thin parts; some things, and indeed most are hot and dry in the second and third degree, such as are all sharp and biting-tasted things, especially spices. The use of these is as wel internal, to open divers obstructions of the bowels, to purge phlegm out of the breast, provoke the courses, break the stone, &c. as also external to melt cold humors impacted in the skin by their heat, and to make them separable, and extenuate them by its drinesse and thinness of substance, that af∣terwards either of their own accord, or by the use of discussing or attracting Medicines they may be wholly dissipated.
The Matter of these is either internal for internal uses; or external. For the internal mat∣ter there is no need of any particular table, seeing they may be collected out of divers, according to the scope and intention of the Physitian, viz. of the Diuereticks, Sudorificks, provokers of the courses, and others that are indued with an atte∣nuating faculty, as may appear in the several de∣scriptions; but of the external matter for external uses this is the table. Roots, of Smallage, Birthwort, Elecampane, Ireos. Leaves, of Dil, Southernwood, Wormwood, Ca∣lamint, Centuary the less, ground Pine, S. Johns wort, Hysop, Bayes, Marjoram, Mints, wild Mar∣joram, Penyroyal, Rosemary, Rue, Succory, Time. Flowers, of Dil, Chamomil, St. Johnswort. Seeds, of Annise, Smallage, Cummin, Fennel, Rue, mustard: Fruits, Juniper herries, Barberies. Fats and greases, the elder sort, especially of Foxes, Bears. Oyls, of bitter Almonds, Dil, St. Johnswort, Ireos, Bays, Nuts, Rue, Scorpions, Turpentine, and Foxes. Ointments, Agrippae, Aragon. Out of which divers external forms may be made, Fomentations, Embrochatians, Oint∣ments &c. Of Cutters, in Latine Inciden∣tia, Graece .
THese cutting Medicines differ not from the Attenuaters really and in their faculty, but onely in their object, and manner of operating; for Attenuators are for thick humors, but cutters for them that are tough and clammy. Now thick and clammy humors may be separated by the same faculty, unlesse that the cutters be storn∣ger then the Attenuaters; for that which is clammy and glutinous is more difficultly divi∣ded then that which is simply thick or gross; therefore the matter of the Cutters is the same with that of the stronger sort of Attenuators. Of Mollifiers, Latine Emol∣lientia, Graece . THese are those which soften those things which are hard; but seeing that a hardnesse may be caused three several wayes, by drinesse, repletion, or over-filling, either with a humor or wind, and by concretion either from the proper distemper of the part, or the nature of the humor flowing into it; that cannot properly be called a a mollifying Medicine that moistens those things which are dry, or that empties those things that are over-filed, but that which heats, dissolves, and melts those things which are hardened.
Such in general are things that are hot, as in the active qualities (because concretion comes from cold,) and in the passive either moderatly dry or temperate, because drought is the mother of hardness; and therefore those which are usu∣ally reckoned amongst the mollifiers (as gumm Ammoniack, Galbanum, Opoponax,) which al∣so dry much, that they may be perfectly mollify∣ing are to be temperd with oyl of sweet Almonds, oyl of Violets, &c. which are contraries, and manifestly moisten; in special the degree of heat must not be the same in all, but proportionably answering to the humour that is hardened. For if it be contumacious, as in Scirrhus tumors, then is required a heat to the second or third degree, that the coldness of the concrete humour may be masterd; but if the affection be milder, a moderate heat wil serve. That we may observe the sen∣tence of Galen, 5. Simpl. c. 7, 8. where he ap∣points temperate mollifiers, viz: in respect of the affection to which they are used. The USE of mollifiers is for the most part external in any Scri∣rhous disposition of the Belly, Spleen, Liver, &c. in mollifying Clysters. The matter is this fol∣lowing. Roots, of Marshnmallows, Bryony, Onions roasted, wild Cowcumbers, Ireos, white Lillies, Liquorice. Leaves, of Orach, Beets, holy Oak, Borage, Bears breech, Bugloss, Mallows, Pellitory of the wall, Elder, Violets. Seeds, of flax called Linseed, Fenergreek, Mal∣lows. Flowers, of Chamomil, Violets, Mallows, Meli∣lot, Saffron: Fruits, sweet Almonds, fat Figgs, Raisins of the Sun, Jujubes. Liquors, The vapor of sharp Vinegar caused by being thrown on bricks or flints made red hot, and so received on the part; nothing can breath out, but the part must first be a little mollified with convenient Plaisters, Oyls, or Fomentations: the decoction a sheeps head or feet.
Rozins, of the Pine, Turpentine. Gums, ammoniack which is most usual, Bde∣lium, Galbanum, Opopanax, Styrax. Fatts. Of a hogg, a man, a calf, hens, capons, ducks, of a Hart, a Cow, a Sow, a Badger. Suets. Of a he or she Goat, of a Bull. Excrements of living creatures. As Butter, oesi∣pus, fat wax, Propolis or Bee-glew cowdung, hony comb, the first washing of wool. Oyls. Olive, Linseed oyl, oyls of white Lillies, Violets, sweet Almonds, Earthworms, Dil, Cha∣momil, Ireos, rock oyl or Petroleum. Oyntments. Dialthea, Resumptivum. Plaisters. de Mucilaginibus, Diachilum sim∣ple, and with gums, of Melilote, de Ammoniaco, Empl. de Succocicutae oum ammoniaco. Note that old gums do rather discuss them mol∣lifie, unless they are temper'd by the mixture of other moistening things. Fats and grease do more mollifie than oyls, and those which are new more than those which are old (which by age become hotter, sharper, and salter,) and the fats of young creatures more than those of old ones. Fats that are sharp and salt are to be often wa∣shed in water, that they may be altered from their drying quality. Of mollifiers these are the strongest, Briony root, the roots of wild Cowcumber Ireos, also Rosins and Gums.
Of such things as dissolve clotted Blood, or curdled Milk. THese in respect of their use may be referrd to the Mollifiers, because they are conveni∣ent for dissolving either blood or milk that is clotted and hardened; yet in respect of their fa∣culty they might better be accounted among the strongest sort of Attenuaters: for it is with such that clots of blood and curdlings of milk are dis∣solved, as you may see in the following table: Roots, of round Birthwort, Swallowwort. Leaves, of Garden and mountain Parsley, Gar∣den Rue, Mugwort, Wormwood, Southernwood, Savory. Time. Seeds, of Cummin-seed bruised with Vinegar, Radish seed. Juices, of mountain Calamint, Vinegar of Squils, Lye of Juniper ashes, and Vine ashes with Vinegar or Honey. Syrups, Oxymel simple of Squils, Mead. Parts and Excrements of living creatures, Mum∣my, the curd of a Leveret, Kidd, the ashes of a Crawfish burned. Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar. The charcoles of a Lintree quenched in Vine∣gar. Chymical salt, (see the Diureticks) spirits of Salt, Turpentine. With all which Mollifiers are to be mixed; chiefly Marsh mallows, Mallows, Butter.
Of Cleansers, Graece . Latine, Detergentia. IN general they are so called, which by their joyning with humours that are either tough and clammy, sticking to the body, or fixed as it were in it, do scour them away, and in their pas∣sage take them with them; they may be in nature hot, or else cold in the actives, but the hot are the most effectual; in the passives they are dry, and something of thick parts, by which meanes they make some stay, and consequently by tugging, and as it were shaving off the tough humors til they yeild, they afterwards take them with them, and carry them forth. But in special, according to Galen 5 Simpl. 12, these cleansers are two-fold, cleansers or scoures, and unstoppers; the first cleanse the parts of the skin, and are of a certain kinde of nitrous, and thin substance; the last free the internal cavities from stoppages, and (as shal be said in its proper place) do not differ from the preparers of humours, in which place also they are to be sought for. Here therefore I wil onely propound the matter of the cleansers; the use of which is to purge and cleanse the superficies, both of the skin and cavities, and also Ulcers from filth that is apt to grow in them. Roots, of Smallage, both sorts of Birthworts, Cuckoopits, wild Cowcumbers, Dragons, Ireos, Gentian, Plantain, Solomons seal.
Leaves, Of Wormwood, Smallage, Pimpernel male and female, Agrimony, Germander, Cen∣taury the lesse, Celandine, Beets, Horehound, Plantaine. Seeds, Of Nettle, Plantane, Smalage, Orach. Flower, Of Linseed, Fenugreek seed, red Vetches, Lupines, Barly, bitter Vetches, Beanes, hither also may be referd Bran. Juices, Sugar, Aloes, Wine, Tartar, all Lyes, and Lac Virginis. Excrements of Animals, Urine, Gal, whey of Milk, Honey. Rosins, Turpentine, Frankinsence, Myrrh. Minerals, Alom, Vitriol, Verdegrease, white Vitriol, Tutty, salt Peter, Orpment, brass burnt, Spodium of the Greeks, Borax both natural and factitious. Oyls, Of bitter Almonds, Turpentine, Tartar. Oyntments, Ung. Apostolorum, Egyptiacum, sope, especially the black. Of Allayers of Acrimony, Grae. . Latine, acrimoniam retundentia. These are those which abate the acrimony of the humours, and the exasperated sense of the part, either by their emplastick quality, or by their temperate moisture; of the Emplasticks in their proper place; the Epicerasticks or Allayers simply spoken are these. Roots, Of Marsh-mallows, Mallows, Licorice. Leaves Of Mallows, water Lillies, Housleek. Purslane, Lettice.
Seeds, Of Barley huld, white Henbane, Lettice, Flax, white Poppy, Rice. Fruits, Jujubes, Raistns, sweet Apples, sweet Prunes, Sebestens, sweet Almonds, Pine nuts. Juices and Liquors, Almond milk, Starch, Barly water, fat broth, Milk of Sowthistles, Creame of Barley, juices of the leaves of Nightshade, and winter Cherries. Excrements of Animals, Whites of Eggs, Butter, all Milk, whey of Milk; Parts of Animals, Calves head and foot, also Lambs head and the broth. Muscilages, Of the seed of Fleawort, Quince kernels, of the seeds and roots of Marshmallows, of Linseed, Mallows seed and of the roots of Bo∣rage. Oyls, Of Olives, violets, sweet Almonds, of the seeds of gourds by expression, of white Hen∣bane, and white Poppy seed, oyl of Lead. Oyntments, of Roses, Album camphoratum. Syrups, Of Violets, of Apples, of Marshmal∣lows, according to Fernel. Syr. of Liquorice, Ju∣jubes, Poppyes. Purslane. Divers officinal things, Pulp of Cassia, Diacodi∣um, Diapenidium, sugar-candy of Violets, Julep of Violets, Honey of Violets. Of Alexipharmacal Medica∣ments. Grae. , Lat. Venenis Resistentia. Of these some are common, which resist all poysons generally; others proper, which onely oppose some peculiar sort of poyson: of the com∣mon sort in this place, to which for the most part
we have recourse, especially if the sort of poyson taken be unknown: of which (in respect of the diversity of the poyson, not of their use) some are internal, which have a peculiar use in the plague, malignant Fevers, and poysons taken in∣wardly. Others external, which cure the bitings and stingings of venemous creatures. Internal. Roots, Angelica, Anthora, Snakeweed, Cress∣wort, or Gentian the less; white Dittany, Elecam∣pane, both sorts of Eringoes, viz. common and sea; greater Gentian, Masterwort, Lovage, Burnet, Saxifrage, Vipers grass, Sentinel or Tormentil, Swallow-wort. Barks and woods, Lignum aloes, all the Saun∣ders, Barks of Citrons. Leaves, Of Wormwood. Dittany, Cinquefoil, (viz. the greater creeping Cinquefoil,) garden Rue, Goats rue, Scabious, Scordium, or water Ger∣mander, greater Valerian, Mede sweet, Pauls bettony. Seeds, Of Annise, Sorrel, Carduus Benedictus, Citrons, Corianders, Juniper berries, Grains of Chermes, seeds of St. Johnswort, Turneps, Basil, Pimpernel, Saxifrage, Purslane. Flowers. Of Borage, Bugloss, Clove-July flow∣ers, the flowers and tufts of heath, Diascorid. flow∣ers of Marigolds, Cetaury the less, St. Johns wort, water Lillies, Rosemary, red Roses, Violets. Fruits, Oak Acorns, Walnuts, Citrons, Oranges. Spices, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeggs, Cardomomes, all sorts of Pepper, especially the long, Zedoary. Juices, Citrons, Oranges. Rosins and Gums, Myrrh, Camphire, Benzoin.
Parts and excrements of Animals, Flesh of Phea∣sants, Castor, curd in the read of a young Hare, Mummy, Musk, Unicorns horn, Ivory, bone of a Staggs heart, new budding Harts-horns, Bezar∣stone Earths, True bole Armonack, true terra sigillata. Precious stones, Corals, Pearls, Rubies, Emeralds, Jacinths, Saphires, Topaz. Things of the sea, Ambergreese, Amber. Confections, Treacle, Mithridate, Confect. de Hyacintho, Alchermes, Elect. de ovo. Lon. Treacle, Compound waters, VVater of Angelica the grea∣ter composition, Bezoar water, cold cordial water of Saxony, Gilberts water, water of Petasitis com∣pound, aq. Protheriacalis, water of Scordium com∣pound, Treacle water, both that distild, and that by infusion: Condited things, Barks of Citrons, Myrobalans. Insuper, the roots and stalks of Angelica, the roots of Burnet, and Zedoary walnuts green, Nutmeggs, Eringo-roots. Conserves, Of the flowers of Borage, Bugloss, Vi∣olets, red Roses, water Lillies, Rosemary, Ma∣rigolds of the flowers of Oranges, Clovegilly flow∣ers, Sage flowers, Scabious flowers, of the tops of Carduus benedicius, Balm, leaves of Rue, &c. Species or powders, Aromaticum Rosatum, de Gemmis, Diambrae, Triasentalinum, Dianthos, Diamoscum, Diascordium, red Pannonick pow∣der of Saxony, Powder of Crabs claws compound, Magisterial cordial powder; Magisterial Bezar powder, Species of Confectio liberantis, temperate cordial powder, Troschischs, Trosch, alexiterii, &c. Out of which may be prepared divers magiste∣rial antidotes, waters, extracts, candied Confecti∣ons, Tablets, powders, &c.
READER, TAke notice that these additions where you see these two Commaes (") at the head of the line, were not in the Latine; wherefore seeing it defective most in this head where it should have been most large, I added them, but shal not exceed the limit of the La∣tine book hereafter. External. As those which are used for venemous bi∣tings, &c. and are either given inwardly, 1. The aforesaid Alexipharmacal things mixed with Cordials. 2. The powder of Vipers which is prepared of the flesh of the Viper, (the heart and liver being left out) washed in white wine, and dryed gently in an oven til it may be powdered, then mixing it with other alexiterial things; the dose is half a dram, or thereabouts in fragrant wine. 3. For the biting of a mad dogg: the Anti∣dote of Galen, of one part of Frankinsense, 5 parts of Gentian, and 10 parts of the ashes ofa Crawfish; the dosefs from half a dram to a dram, or two drams in wine. Or else outwardly, 1. The Alexipharmacal things mixed with things that draw to the skin. 2. The flesh of any venemous creature, applyed to the sting or the bite.
The Second SECTION, OF THE FIRST PART OF The First Book. OF MEDICINES respecting the Causes offen∣ding in quantity. A Type of this Section. Medicaments respecting the morbifical cause offend∣ing in quanti∣ty, are either Prepa∣rers, Of the humors, other∣wise called Digestives. Of the body, called o∣therwise Openers. Or Univer∣sal Eva∣cuaters, as Purgers, viz. those tha are properly so called. Vomitories, Diureticks, Sudorificks.
Preparers of the Humors, or Digestives: THese are those digestives that correct the ful∣ness of the humors either in first or second qualities, that any way hinder concoction by con∣trary qualities, and by this meanes do as it were prepare them, partly to help nature in the conco∣ction, partly to procure the more commodious e∣vacuation by the succeeding purge; and of this preparation is meant that Aphorisme 22. Sect. 1. These are threefold: for some prepare Choler, some Phlegme, others Melancholy. Preparers of Choler. CHoler, in respect of the first qualities, because it is hot and dry, requires those things that are cold and moist; but in relation to the second qualities, because some is very thin, as that which is yellow, other of it thick and gross, ei∣ther by adustion, or by mixing with gross hu∣mours, as the Vitelline, Leek-colourd, Aeruginous, and azure colourd; the first sort is to be thickned, this last to be attenuated; therefore alterers of Choler are two-fold, some thickeners, others attenuaters. Concerning which note this, that although all of them are not moist, yet because they are coo∣ling, they abate the heat, and prevent any farther driness, and so by accident do moisten.
Thickners of Choler. The Roots, of Bugloss, Plantain. Leaves, of Purslane, Plantain, Lettice, Garden Nightshade, great Housleek. Seeds, of Quinces, Lettice, Mallows, white Pop∣pies, Plantain, Fleawort. Flowers, of water Lillies, Violets, red Poppies, Roses, Mallows. Fruits, Jujubes, Quinces, Pomgranates, Peares, sweet Apples, Sebestens. Gums, Tragant, Arabick. Juices, of the leaves and fruits before rehearsed in this table, starch. Waters, of the leaves and flowers aforesaid. Syrups, of the leaves, flowers, and fruits afore∣said, usual in the shops; as also the syrup of white Poppy seed. Conserves, of the flowers of water Lillies, vio∣lets, red Roses, Mallows. Species or Powders, of Diatragacanthum Frigi∣dum, Diamargaritum Frigidum, Diapenidium, Pulvis Haly. Elect. Diacidonium without spices. Rob. As of English Corans, Cherries, Sloes, &c. Attenuators of Choler. Roots, of Sparagus, Sorrel, Succory, Grass. Leaves, of Sorrel, all the capillary herbs, (viz. black or common Maydeehair, yellow Maydenhaire, wall Rue, or white Maydenhair, Cetrach,) Endive, Succory, Sowthistle, wild Endive, Dandelion, gum Succory, Liverwort, wood Sorrel, Harts-tongue.
Seeds, Of Sorrel, Endive, Barley, the four great cold seeds. Flowers, Of Succory, Endive. Fruits, Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Melons, Pompions, soure Prunes, soure Cherries, Corans, Barberries. Gums, Camphere. Clarified juyces, of the Leaves and fruits before rehearsed, also verjuyce. Waters, Of the Herbs aforesaid whatsoever you can have. Syrups, Also of the Leaves and Fruits aforesaid, which are extant in the shops. Conserves, Of Succory, Sorrel, Citron. Species, Diatrion-Santalon. Preparers of Phlegm. PHlegm, in relation to its first qualities, is ei∣ther cold and moist, as the insipid, sour, and glassie; and these are to be corrected with heaters and dryers; or is heating and drying, as the salt phlegme, and that is prepared as choler, mixing with the others those things also which respect phlegme; but in relation to the second qualities, all phlegme is gross, rough, and glutinous; there∣fore to be corrected by attenuaters, cutters, and cleansers. Roots, The five opening roots, (viz. the roots of Sparagus, Parsley, Fennel, Smallage, Kneeholm,) Acorus, Angelica, Birthwort, Ciperas or English Galangale, Calamus Aromaticus, Elecampane, China, Galingale, blew Flower de luce, Master∣wort, Liquorice, Piony, Salsaparilla, Valerian, Zedoary.
Leaves, of Wormwood, Agrimony, Betony, Calamint, Germander field Cipres, Fennel, Hy∣sop, St. Johnswort, Bayes, Marjoram, white Hore∣hound, Mints, Balm, wild Marjoram. Penniroyal, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Savory, mother of Time, Time. Seeds, the four greater and lesser hot seeds, and of Carduus benedictus, Corianders, Citrons, Lo∣vage, Pyony, Silver-mountain, Nettles, Mustard. Fruits, Barberies, Juniper berries, Nutmeggs, Figgs. Flowers, of Rosemary, Lavender, Centaury the lesse, St. Johnswort, Lavender, Lilly of the val∣lies, Sage, French Lavender. Barks and woods, of Guajacum, Sassafras, barks of Citrons, Oranges. Spices, all in general. Rosins, Myrrh, Mastick, Storax, Frankin∣sense. Things taken from animals, Hony, Musk, Castor. Things of the sea. Ambergreese, Amber. Waters, of the aforesaid things which you can find ready at the shops, Aqua vitae, Aqua coe∣lestis, Imperialis, Theriacalis or Treacle-water. Syrups, of Wormwood, Byzantinus, Mayden∣hair, syrup of the preserving of the roots Acorus, and Citron peels condited, and of Condite Gin∣ger, syrup of Hysop, Mints, Hony of Roses, Oxy∣mel simple, and of Squils, syrup of Horehound, of the two or five opening roots, syrup of La∣vender cotton. Preserves, and Condites, the Roots of Acorus, Elecampane, Ginger, Emblick Myrobolanes, Nutmeggs, Walnuts, barks of Citrons, Oranges, Olives pickled.
Conserves, of the flowers of Rosemary, Laven∣der cotton, Sage, Wormwood. Powders, Aromaticum Rosatum, Caryophilla∣tum, Dianthos, Diambrae, Diamoscam dulce, Di∣arrhodon abbatis. Confections, Aurea Alexandrina, Treacle, Mi∣thridate. Troschischs, of Wormwood, Gallia, and Alip∣ta moschata, of Maudlim. Distill'd oyls, of Anniseed, Cinnamon, Cum∣mins, Cloves, Orange peels, Fennel-seed, Nut∣meggs, Rosemary, Marjoram, Amber. Preparers of Melancholy. MElancholy is two-fold, either adust, which because 'tis very hot, dry, and gross, re∣quires coolers, moisteners, and attenuaters; there∣fore we must here have recourse to the table of the attenuaters of choler; but chiefly the juice of fragrant apples (as Pippins and Pearmains, &c.) in∣commended, of which may be made a syrup; or else not adust, and is called the melancholy juice, which by nature is cold, dry, and grosse, and therefore is to be prepared with things that moderately heat, moisten, and attenuate. The matter of these follows, where note, that if any among them be dryer then is fitting, such things are to be temper'd with moisteners. Roots, of Coocoo-pits prepard, Bugloss, Ele∣campane, Ferne, Polipody of the Oak, Satyrions, the 5 opening roots, Liquorish which is always to be prescribed to temper the drinesse of others.
Barks, of Citrons, the roots of Capers, the mid∣dle barks of Ash, Tamarisk, Elder. Leaves, of Borage, Bugloss, Brooklime, Dod∣der, Centaury the less, Maydenhair, Fumitory, Hops, Balm, Cresses, Harts tongue, Time. Seeds, the four greater hot seeds, of Smallage, Agnus Castus, Basil, Carduus Benedictus, Citrons, Dodder, Cresses, Parsley. Flowers, the four Cordial Flowers, (see the premonitions) flowers of water Lillies, to temper the dryer medicines, of Marigolds, Broom, Wal∣flowers, Tamarisk, Elder, Saffron. Fruits, Capers, Raisins of the Sun, Corans. Gums, Ammoniack, Lack. From Animals, the shel blatta, bone of a Staggs heart, Honey, Silk. VVaters, of the leaves and flowers aforesaid that are used in the shops. Syrups, of Fumitory, Bugloss, barks of Ci∣trons, the 5 opening roots, Maydenhair, Byzan∣tinus. Confections, Alchermes, Treacle. Conserves, of the flowers of Bugloss, Borage, Elecampane, Maydenhair. Condites or preserves, Citron-peels, condite My∣robolanes, green Ginger. Spices, or powders, Diamoscu dulcis, Diambre degemmis, Laetificans Galen. Troschischs, of Wormwood, of Capers, Gallia Moscata, of gum lack, of Maudlins. Distill'd oyls, of Aniseed, Fennel seed. Salts, of Wormwood, Ash, Tamarisk.
Preparers of the Body. PReparers and Openers of the body, are those things which remove any thing that may hinder in easie purgation, viz. the grossenesse of the humors, or obstructions of the passages, of which it is to be understood, Aphor. 9. Sect. 2. Such are Attenuaters, Cutters, and Cleansers. They are in general called Anastomaticks, (which word may signifie any thing that opens any pas∣sage whatsoever.) And Openers, also Ecphra∣cticks, or unstoppers, because they open the passa∣ges, and free them from obstructions. Neither do they in substance differ from Preparers of the humours, but only in the subject they work on; for sometimes it happens that humours yt are not crude, or are already prepared, cannot be expeld because other grosse humours are in the way, stopping the passages, by which the peccant hu∣mor is to passe; hence appears the necessity of this preparation; which Galen 1 Aph. Com. 24. requires also in acute diseases, when the causes are turgent or moving, if there be any quantity of clammy crude humours. But in special, Ope∣ners are two-fold; hot, fitted for phlegmatick humours, and natural melancholy, or cold, de∣dicated to prepare grosse choler, and adust melan∣choly; the hot are to be sought in the Table of the preparers of Phlegm and natural melan∣choly, and the cold out of the Table of the pre∣parers of grosse choler, and adust melan∣choly.
Of those that are properly called Purgers. PUrging Medicines are so called, either pro∣perly or improperly; these are called . Lenientia, Lenitives, the others specially Catharticks. The Lenitives are of a four-fold difference; some loosen the belly by making it slippery, as whatsoever by its own fat moisten∣ing substance doth smooth the inside of the guts, which otherwise is perhaps dryer and rougher then it should be, so that by this meanes the ex∣crements cannot stick to them; such are oyl of sweet Almonds, Butter, fat broth of flesh. Others are called Washers, or Cleansers, which by their abundance of moisture dissolve the dung, and cleanse the internal superficies of the intrals; such are fair water, Whey, Milk, Beets, Pellitory of the wal, Coleworts, Spinach, and the broths of these. O∣thers may be termed Compressers, which by con∣tracting together the intrals, presse forth that which is below them, and by this reason Quinces taken last at meat loosen the belly; so also un∣cleansed Wines, and things very sowr purge some folks, which can be by no other quality then their binding faculty. Lastly, others are Fret∣ters, which stir up the expulsive faculty by their biting quality, of which sort are all hot and sharp things, and besides, they are of thin parts, and some of them salt. And in this manner a certain Carter cured diverse people troubled with a la∣sting Fever by giving them a draught of wine,
in which was dissolved a handful of Salt: for they which took it were immediately purged both by vomit and stool very violently. In this manner also meats much salted or aromatized, loosen the belly by stimulating nature; and by the same reason also happen those purgings which sometimes nature moves of her self; also those things which purge being applyed to the Navil: as the Ointment of Sowbread commonly called Ʋnguentum de Arihanita. And all these are improperly called Purgers which purge any humour that comes in this way, without a pe∣culiar choice. But those which are properly cal∣led Purgers are those which by choice purge some particular humor, of which I now intend to treat. There are four several Classes of those properly called Purgers, Cholagogues, Phlegmagogues, Hy∣dragogues, and Melanagogues. The Cholagogues, or purgers of Choler are, Cassia, Manna, Tama∣rinds, Juice of Roses, Aloes, Reubarb, Myrobolanes, Scammony. The Phlegmagogues are, Carthamus, Agarick Turbith, Hermodactils, Mechoacan, Ja∣lap, Coloquintis, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Euphorbi∣um. The Melanagogues are these following, Senna, Polipody of the Oak, Epithymum, black Helle∣bore, Lapis armenius washed, Lapis lazuli. And lastly, the Hydragogues, or purgers of watrish hu∣mours are the seed, bark, and juice both of Danewort and Elder, Soldanella, or sea Colewort, the juice of Ireos, Elaterium, Spurge called Esula prepared, Me∣choacan, h root Jalap, and of late the berries of blackthorn or Khamnus; to which may be numbred divers others quite out of use, rather to be refer'd to those improperly called purgers or preparers
of humours; also compounds, as Syrups, Electua∣aries, purging pils, &c. which are all mentioned in the foregoing treatise of prescribing the forms of remedies; And in all these aforesaid purgers severally, I shal consider these six heads. 1. The Kind. 2. The Election, or the marks how to know the true from the adulterated purger. 3. The Qualities, as wel the first, viz. their tempe∣rature, as the second & third, in which I compre∣hend the parts for whom they are good, and the affections which they oppose; also the sex and age for which they are most convenient. 4. Cor∣rectors. 5. The Dose, both least, meane, and greatest. 6. The Form, in which they are most conveniently given, although this last rather be∣long to the method of compounding.
The First Classis of PURGERS, In which are handled the Chola∣gogues, or purgers of CHOLER. CASSIA. The Kind. CAssia meant here, is the fruit of a certain Indian tree of the bigness of a Pear-tree, having leaves like the Peach-tree, flowers like broom, yellow, smelling like Cloves; this Fruit is a long Codd, round, somewhat black outwardly, inwardly replenisht with much black pulp, and many seeds, round, plain, and flat, resembling the form of a heart, divi∣ded from one another by certain woodish mem∣branes set tranverse or crosse the Cane, and is called Cassia of the Arabians from the Inventor, by Actuarius, Cassia nigra, or the black; by others, Cassia of the Canes; also Lenitive Cassia, to make a difference from the Cassia of the Greeks, and the Cassia of the Poets. For the Cassia of the Greeks is nothing else but the Cinnamon of the shops, commonly called Canea, and for diffe∣rence sake, woody Cassia, and sweet smelling Cassia.
The Cassia of the Poets is a certain coronary herb which The ophrastus calleth Cneoron, whose sigure is set forth by Matthiolus. The pulp onely of our Cassia is in use, which they cal Flower, or pulp of Cassia, and Cassia newly drawn; although Fallopius and Manardus affirm that the cane and seeds powdered have also a purging quality, and that greater then the pulp, which sentence of theirs is not approved by Anton. Musa, nor Garcias ab Horto. The Election. The greatest canes are rather to be chosen, and those which are new, weighty, and full, which if it be shaken doth not rattle or sound, shining without, and ful of fat pulp within. Nei∣ther is it to be drawn til to be used, for after 'tis kept in, it groweth sowr. The Qualities. As to the first qualities, Cassia is very near tem∣perate; for Avicen lib. 2. ch. 197. writes that it is temperate in the active qualities, but that in the passive it doth somewhat moisten. Serapio lib. Simp. ch 12. makes it altogether temperate; Mesu∣es cap. 6. Simpl. writes, that it a little inclines to heat. Ant. Musa in exam. simpl. says it is hot and moist in the first, or beginning of the second degree.
As to the second qualities, it lenifies, mollifies, and loosens, purgeth choler and phlegme, and makes the blood pure. As to the parts and affe∣ctions, 'tis dedicated to the Brest, Lungs, Liver, Reins and bladder, and is therefore profitably used in the Pleurisie, burning Fevers, hot distem∣per of the Liver, heat of the Reins and bladder; and also in the stone, in the running of the Reins or Gonorrhea, proceeding from a sharp matter, or cholerick sperme. As to the age and Sex 'tis safe for all ages, and very profitable for Women with child. Correction of it. Besides the aforesaid commodities, Cassia hath this discommodity, that 'tis very windy, maketh so slippery, and is of slow operation; hence it is hurtful for them that are troubled with windi∣nesse, and that have a weak moist stomack; and less commodious for them that are of a loose belly, and is hurtful for the Ulcers of the Reins and bladder; and little helps them that are of a costive nature, unless these defects of it be corre∣rected. But it is corrected as to its windiness with halfadram or a dram of the seeds of Annise, Fennel, & Citrons, as it over-moistens or relaxeth, wth the powder of the bark of Myrobolanes, Reubarb, Ci∣amon, Mastick, but chiefly Coriander seed prepa∣red, and as to its sloth in working, 'tis to be quickened with two drams, or half an ounce of some purging Electuaries, or Tablets. The Dose. 'Tis given for the most part to children from three drams to half an ounce; to those of ripe age an ounce, an ounce and a half, two ounces; to those that are with child, or weak, one ounce; if Cassia with the cane be taken, the dose is the same. But the most usual dose of Cassia is from half an ounce to an ounce.
The manner of giving it. Cassia is taken either in the form of a bole, or a potion; if it it be taken in the form of a bole, the basis is Cassia to an ounce, or an ounce and a half, as need requires, correctors being added, or things respecting the part affected, to half a dram or a dram, or things that quicken it to two or three drams, more or lesse, and so with q. s. of Sugar is made a bole: as for example, in affecti∣ons of the breast, ℞. of Cassia newly drawn one ounce, more or lesse, Flower of brimstone, or some other pectoral powder, to a scruple, or half an dram, the seed of Annise or some other corrector two scruples, with sugar make a bole. In burn∣ing Fevers, ℞, &c. of Cassia one ounce, the seeds of Citrons powdered, one dram; with sugar make a bole. In affections of the Reins and Bladder 'tis prescribed, of Cassia six drams, Turpentine washed in Pellitory-water, two drams, with pow∣der of Liquorish, sugar
q. s. make a bole, so accor∣ding to the indication may be adjoyned those things that suppresse the effluvium of the seed, as Coral, Mastick, Oriental bole, Troschisch of Amber, to half a dram, or two scruples, and so with su∣gar make a bole; 'tis a most excellent Medicine if the faculty of Cassia is to be acuated, ℞ of Cassia six drams, or half an ounce; some purging Ta∣blets or Electuaries, as Diaprun. solutive, or Ele∣ctuar. de succco Rosar. two or three drams, Corian∣der seed prepared, 2 scruples, with sugar make a a bole. In those that are of a loose constitution o∣ther purgers are added that are indued with a strengthening & binding faculty, as to 1 ounce of Cassia take an ounce of Reubarb, or the barks of Myrobolanes, and half a dram of some of the cor∣rectors, so with Sugar make a bole. But if it be taken in the form of a potion, some Liquor is to betaken, in which the Cassia is to be dissolved. This Liquor is either a distilled water, as of Sorrel, Endive, Succory, or some decoction of fit plants; as for example, take of Cassia, an ounce & a half, which dissolve in q. s. of Liquor, make a potion. Of late at Paris they have began to use Cassia in infusion, which way is of all the best, because Cassia in the form of a bole is ungrateful through its extream quantity: and if it be dis∣solved in a fit Liquor, it renders the potions too gross; therefore 'tis much better if Cassia be in∣fused in some conveniet Liquor, in some hot place, and a q. s. of the in fusion strained be dis∣solved in other things, &c. or if need be some other may be joyned, and so given; as for exam∣ple, in burning Fevers, ℞. Sorrel. water as much as you wil, in which infuse of Cassia newly drawn an ounce and a half or lesse, in q. s. of the strained Liquor, dissolve two drams of Electuary of the juice of Roses more or lesse; make a potion. MANNA. The Kinde. THe word Manna is a doubtful word, for somtimes 'tis taken for the Manna of Frank-insence, which is nothing else then the smal corns of frankinsence broken off in carriage; or else 'tis meant of a dew condensed; in this lat∣ter sense I here understand it. Of this there are diverse differences taken
from the Provinces, but that which is usual in the shops is that which is brought out of Cala∣bria, which is gathered in Calabria by the Inha∣bitants about the dogg-dayes upon the leaves of the Ash, and the wild Ash; which is two-fold, Manna in grains, which is as it were in smal grains; and the Masticine Manna, which consists of the greater grains like Mastick. The first is called Manna of the leaves, because 'tis gathered from the leaves; the other is called Manna of the body, because 'tis taken off from the greater boughes. And this Manna is altogether celesti∣al, i. e. falling from the very region, doth settle on the leaves, and doth not proceed like Gum out of the tree, as Altimarus and the Monks (that have commented on Mesues) have written; for it fals not onely on the leaves of trees, but also on the Meadows, so that the mowers cannot untan∣gle easily their sickles from the grasse by reason of the Manna dissolved on them with the heat of the Sun; but the reason why 'tis onely gathered from the Ash and wild ash called Ornus, is because the Ash hath some occult quality, whereby it doth thicken and coagulate the Manna, which from other trees drops off like Honey on the grasse benerth. The Election. That is to be chosen that is white, new, not more then a year old, (for that which is red or brown is too old) round, whose grains being broken are not spnngy, nor ash'coloured, but so∣lid and white.
The Qualities. According to Avicen and Mesue, 'tis tempe∣rate, to Averrhoes 'tis hot and moist, it opens mol∣lifiers, smooths gently, moves the belly, draws forth choler, and purgeth watrish humors, chiefly dedicated to the wind-pipe and breast; hence it is profitably used in hectical Fevers, and to quench thirst: 'tis lesse useful in burning Fe∣vers for its sweetness, for which reason it easily turneth into choler; 'tis safely given both to Wo∣men with child, and children. The Correctors. Because it is flatulent 'tis corrected with a lit∣tle Cinnamon, Ginger, or Aniseed; and because 'tis slow of operation, 'tis usually quickened with syrup of Roses solutive, or some gently purging decoction; some add two, three, or four grains of Diagridium. The Dose. Is from an ounce to two or three ounces, but commonly to an ounce and a half, and to chil∣dren one ounce; Mesues appoints from six drams to fifteen, but perhaps he meant the best sort of Masticine Manna. The form of giving it. 'Tis given i the form of a potion dissolved in the broth of a Chicken, in which 'tis scarcely perceived, or in VVhey, or in some decoction, or in a convenient water. In the Cholick with oyl of sweet Almonds, to wch a little Malmsey should be added; sometimes tis prescribed to be eaten down. TAMARINDS. The Kind.
TIs a fruit of a certain kind of Indian tree wch the Arabians have referred to the kind of dates, as if it were the fruit of a wild Datetree, be∣cause tis called the Indian date; for Tamar in their language signifies Date. But they have not proper∣ly called this fruit Dates, as if the tree were of the kinds of Dates, or like a Date tree, but more respecting the similitude of the fruit, which also contain little stones in them, as Dates do, then which they had found no fitter name; but the pulp of this Fruit onely is in use, the stones being to be cast away. The Election. Those Tamarinds are the best that are fat and pulpy, brown, sharp, and soft, from whence they were called Oxyphaenica. The Qualities. They are cold and dry in the second degree, as Mesues writes, and that to the height, as Brassa∣volus, and as Avicen saith in the third; they miti∣gate humours too much burnt, especially choler; they move the belly, and purge choler, therefore are profitably used in vomitings, to quench thirst in madness, and for those that are obstructed, hy∣dropical, sick of the Jaundies, and Spleen-sick; they also prevent all exulcerations of the skin hapning through too much torrifying of the blood, as the Scabs, Leprosie, Frckles, and Ring-worms. The Correction. They hurt by their coldness a cold stomack, and are of slow operation, and are therefore cor∣rected with Mace, Mastick Cinnamon, and Spie∣nard, and are quickened with whey of Goats milk, Juice of Fumitory, or Hops, Manna, or Cassia.
The Dose: Is from one ounce to two and three ounces, which varies according to the manner of gi∣ving them. The manner of giving them: They are given either in the form of a bole or po∣tion; if in the form of a bole, then the masse of them is first to be washed with a pestle, after dri∣ven through a hair sieve, placed over steeming hot water, and afterwards adding correctors (to the proportion as is said in the Cassia) with Su∣gar, make a bole. But for the most part Tama∣rinds are not given alone, but to half an ounce of the pulp of Tamarinds is added one ounce of Cassia, then adding Correctors as is said in Cassia, make a bole; the form of a potion is used either in an infusion, or a decoction. The infusion is made thus; they are steeped in Endive water three hours, afterwards make an expression, and give the strained Liquor with Sugar. The decoction is made thus, ℞. of Tamarinds one ounce, boyl in it ten ounces of ƲƲhey, or some other broth, altered with Hops or Fumitory, til two ounces be wasted, strain them thorow a thick cloth; take of the strained Liquor two, five, or six ounces; with Su∣gar make a potion.
The Dose of the decoction and infusion is the same, viz. from ℥ ii. to ℥ v. or ℥ vi. JUYCE of ROSES. Roses used in the Shops, are white. red. damask. either common or musked. The Kind. This is the juyce drawne forth of the damask Roses, or else from the musked white ones, not the common ones, wherewith rose Gardens a∣bound, but either of the damask or musked. Election. The juyce of the musked Roses and damask Roses is to be preferred before the juyce of other pale Roses; and the juyce of Roses full blowne is better then that of the buds. The Qualities. This juyce is hot and dry in the first degree, though Roses themselves be cold in the first, and dry in the second degree; the reason according to Mesues, is because the juyce is here separated from the earthy and cold substance; It discusseth, clean∣seth, opens, purgeth choler and yellow watrish hu∣mors, and moves the courses gently; therefore not to be given to women with child; 'Tis good for
the liver and heart, and is used in obstructions of the liver, and pantings of the heart; as also in cholerick Feavers, for it purgeth humours that cause these diseases; it strengthens the bowels by purging them, and there is no malignity in it. The Dose and manner of giving it. 'Tis given from ℥ i. to ℥ ii. with sugred water, or according to Mesues, with whey or honey, gi∣ving ℥ i. of the juyce of Roses with ℥ ii. or ℥ iii. of whey; but now with us is prepared an infusion of damask Roses, and of that is made syrup of Ro∣ses solutive, simple (called Muchard) and com∣pound, also honey of Roses solutive, and out of the juyce is prepared Electuary of the juyce of Ro∣ses, but this is of red Roses. RUBARB. The Kind. 'Tis called Rubarb by an Antonomasia figurative∣ly, and is a famous root of a barbarous people in the East Indies, or of some Province of Barbary, cal∣led the Trogloditick, but very ill so esteemed; For as Garcias ab horte, Lib. 1. c. 37. and Linscot Par. 4. Ind. Orient. Cap. 29. there is no Rubarb in India, but onely in China where it growes, from whence it is carried to Ormur through Tartary, and thence into India, and againe by the Westerne Tartars in∣to Turkey, and so to Venice, from whence the other Kingdomes of Europe are stored with it. This
Root was unknown to Galen, and Dioscorides, and therefore diverse think amisse, that this is the Rha∣pontick of Dioscorides and Galen, and so confound that with our Rubarb; For the Rheum of Diosco∣rides hath no purging quality, and besides wants the markes of the true Rubarb; for Rubarb is in substance compact, weighty and brittle, bitter in tast, and sharp in smell, of a reddish brown colour without, within of a yellowish red colour, some∣what near the colour of the inside of a Nutmeg, and when it is either steeped or chewed, it gives a yel∣low die; Rhapontick on the contrary is not solid or compact, but porous, not weighty, but light, not brittle, but tough, not bitter, but sharp to tast, nei∣ther sented nor coloured like Rubarb; Neither ought the Monks Rubarb, or horse dock of Dioscori∣des to be confounded with ours, for this hath not the faculties of the genuine Rubarb. The Election. That Rubarb is to be chosen which comes neer∣est the aforesaid markes. The Qualities. 'Tis hot and dry in the second degree, as Mesues writes, which cannot be understood simply and without distinction; for according to the same Mesues, Rubarb consists of a twofold substance, one grosser and binding, which is watrish and earthy; another thinner, which is aery and fiery; and for this duplicity of substance, it hath a mixt tempe∣rature, and per consequence, mixt faculties, for by reason of its thin substance, it hath a faculty
of purging choler and phlegme, and of opening obstructions; but by reason of its grosse substance, it also by purging, binds; If you respect the parts, it is chiefely addicted as a remedy for the liver, which it very much comforts, from whence it is by some called the treacle of the liver; as to af∣fections, it is convenient for all that rise from ob∣structions, as Jaundise, Dropsy, swelling of the Spleen, longlasting putrid Feavers, stichy paines of the sides, by reason of its thin substance; but by reason of its grosse and binding substance, it is good for the lientery, dysentery, spetting of blood, and to stay bleeding wheresoever it be, also for any part broken or bruised, and inward bruises; but it is hurtfull for them that are troubled with the sharpnesse of Urine, which this increaseth, be∣cause it is diureticall, and soon seekes the bladder; It may be given safely at any time, even to them that are recovering out of diseases. The Correction. Its slownesse is corrected with Cinamon or Squinanth, to ℈ s. or ℈ i. or spikenard, to gr. iii. iv. for ʒ i. of Rubarb; but you must abstaine from this last, in people that are with child, and in Fea∣vers, and in those which easily vomit; Some cor∣rect it with mastick, but it is better first to sprinkle it with aq. vitae, afterwards to infuse it in conveni∣ent liquors. The Dose.
In substance Mesues gives it from ʒ i. to ℈ iv. in infusion from ʒ i. s. to ʒ iii. and now a days, none give it in substance beyond ʒ i. or ℈ iv. In infusion we very seldome give beyond ʒ ii. never beyond ʒ iii. The manner of giving it. 'Tis given either in substance, or infusion, or in a decoction; In substance, when the indicati∣on is to bind after it, and when it should bind more forcibly, it ought also to be torrified; But in an infusion or a decoction, when our mind is more to purge; for by steeping, the purgative faculty be∣ing in the thinner substance is transplanted into the liquor, but the binding and earthy substance remaines.
The substance of it is given divers ways; 1 In forme of Pils, so there are divers officinall Pils that have Rubarb in them, as pillulae aggregativae, pill. de tribus, pill. sine quibus, pill. de rhabarb, of Mesues. 2 In forme of a potion, dissolving the powder of rubard in a fit liquor, a broth, whey of Goates milk, some convenient distilled water, as of Plan∣tain, Smallage, Endive, white wine, adding cor∣rectors, and sometimes syrrup of roses solutive: as for example. ℞ of the liquor ℥ ij. more or lesse, of Rubarb ʒ i. or ℈ iv. of correcters ℈ s. or ℈ i. syr∣rup of roses solutive ℥ i. Make a potion. 3 In form of a bole, by mingling the powder of it with Cas∣sia, Raisins, Figges, sugar of Roses, &c. or with the juyce of Roses, or syrrup of Roses solutive; so with a little Cinamon and Sugar, make it into the consistence of a bole, which we suffer to fer∣mentate a little in the heat of the Sun. 4 In the forme of lozenges, for children; ℞ of Rubarb ℈ i. and with Sugar, q. s. dissolved in a convenient water, with which make lozenges, which children will easily eat. 5 In the forme of little cakes also for children, kneading it up, the honey boyled to a consistencie for cakes. 6 In the forme of a mar∣melade, mingling the powder of Rubarb with marmelade in the boyling of it up; Or else take a Quince, slit it in halves, take out the coare, and fill up the cavities with the powder of Rubarb, Senna, Carthamus or Agarick, then joyn them to∣gether, wrap them up in a wet paper, and rost it in an oven or chimney till it be pap, then loosen or open it, throw away the medicine, and eat the pulpe. The infusion of Rubarb is also diversly given. 1 and that commonly, Rubarb with its correctors is infused in s. q. of a convenient liquor, as ℥ ii. or ℥ iij. which after is strained from it, and this strain∣ed liquor is taken; or else in it is also dissolved syrrup of Roses solutive to ℥ i. or electuary of the juyce of roses, ʒ i. ʒ i s. and so make a potion.
2 In the forme of Cakes for children, by taking the infusion, and adding fine flower or crumbs of bread, with which mixed together, make a past, of the which are made Cakes; 3 Or else after this manner, for those that are more delicate, ℞ of ru∣barb powdred q. v. infuse it in aq. vitae enough to lye above it four fingers breadth, in B. M. four days, then pour of this coloured liquor, and pour in another new one, as before; thus do till the liquor will be no more coloured, then distill all those infusions mixed together, till the extract remain in the bottome as thick as hony, and to every ℈ i. will suffice, ℥. of the juyce or extract that remains; adde ℈ ij. of the oyle of Cinamon. For infants and women with child, it is a precious and harmlesse medicine, the Dose is ℈ i. with a spoonfull of wine. The Decoction of Rubarb is made by boyling Rubarb out of hand, with its correcters, in s. q. of some fit liquor; afterwards pressing it out with strained liquor is taken, or else over, &c. above may be dissolved in it syrrup of Roses or electua∣ry of the juyce of Roses, as aforesaid. A LOES. The Kind. Aloes is a thickned juyce of a certaine Plant, which Dioscorides describes, lib. 3. cap. 21. which in the shape of its leaves, resembles the greater Housleek, and because of its long lasting green, it is by divers cal'd sempervivum marinum, i.e. sea live∣ever, but commonly sea sengreen; there are two kinds of it, one Aloes Caballina, or horse Aloes, so called, because it is used by Farriers to purge hor∣ses, asses, and mules; the other is Aloes Hepatica or liver-coloured Aloes, because it is condensed and coloured like a liver, the best fort of which is that that is usually called Succotrine, so called, not from the citrine coloured juyce, as Fuchsius (l. 1. de comp. Medic. c. de aloe.) will have it, but from its native place, viz. the Island Succotra. Therefore some make the Succotrine a particular difference of it selfe, distinct from the hepatick, but they differ only in the degree of goodnesse.
The Election. Aloes Succotrine is rather to be chosen; for the Caballine is only the dregs and sedement of Aloes, and the Hepatick is not so good as the Succotrine; but the marks of the best Aloes are taken from the substance, weight, colour, smell, tast, in all which severally some conditions are to be required; the substance of it ought to be solid and firme as the liver is, yet easy to be broken or melted, if it be put into water, not sandy, but fatty and smooth; in weight it should be light; and by how much the lighter, so much the better it is; for the light∣nesse sheweth that sand is not mixed with it; of colour it should be browne, somewhat yellowish and redish, also something transparent; for that which is thick and dark is older then the rest; the smell should be good, inclining a little to the sent of myrrh; the tast according to Galen, should be somewhat astringent, but extreamly bitter. The Qualities.
It is hot in the second degree remisly, or the first intensly, and dry in the third according to Galen, though according to the same Author, it is not of a simple, but a mixed nature; for it doth a little bind, though it be very bitter; As to the second qualities inwardly taken, it hath a faculty to open the orifices of the veines, and cleanse the parts it passes through; Therefore it is to be a∣voided by them that are apt to bleed, either at mouth, belly or womb; therefore hurtfull for them with child; it purgeth choler and grosse phlegme; choler by a similitude of substance, but phlegmatick and grosse humors by its cleansing quality; but its purging quality reacheth not be∣yond the liver, it empties onely from the first veines, Galen 8. comp. med. local. in mentioning Hiera; As to the parts, it is chiefely addicted to the stomack, if any thing else be, as Galen sayes, and Mesues gives it the prerogative above all other purgers. Cardan in con-medic. affirms the contrary, in strengthening the stomack; It is profitable also for the head that is affected by sympathy from the stomack, and for the eyes and liver; As to the affections and diseases, it is profitably used in nauseousnesse, crudities, wormes, jaundise, ill habit or cachexia, sorenesse of the eyes, trouble∣some sleeps, so they be without a Feaver. As to the temperatures, it is best for cold and moyst ones; but for the drye, as cholerick young people, old folkes, or those that are leane or he∣cticall, it is hurtfull, unlesse it be when there is a great collection of moist excrements in them; therefore also it is hurtfull for either stomack or liver that is hot and dry, or cold and dry; and it is very cantiously to be used to them that are Feaverish. The Correction. There are three things in Aloes which want cor∣rection. 1 because it is slow of operation. 2 It is anastomaticall, or opening of the orifices of the veines too much. 3 It is but weake in operation. The first inconvenience is corrected by adding spices that are of thin and sharp essence, as Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinamon, Spikenard,
Calamu aromaticus, Cubebs, Squinant, Saffron. The weak∣nesse of operation is corrected by Ruffus, by ad∣ding Turpentine, or some other sharp rosin, but Mesues mingles other purgers with it, as Coloquin∣tis, Turbith, &c. And moderne Writers wash it in the decoction of Rubarb, or the infusion of ro∣ses, and thus make it the stronger. The second fault of it is corrected by mingling with it Mastick Gumtragant, Bdellium, and such like, or else by washing it in Endive or Succory water, because these simply being cold and moist, take away a great part of the medicinall substance from it by that washing. The moderne Physitians take away all offence from it by these following preparati∣ons. 1 Some prepare it thus, ℞ Aloes lib. i. rose vi∣negar, 2 parts, rose water part 1. of both these s. q. boyl all three or four boyles together, then strain it, and presse it forth; let that which is strained be boyled over a gentle fire, alwayes stirring it till it come to the former consistence of the Aloes, then keep it for use. 2 Others infuse Aloes Succotrine in certaine juyces, as of Borage, Bglosse, Violets, red Roses, Carduus benedictus, Fluellen, field Ci∣press, Chamomell, either single or mixed together, taking to lib. s. of Aloes lib. j. s. of the juyces, or more, afterwards straining them and boyling them to the due thicknesse. 3 Others imbibe the powder of
Aloes with Whey, juyce of Roses, En∣dive, and so dry it again in the sun, or in an Oven, or B.M. when it is dyed, they put to it a new juyce and dry it as before; thus they proceed also a third and fourth time or oftner. Lastly, they pour the same juyce anew to it, and bring it to a conveni∣ent consistence, or else dry it altogether, and lay it up for use. 4 Lastly, others prepare it in forme of an extract. ℞. of Aloes Succotrin, q. v. pour to it spirit of Wine, or Endive, or Sorrel water, q. s. let them steep in B.M. till the liquor be colou∣red, then separate it by gently, pouring it off, and pour a new liquor to it; iterate this so often till the liquor that is put to it will be no more colou∣red, then strain or filtrate all these liquors together, and reduce them to the consistencie of an extract either by exhalation, or distillation; then keep it for your use. The Dose Is from ʒ i to ʒ ij. Mes. infused from ʒ i to ʒ iii. to wit when you intend it to purge; but if it be only to loosen the belly, it is given from ℈ i to ʒ i. due consideration being had. The Forme. It is given first in the Forme of a potion, steep∣ed in the decoction of some of the aforesaid spices, and strained out; but this forme is usually refused for its extream bitternesse, unlesse it be in sleepy affections to stir up the nummed faculties. 2 In forme of an electuary as hiera picra Galen. taking Aloes with its correcters, and with honey, boyling it to the consistency of an electuary; let there be of Aloes three parts, of the correcters one part, hony three times so much as of all the powders. 3 In the forme of Pils, and that most usually so; all Pils of the Shops almost have Aloes in them, but Pils are diversely made of Aloes according to the various preparation of the Aloes. But if it be corrected, and prepared after the manner of the Antionts, there
are taken of it two parts, of correcters one part, so with a fit juyce or liquor make amasse of Pils; so are made the Pils of washed Aloes of an unknown Author, of Aloes washed in the juyce of roses, ℥ i. of agarick troschisated, ʒ iii. Mastich ʒ ii. of the species of diamoscum dulce, ʒ s. with Malmsey wine, s.q. make a masse; But if it be of the la prepa∣rations, then Pils may be made either of that a∣lone, or with some liquor if need require; so out of ʒ i of Aloes rosata with wine may be made as many Pils as you see fit: or else over and above may be added some juyce thickned, or other liquor, with correcters or directers; and Pils may be made whose dose is from ℈ i going forwards to ʒ i o more; so are prepared the Pils called the angeli∣call Pils. MYROBALANS. The Kind. Myrobalanes are a certain kind of Plums, which the interpreter of Avicen and Serapio without any reason translated Myrobalans; for Myrobalanus signi∣fies a nut or fatty Acorne, out of which oyle is pressed for precious oyntments, of which Dioscori∣des lib. 4. cap. 254. but our
Myrobalanes neither bear the shape of an Acorne, nor smell like a precious oyntment. There are of them in the shops five kinds, produced by divers Trees, viz. Citrine or yellow, Chebules, Indian or black, Emblicks, Bellericks, whose bark only is in use. The Citrine are so called from their citron colour; they have a small and thin bark, and a great stone. Chebules are the greatest and longest of all, rugged, full of corners, having a small stone; the Indian are small but very black; the Emblicks are rather peices then whole plums; the Bellericks are round like gals, having both a thick bark and stone. The Election. Those Citrine Myrobalanes are commended, which are of colour between green and yellow, which are heavy, as being well replenished with a firme, and much of their fleshy part, which are gummy, and if broken, have a little stone: those Chebules are the best which are the biggest, of a darke somewhat purplish colour, and which being cast into water, suddenly sinke to the bottome. The Indian Myrobalanes are the best which are the blackest, most weighty, and have no stone with∣in, and which when they are broken seem all as one thing: Those Emblicks excell which are in the greatest, thickest, firmest and most weighty peices, and which have lesse of the stone than of the pul∣pye part: The Bellericks are to be chosen which are great, and by reason of their thick fleshy part, weighty, and which have a thick barke. The Qualities. All Myrobalanes are cold in the first, and dry in the second degree, except the Emblicks; which Mesues saith are cold & dry in the first degree on∣ly, but understand it in the height: Therefore as to the second qualities, all of them together with
their purging bind, therefore are they used in all fluxes, and help the hemorrhoids; they are addi∣cted to the stomack, heart and liver; but in perti∣cular the citrine purge choler, the Indians melan∣choly, and make men merry: the Chebuls and Emblicks purge phlegme, the Bellericks effect all that the others can. The Correction. The astriction of them is corrected by adding those things which open and provoke Urine, as a∣ny sweet seeds, or else if while they be broken and powdred, they be anointed with oyle of sweet Al∣monds or butter. The Dose. In powder. ʒ ii. in infusion or decoction from ℥ s. to ʒ vi, &c. The manner of giving them. They are given either condited, or else in infu∣sion or decoction; The condited are given when you would strengthen, giving one of them every day after meat, diverse dayes together; But in in∣fusion or decoction when you would evacuate, they are boyled or infused in water, broath, whey or wine, to ʒ vi. by themselves, or to ℥ s. with o∣ther things, adding correcters; Then in the strain∣ed liquor other things are added, as is said in Ru∣barb.
SCAMMONY. The Kind. It is a thickned juyce of a Plant of the same name, which is gathered from the root being cut, which is full of a milky juyce, of which there are diverse differences according to their native places, as Dioscorides, Pliny and Mesues write, yet that of Antioch is the best. The Election. The marks of the best Scammony are taken from the substance, weight, colour, smell and tast; in substance it is smooth, porous, like a sponge, friable and tender, easy to be powdred, and soon melting; In weight it should be very light, as Pliny will have it; In colour it should be glisten∣ing and shining, like gum transparent, like glew when it is broken, yellow, iubbed on the tongue, or melted in water, of a milky colour; In smell not loathsome, though not pleasant; In tast insi∣pid, nor much heating the tongue, which if it do, it is a signe of the mixture of Spurge with it. The Qualities.
Scammony is of temperature hot and dry, and that in the third degree, as Msues saith; and therefore hurtfull for them of a bot and dry na∣ture; neverthelesse I must dissent from this opini∣on; for if it be true Scammony not adulterated with the juyce of Spurge, it is rather to be account∣ed hot and dry moderately; for it is neither sharp in tast, nor bitter, as Mesues hath mistaken, but ra∣ther insipid; it purgeth from the remote parts thin choler, and yellow watrish humors; for it hath a strong drawing faculty, and therefore if it be taken in too great a quantity, the thin sharp hu∣mors being too much drawne into the intrals, do cause most violent symptomes; for by their acri∣mony they corrode the guts, from whence comes gripings, the dysentery, and tenesmus; they also open the orifices of the veines immoderately, from whence come fluxes of the belly, sometimes with blood; besides they send forth certain sharp fumes, whereby the heart, liver, and rest of the intrals are disturbed, and the stomack is so tired and hurt with it, that it breeds nauseousnesse to them that take it, and lastly by their acrimony they inflame the spirits of the body, and so easily occasion fea∣vers; all which things both Mesues and others a∣scribe to the proper nature of Scammony, when they rather proceed from the corroding humours which by a proper quality it attracts to it: for pure and legitimate Scammony hath no such nature as they attribute to it. The Correction. Scammony is corrected (because it was thought to occasion those symptomes by its owne nature) with binders, coolers, lenifiers, and things that strengthen the heart, liver and stomack; of which there are divers ways of preparing Scammony, as you may see in
Mesues; But the most usuall, is that correction that is done with the juyce of Quinces, Barks of Citrone, Myrobalanes, and Mastich, of which according to art are made troschisks; as to lib. i. of choyce Scammony are taken of the Barks of Myrobalanes and Mastick ana ℥ s. of the juyce of Quinces l. s. and ℥ s. Make troschiscks: or else Scammony powdred is put into a Quince, made hollow, and wrapped in past, and so is roasted ei∣ther in an Oven or under the Embers; then is the Scammony taken out of the Quince being first cold and kept for use: But the true preparation of Scam∣mony is done with the juyce of Limons clarified, in which it is dissolved in B. M. and whilest it is yet hot, it is strained through a linnen, by which meanes the grosse and impure substance that doth nothing but hurt, is separated; Scammony thus prepared and corrected, is called Diagridium. The Dose. The Dose of prepared Scammony, i.e. of Dia∣gridium, is from gr. vi. to xii. and ℈ i. Mesues from gr. v. to xii. Dioscorides and Ruffus to ʒ i. Paulus, and Aelius to ℈ ii. But perhaps the Scammony of the Greeks was gentler then ours, not adulterated as now a days with the juyce of Spurge; therefore it is better to follow the dose appointed by Mesues then that of the Greeks, so that the lowest Dose be to gr. v. vi. the middle Dose to gr. xii. and the highest to gr. xv. or ℈ i. The manner of using it.
Diagridium is used in the forme of a potion, bole, electuary, pils, powder. Dioscorides gave it in forme of a potion, with fair water, or water and hony. But now a dayes it is neater used with oyl of sweet Almonds or syrup of Roses solutive, and some convenient distilled water; as for ex∣ample, ℞ of syrrup of roses solutive, ℥ i. Diagri∣dium, gr. vii. more or lesse with succory water. s. q. make a potion. The Bole is made of gr. x. or xii. of Diagridium with conserves of roses to ʒ ii. and the chymicall oyl of cloves three or four drops, a most pleasant purge; It is used in form of an Ele∣ctuary, in the Electuary of the juyce of roses, and transparent diacidonium purgative, the Dose of both which is ʒ iii. yet the Electuary of the juyce of roses is never given by it selfe, but dissolved in some convenient distilled water, in the forme of a potion. There is also made a pleasant electuary of the jelly of apples to twice the weight of the sugar, to which boyled up to a just consistence, there is added the infusion of Scammony in this proportion, that ℥ i. of the electuary may receive ʒ i. of the infusion, then boyling it up to the con∣sistence, and make an electuary like clear Marme∣lade; the dose is ʒ iii. And this infusion of Scam∣mony is made in aq. vitae, which afterwards is fil∣trated through a gray paper. 'Tis used in the form of Pils, in many masses of Pils of the shops; also it may be made into magisteriall Pils, of a certain proportion of diagridium, as gr. viij. ix. xii. with a fit juyce or syrrup. Lastly the powder is thus composed out of Diagridium, ℞ of creme of tar∣tar ℈ ij or ʒ i. of Diagridium gr. vii. or more ac∣cording to your indications; mix it, and make a powder to be taken in broath.
THE SECOND CLASSIS OF PURGERS, IN WHICH ARE CITED THE PHLEGMAGOGVES OR PURGERS OF PHLEGME. CARTHAMUS. The Kind. IT is the seed of wild or bastard Saffron, whose kernell is onely u∣sed to purge withall, and therefore in prescriptions it is commonly set downe the kernel part or middle of Carthamus bruised. The Election. That seed is best that is white, plain, thick and full, whose kernel is fat and unctuous, and husk thin.
The Qualities. Mesues saith it is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, Galen and Paulus say it heats in the third degree; if it be used outwardly) it purgeth phlegme, and watrish humours, it wonderfully discusseth windinesse, and therefore is profitable in the cholick and dropsy; it is addicted to the breast and lungs, but is nought for the stomack. The Correcters. It is corrected for its hurting the stomack, with stomachicall things, as Anniseed, Cinamon, Ga∣lingale, Mastich, and the like, but as to its slow o∣peration, by adding sharp things, as Cardamomes, Ginger, Sal gem. The Dose. Is from ℥ s. to ʒ vi. and ℥ i. in infusion. The manner of using.
It is seldome given, unlesse in composition, e∣specially the Diacarthamum of the shops, either in a liquid or solid consistence; But by Mesues, both by his owne and others judgment. 1 In the form of Pils, making a mass of ʒ x. of the kernelly part of Carthamus, and ʒ i. of Cardamomes, of which make Pils like pease, and give ʒ v for one dose. 2 In the form of a honyed syrrup, viz. of an oxymel; The kernelly part of Carthamus being tied up in a thin cloth, and soaked in oxymel of squils, whilst it is a boyling, by which meanes it is made solu∣tive. 3 In the form of a bole. ℞ of the Medulla or kernelly part of Carthamus ʒ xii. pinidies, ʒ iv. Cardamomes and Ginger, ana ʒ i. with honey make pils like wall-nuts, of which let him take one or two at a time. 4 In form of a potion, the same Medulla being boyled in cock broath to ℥ s. or thereabouts, and afterwards the broath drank downe. A GARICK. The Kind and Election. It is a Fungus or excrescence growing to the trunck of the Larch tree, taking its name from Agaria, a country of Sarmatia, in which the best did grow; yet now the best is had from the Dolphiny in France, and from the mountaines about Trent, as also in Rhetia, Vindelitia and Noricum, Countyes of Germany. The marks of the best Agarick are included in the distick following. Agarick's best that's soon broke, shining, white If much goes to a pound, for then 'tis light. That which is black, weighty or wormeaten, is discommended, and that part of it that growes next the Tree. The Qualities. It is hot in the first, dry in the second degree: it cuts, attenuates, cleanseth, openeth, and discusseth; it purgeth phlegme, especially that which is gross and tough, and both the sorts of choler, from the brain, nerves, muscles, organes of the senses, back∣bone, brest, lungs, stomack, liver, spleen, reines, womb, joynts, it also resisteth poysons; And therefore perhaps it is called by
Democritus the me∣dicine for the family, because it hath some influ∣ence on all the parts of the body, and takes away their obstructions, and any disease thence arising; and is safe for all ages; but let women with child avoid it, for it provokes the courses, and is apt to cause abortion. The Correction. Two faults are to be corrected in Agarick; 1 The slowth in working; 2 The lightnesse or levi∣ty of it, whereby it floates in the stomack, and provokes vomiting and sticking to the intrals, it moves defluxions, and as it were pricking and fretting them, breeds gripings; which fauls of it are diversely corrected by Mesues; but the best way is to make it into troschiscks, with s. q. of white wine or Malmsey, wherein Ginger hath been steeped. The Dose and manner of taking it. The powder both of that in troschiscks, and the other is given from ℈ ii to ʒ i and ʒ ii; but in decoction or infusion, from ʒ ii to ℥ s. ʒ v; It is given both in the form of a potion, pils and bole; In the form of a potion, if the powder of Agarick, especially the troschiscated be dissolved in a con∣venient liquor, and so given; or else it may be boyled or infused in it, and then the strained li∣quor given to drink, in the form of Pils both of∣ficinall and also magisteriall, by making the Pils of a certain Dose of the Agarick, (adding if you see fit such things as may convey it to the part,) with hony or some fit syrrup; Lastly in the form of a bole, by taking a convenient quantity of Agarick, and making it into a bole, with diaphaenicon or conserves of Roses.
TURBITH. The Kind. Turbith is a root of some of those Plants that yeild a milky juyce; but what it is, is a doubtfull controversy, and therefore so many men, so many opinions. Actuarius sometimes takes it to be the root of the spurge Pityusa, sometimes of the Alipus of Dioscorides; Serapio and Avicen think it the root of Tripolium of Dioscorides: Brasavolus thinks it the root of the spurge Mysinitis; Others, among whom Fuchsius think it the root of Thapsia, others of scam∣mony, whereupon Clusius upon Garzias, tels us that in many parts of Spaine they use the roots of Thap∣sia for Turbith, and in other places of Europe the roots of Scammony. The Election. That is most praise-worthy, that is weighty, somewhat white or ashcoloured, new, easie to be broken, gummy within side; for that which is a∣dulterated, is only gummy at the ends. The Qualities. It is hot in the third degree, and hot in the se∣cond to the height; it purgeth grosse and clammy flegme, and that which is putrid, from the brest, re∣mote parts and joynts; Therefore it is good for them that have the gout, phlegmatick Feavers; it preserves from the scab, Leprosie and other phleg∣matick vices of the skin, as
Mesues writes. It hurts the stomack, bringing nauscousnesse and provok∣ing vomit, and is not fit to be given to children, old folkes, or women with child. The Correction. It is corrected for its slownesse in operation with sharp things, as Ginger; for its offending the stomack with stomachicall things, as Mastich, pep∣per, and spices; and for its extenuating the body with mitigators, as oyle of sweet Almons, whey, syrrup of violets, raisins of the sun, sugar. The Dose. The Dose of it in powder is from ℈ ii. to ʒ i. and ℈ iv. Mesues gives from ʒ i to ʒ ii. but in de∣coction you may give twice so much. The manner of using it. It is given first in the form of Pils, as ʒ i of this in powder, adding a third part of correctors, may be made into pils with a fit syrrup, as of violets, &c. Secondly in the form of a powder. ℞ of Tur∣bith ʒ i. of correctors ℈ i. sugar, twice the weight of the powder, mix it and make a powder to be taken in broath. Thirdly in the form of Tablets taking the powder of it, and making it into Tab∣lets with sugar melted according to art. Fourthly in the form of a bole, mixing the powder with conserves of roses, N B. It is very profitable to give the powder with Rubarb in the wormes. Fifthly in the form of a decoction or potion, as ℞ of Tur∣bith ʒ ii or ʒ iii with its correctors boyl it in a s. q. of some fit liquor, and give the strained liquor; or else dissolve in it besides other things, syrrup of violets, &c.
HERMODACTILS. The Kind. It is the root or bulbus of the bunchy rooted Ireos of Lobell, which being dryed is brought to us, and is accounted the true Hermodactil of Paulus. Instead of which as before, so now is used in many places to the great damage of the sick, the common Hermodactil, which is the root of mea∣dow saffron, which is either poyson as that which growes in Colchis, and therefore not to be taken inwardly; or else doth not purge, as that of our Country; or else doth purge but not like the Her∣modactil of Paulus, as the Syrian meadow saffron. The Election. The notes of good Hermodactils are contained in this distick, Hermodactils hard and white, If solid too, be sure they'r right. This solidnesse is opposite to porousness, loose∣nesse or flagginess, and friability. And the roots of meddow saffron are little correspondent with the aforesaid markes; for this when it is dryed, is ri∣veled, and looks black both within and without, or somewhat of a reddish browne. The Qualities. It is hot and dry in the beginning of the second
degree; yet as Mesues hath it, joyned with an ex∣crementitious humidity, both flatulent and nau∣seous wherewith it offends the stomack; It effe∣ctually draws tough phlegme, and clammy hu∣mors from the joynts, and therefore according to Paulus it is dedicated to the gowty affections. The Correction. It is corrected with attenuaters, as Cummin-seed, Ginger, Spikenard, Cinamon, and such like stomachicall and arthriticall things that may con∣veigh its faculty to the joynts. The Dose and manner of using it. Mesues appoints it from ʒ i. to ʒ ii. it is used. 1 In the form of a powder, ℞ ʒ i of Hermodactils with the powder of Ginger and Pepper, make, &c. 2 Of a decoction, ℞ of Hermodactils ʒ ii. some of the correctors ana ℈ i. bruise them grosly, and boyle them in a convenient liquor. 3 Of Pils, as in the greater Pils of Hermodactils of Mesues, whose de∣scription may be had in the Pharmacopeia Augusta∣na. 4 Of troschiscks, according to Mesues, taking Hermodactils with their correctors, and making them into troschiscks with the juyce of radish or squils. MECHOACAN. The Kind. It is the root of a forrain sort of Briony brought from Mechoaca an Island in new Spaine, and it is
twofold; the white or common Mechoacan, and the black Mechoacan, which the Massilians from the place where it growes, call Jalap and Gelap. The Election or Markes of either. The common Mechoacan is to be chosen whi∣tish and new; that is to be rejected which is either very white or black, or wormeaten or mouldy. It is adulterated with the roots of Briony cut in slices and dryed after the manner of Mechoacan. The de∣ceipt may be perceived by the tendernesse of Me∣choacan in respect of the Briony which is of a gross substance. Black Mechoacan or Jalap is like the former, only the outward bark is somewhat black; inwardly it looks reddish, which is cut in round slices, in quantity and figure like tablemen; it is of a gummy and not unpleasant tast, and by reason of its great gumminesse if it be held to the fire it takes flame quickly. The Qualities. It is hot in the first, and dry in the second de∣gree, and almost quite without tast, nor doth it partake of any acrimony, otherwise then our wild Briony, which is very sharp and hot; it purgeth phlegme and watrish humours, and in purging it strengtheneth the parts; it is very good in an old cough, the cholick, and in the French Pox, use∣full for any age; Besides it is given to purge phleg∣matick slime from the stomack and intrals of children, and both to prevent, and kill and drive forth wormes. But Jalap surpasses the common
Mechoacan in fa∣culties; for by reason of its gumminesse it draweth downe watrish humors much more powerfully; This worketh very violently in respect of the for∣mer; it purgeth phlegme and watrish humours, and that from the outermost parts, as from the skin in scabbinesse, and inclinations to the Leprosy; and from the whole body, as in the Dropsy; and from the joynts, as in the Gout and nocturnall pains of the French Pox; It is only to be given to strong bodies, and such as are repleat with humours for it to work on; it is not safe for children, old folks, or women with child, or for young folks of a dry constitution, or that have any malignity lurking about them; for it inflames adust choler, stirs up malignant vapours and humours if any be extant, and much weakens the strength of the body where it hath not plenty of humours to prey on; and therefore in such bodies it is apt to make a feaver. The Dose and Correction. Mechoacan is corrected with Cinamon, Anniseed and Mastich, to a third part; the Dose is from ʒ
s. to ʒ i. and to ʒ ii. only in them that are hydro∣picall, else it is too much. Jalap is corrected with Nutmeg, Lemmon pils, and liquorish infused in the liquor wherein it is given; for so its incensive quality for inflaming the humours is abated by the liquorish, its malignity by the Lemmon Bils, and its nauseous quality by the Nutmeg, which is not of so thin parts as other spices, yet strengthens the stomack as much; But the London Physitians do usually prescribe with it either London Treacle or Mithridate for the aforesaid reasons; The dose of it is from ℈ i. to ʒ s. and ℈ ii. to ʒ i. saith the Author, but it must be only in hydropicall strong bodies. The manner of taking them. They are both taken for the most part only in substance, with some fit liquor, especially with wine, yet they may also be taken with broath; they are never given in decoction; for it is found by experience that their purging quality doth va∣nish, or at least abate in boyling; And when they are prescribed in infusion, the liquor is not to be given alone, but the powder also. COLOQUINTIS. The Kind. It is the fruit of the wild Goard, whose pulp being white and light, is chiefely in use, being first cleansed from the seeds. The Qualities.
'Tis hot and dry in the third degree; it pur∣geth phlegme and other grosse and clammy hu∣mours from the deepest and most remote parts of the body, as Brain, Nerves, Muscles, Joynts, Lungs, Breast and Womb especially, for which cause it is used for the inveterate pains of the head and he∣micranies, Apoplexy, falling-Sicknesse, Megrim, or swimming of the head, Asthma, Coughs, diffi∣culty of breathing, cold diseases of the joynts, and wind Colick, to scour glassy plilegme from the in∣trals; it hurts the stomack and guts much by sticking to the filmes of them, and is hurtfull for children, old folks, and women with child. The Correction. It is corrected either in the form of troschiscks, which are called Troschiscks of Alhandale, and are nothing else but Coloquintis prepared, which goes into all compositions that have Coloquintis in them; Or else by adding Cordials, hepatical, stomachical, and lenifying things, as Gum Tra∣gant, oyle of sweet Almonds. The Dose. Is from gr. vi to xv. and ℈ i. Dioscorides gives it to ℈ ii. The manner of using it. It is used most profitably in Pils, though some∣times also in Electuaries, as hiera diacolocinthidos; pils of it may be thus formed, ℞ of the pulp of Coloquintis, gr. x. Cinamon and Ginger ana gr. vi. musk gr. i. with a fit syrrup make pils. It may also be made in the forme of an extract in this manner; Pour to the powder of it spirit of wine, to the emi∣nency of six fingers breadth; let them steep twenty days or more, then gently pour off the cleare, last∣ly reduce it to the thicknesse of hony, and to ℥ i of this extract, add ʒ i of oyl of Cinamon; the dose is ℈ s. and ℈ i. in syrrup of roses.
OPOPANAX. The Kind. It is the juyce of Hercules, all-heal, according to Dioscorides, Galen, and almost all, except Mesues, who saith it is made of a fennel fashiond, all-heal, called Asclepium, and some few others that will have it made of the all-heal, called Chironium. The Election. That is approved that is very bitter, inwardly white or yellowish, fat, tender, friable, soon dis∣solving, and of a strong smell. The Qualities. It is hot and dry in the third, as Mesues writes, but Galen saith, dry in the second; It draws forth grosse and clammy phlegme from the most re∣mote parts and joynts, although neither Galen nor Dioscorides attribute any purging quality to it. The Correction. It hurts the stomack, and is of slow operation, and for that reason is corrected with a third part of Mastich, Spikenard, Ginger, Cinamon and Ele∣campane. The Dose. Is from ʒ s. to ʒ i. as Mesues sayes, from ʒ i to ʒ ii. Brassavolus to ʒ iii. It is used in Pils, as Pils of Opopanax of Mesues, or ℞ of Opopanax ʒ i quick∣en
it with gr. iv. of Diagridium &c. and with a syr∣rup make Pils. SAGAPENE. The Kind. It is the juyce of a certain Plant which it selfe is called Sagapene, Galen. 8. simpl. and is brought out of Media. The Election. That is most commendable that is transparent, without of a yellowish colour, within whitish, sharp in tast, strong in smell, of a grosse substance, yet easy to be dissolved in wine. The Qualities. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the se∣cond; it purgeth grosse phlegme, and other tough humours, according to Mesues, for the Greeks pass by the purgative quality in silence. The Correcters Are as in Opopanax. The Dose. From ʒ s. to ʒ i. it is used in Pils. ℞ of Saga∣pene. ʒ i. Mastick, Cinamon, Ginger, ana gr. iii. make pils with some convenient syrrup.
EUPHORBIUM, The Kind. It is the juyce of a Libian Tree, taking its name from Euphorbus Physitian to Juba the King of Mauritania. The Election. Choose that which is transparent, of a pale red∣gathered into little corns, which being but gent∣ly touched with the tongue, leavs the mouth burn∣ing for a long time after. The Qualities. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree; It pur∣geth grosse tough phlegme, and watrish humours; and therefore is a most powerfull medicine in af∣fections arising from it; as the Gout, Colick and Dropsy; but it is a vehement medicine, and cau∣seth a troublednesse of spirit. The Correctors.
Therefore it is to be corrected with medica∣ments that mitigate its fretting quality, as oyle of sweet Almonds, juyce of Citrons; and besides these, with cordiall and stomachicall things, as Mastick, Saffron; The best way of preparing it is with distilled Vinegar, juyce of Lemons clarified, or the distilled liquor of vitrioll, called the phleg∣ma impregnated with its own spirit; in some of which Euphorbium is to be dissolved in. B.M. and whilest it is yet hot, it is to be strained through a linnen cloath. The Dose. Is from gr. iii. to viii. and xii. The manner of using it. It is used either in Pils, as ℞ of Euphorbium gr. vi. mitigaters, as of the seeds of Lettice, Pur∣slane, Endive, flowers of Roses, ana gr. iij with juyce of Lemons make Pils; Or else it may be dissolved in the juyce, or water of Endive, like a potion; Or made into the form of a bole, with Cassia, as ℞ of Cassia ʒ iij. Euphorbium prepared gr. iij. with sugar make a bole.
THE THIRD CLASSIS OF PURGERS, WHEREIN ARE TREATED THE MELANAGOGVES OR PURGERS OF MELANCHOLY. SENA. The Kind. IT is a codded Plant, first brought to us out of the Easterne Countryes, very like to Collutea, which we call bastard Senna; we use chiefly the leaves, though Mesues sayes the cods are the more effectuall, which is to be under∣stood of the cods that are gathered whilst they be green and juycy, and suddainly dryed, but not of those that are fading and dryed on the Plant.
The Election. But seeing the cods are seldome brought to us, we are to take those leaves of Senna which are green, throughly dryed, not spotted or worm-eaten, but cleansed from their stalkes. The Qualities. The leaves are hot and dry in the first degree, they purge melancholy, burnt choler and phlegm from the brain, lungs, liver, spleen, stomack, and mesentery; and therefore heal diseases of the a∣foresaid parts, arising from such like humours, safely to be given to all ages, and to them which are with child a most profitable purge. The Correction. It is corrected for its windinesse, and the of∣fending of the stomack, that is imputed to it, with Ginger, Cinamon, Anniseed, Cloves. The Dose. In substance is from ʒ i to ʒ i s. ʒ ii. some will give ʒ iii. but in infusion or decoction, from ʒ iii. to ℥ s. ʒ vi. and in the stronger sort, to ℥ i. if there be no other purgers. The manner. It is given either in substance, or infusion, or decoction,; In substance it is given diversly. 1 In the form of Pils, as ℞ of the powder of Sena, ʒ i. Ginger, Cinamon, ana ℈
s. salt peter gr. v. make them into pils with some convenient syrup, which may either be taken all at once, or else some only as the usuall pils. 2 In form of a potion, dissolv∣ing the powder of Senna with the correctors in some fit liquor, especially whey. 3 In the form of Lozonges for children, as is said in Rubarb. The infusion. The infusion of Senna is also diversly used. 1 The leaves of Senna are infused (to a double proportion to that they may be given in sub∣stance) in s. q. of white wine, afterwards the liquor is strained forth, which may either be given of it selfe, or other things may over and above be dis∣solved in it, as is said in Rubarb. 2 In form of an extract, prepared according to art, with the water of hops, harts-tongue, borrage, fumitory, adding to it a proportion of Cloves, Ginger, Fennel∣seed, &c. 3 In form of a sennated spirit, as ℞ of the leaves of Senna cleansed, ℥ iii. creme of Tar∣tar ℥ ii. Cinamon ℥ i. Mace ℥ s. spices of Diaga∣langal ℥ i s. Ginger ℥ s. infuse them three dayes in spirit of wine, either common or of Malmsey, afterwards filtrate it, and keep for your use. The Dose is from ℥ s, to ʒ vi. in phlegmatick fat people only for its heat. The Decoction of Senna is made after the same manner as the decoction of Rubarb, only chang∣ing Rubarb for Senna. POLIPODY. The Kind. 'Tis a herb like Ferne, growing on mossy wals,
and the old bark of Trees, whose root (which is only in use) hath many knots and tufts of sprigs, like the fish Polipus, from whence the name; 'tis also called tree-Ferne. The Election. That is to be elected that growes on the Oake, and is new and knotty; for that which is old, binds. The Qualities. As to the Qualities, it purgeth burnt choler and phlegme, helps the collick, and is peculiarly ap∣propriated to the Spleen, and is most effectual in hypochondriacall affections. The Correction. But because it dryeth very much, it is to be cor∣rected with liquorish; and to quicken it in the working, add a third part of Anniseed, Fennel or Ginger, &c. The Dose. Is from ʒ ii to ʒ iii. and ℥ s. The manner. It is given either in decoction or infusion, made in some fit liquor, i. e. that is appropriated both to the part and affection, as whey for scabbinesse and burnt choler; in Barly water for Quartane Agues, adding fit correctors to a third part.
EPITHIMUM. The Kind. It is a herb that grows upon thin hyssop, savory, mother of Time, and other Plants like Ddder, from which it differs in figure, native place, and qualities; although some use Epithimum and Dodder promiscuously. But these medicines should rather be referred to the openers then pur∣gers; and it is better to use them with others, then them alone, and therefore they should have been referred to the alterers, for which place also I re∣serve them. Though this purgeth but gently, yet it doth move the belly, and might claime a place among the purgers, as Polipody, which also more openeth then purgeth; but the best use of Epi∣thimum is with others purgers of melancholy, for it doth specifically direct their faculties to the hu∣mor, opens obstructions, and makes that humour yeild and be obedient. 'Tis hot and dry in the end of the second de∣gree, and of thin parts; it is best corrected with liquorish, and raisins of the sun stoned, and is most used in infusions or decoctions. ʒ i or ʒ ii. of this at most will be enough to put into any other purging potion; it is chiefly used for them that have stiches in their sides, through obstructions, coming of grosse cold humors, and after Quartane agues.
Black HELLEBORE. The Kind. Black Hellebore is of two sorts; the false, and the true; The false is either the Garden false Hel∣lebore, which Fuchsius cals Eristwarken, or the wild, which is called Helleboraster; The true black Hellebore is by some thought to be that which Mathiolus cals the purple flowred; by o∣thers to be the Sanicula femina of Fuhsius; by others to be that which Mathiolus cals Psendohellebor, which hath flowres like them of Oxe eye. The Election. For use we must choose the true black hellebor, viz. that with the purple flower, or for want of it the false or adulterine Garden black hellebore. The roots only are in use, the small pith being cast away, which is to be steeped in wine of Quinces in a warme place, and after dryed and laid up for use. The Qualities. As to the Qualities, it is hot and dry in the third degree, it purgeth the dry sort of me lancho∣ly, and other burnt humors, that are hardly loos∣ned; therefore it is profitable for all melancholy diseases, as madnesse, melancholy, leprofie, quar∣tane agues, &c. Where note, that black hellebore rightly used is a hurtlesse medicine, and may safe∣ly be given to children; have a care of women with child, and other weak bodies.
The Correction. It is corrected with cordiall and stomachicall things, as Cinamon, Aniseed, Fennel seed, &c. The Dose. In substance is from gr. xv. to ʒ s. ℈ ii. Mesues gives to ʒ i. In infusion it is given from ʒ ii to ʒ ii s. Some give it to ℥ s. but then they ascend by degrees, from ʒ i first; so likewise in the decoction. The manner. It is given either in substance, infusion or deco∣ction; The substance is given 1 in form of pow∣der, taking black Hellebore to ℈ ii. Ginger, Ma∣stick, red Roses, Cinamon, Aniseed, ana gr. iv. mingle it and use it in broth; for children, take but ℈ i. 2 In the form of pils, making pils of the aforesaid powder with a convenient syrrup. 3 In the form of Lozonges, as is said in Senna and Ru∣barb. 4 In form of a Marmelade, as is said in Rubarb. The infusion. The infusion of Hellebore is made, 1 The common way, with some fit liquor, decoction, meade or barly water, &c. as hath been often said; 2 In form of an extract, where is to be noted, that for the Menstruum, (or liquor for extraction) some will take Aniseed water, adding the due corre∣ctors; some will take only rain water without correctors, because they have found that its pur∣ging quality is acuated and made stronger by the admixtion of them. The Dose of this extract is from ℈ i to ʒ s.
The Decoction is also made two wayes. 1 And commonly in a convenient liquor, as other pur∣gers. 2 In a Helleborated apple; an apple is stuck full with the sprigs of the root of black Hellebore and some cloves, then wrap it up in a paper wet with cold water, and so it is roasted under the ashes, then drawing forth the hellebore and cloves, the apple it selfe is to be eaten with suga. LAPIS ARMENUS. The Kind. This is not only brought out of Armenia, but is also found plentifully in the silver mines of Germany; of which is made the coou for Painters. The Election. That is best which is between sky colour and green, not sandy, yet friable. The Qualities. It is hot and dry in the second degree, it pur∣geth melancholy, and cureth the same affections that black Hellebore doth, The Correction. It is corrected, being finely powdred, by often washing in cordiall waters, as borage, roses, bug∣losse, &c. iterated so often, that the water, thence receives no more either colour or tast. The Dose. Of that which is washed, is from ʒ s. to ʒ i. and ʒ i s. of the unwashed to ʒ i. 'Tis taken all the same wayes that Lapis Lazuli is. LAPIS LAZULI. The Kind.
Lapis Lazuli, Lyaneus or Cerulcus, which we call azure, hath so great an affinity with the Armenian aforesaid, both in their originall and faculties, that one may easily be used for the other. The Election. That Lapis Lazuli is chiefly to be chosen, which is distinguished by its golden spots, or in the breakings and flaws of which appear little glit∣terings of gold, and therefore it was called by Me∣sues Lapis Stellatus or the starry stone. The Qualities. It is hot in the second, and dry in the third de∣gree, and hath the same virtues as the Armenian stone, but something weaker. It is Corrected as that also. The Dose Is from ʒ s. to ʒ i and ʒ i s. Mesues saith from ʒ ii to ʒ ii s. The manner of using it. 'Tis Ʋsed 1 In the form of Pils, as ℞ ℈ ii or ʒ i of Lopis Lazuli prepared, and with Cinamon, Ginger, Camphere ana gr. vi. with some conveni∣ent juyce or syrrup make Ps. 2 In form of a pow∣der, by taking the powder of this finely ground, and with some certain spices, give it either in broath or other liquor. 3 In form of a bole mix∣ing the aforesaid powder with conserves of Bo∣rage. 4 In the form of Cakes and Lozonges, but then the stone is to be ground to an alcool, least the powder being coarse grate in the teeth. 5 In form of a potion, taking the powder in sweet wine. 6 In any convenient break-fast meat. Note it is alwayes to be reduced to a very fine powder.
THE FOVRTH CLASSIS OF PURGERS, IN WHICH ARE HANDLED THE HYDRAGOGVES OR PURGERS of WATRISH HUMOURS. ELDER and DANEWORT. The Kind. DAnewort and Elder are alike in the leafe, flower, and fruit of the plant, and differ according to Dioscorides only in the bignesse of it; for Dane∣wort is a smaler elder or chameacle, i.e. field elder, commonly dwarse elder, but El∣der it selfe is a Tree; of either of these, the middle
bark, and seed, and the juyce of the roots and leaves are in use to purge watrish humours. The Dose. Of the seeds of their berries is ʒ i. of the barke, ʒ ii. of the juyce, ℥ s. or ʒ vi. they are corrected with Cinamon. The Ʋse. The seed is used in powder, given in strong wine or wormwood wine, or in the decoction of Chamepitis or field Cipres in gouty affections; the bark is steeped or boyled in wine to ʒ iii, but its purging quality decayes in the boyling; accord∣ing to Dioscorides, the juyce is taken to ℥ i. in broth altered with wormwood, as also the juyce thick∣ned with hony, fometimes Cinamon water is ad∣ded; but for the most part it is not given by Pra∣cticians alone, but mixed with other things. SOLDANELLA. This is the Sea Colewort, Dioscorid. whose leavs and juyce are in use. The Qualities. 'Tis hot and dry in the second degree, some say the third; it is an admirable remedy to purge watrish humours, yet so that there be always some choler mixed with it. But because it is offensive to the stomack, it is to be corrected with Cinamon, Ginger, &c. The Dose is from ʒ i to ʒ i s. ʒ ii. of the juyce ℥ .
The leavs are Ʋsed. 1 In a pickle of vinegar and salt, six mouthfuls or bits of which do won∣derfully purge waters in the Dropsie; sometimes also it is boyled in broath, like garden Cabbage. 2 In powder, adding if you think fit Rubarb and Cubebs, which is given either in broath, or some other breakfast, or else is made into Lozenges for hydropicall children; 3 In decoction, as other things, adding fit correctors; 4 In Pils but then a lesse quantity of this is to be taken, and other quickeners added, least through the lightnesse of the powder, the Pils be too many in number. But the juyce is given with Rubarb, in form of an infusion, which purgeth watrish humours pro∣fiably. The Juyce of IREOS. This juyce is pressed out of the root of the Ireos or Flowrdeluce of our climate, but most usually out of that which beares the blew or purple flowr, and it is hot and dry in the third degree, and pur∣geth yellowish waters powerfully, but is not safe for children, old folks or women with child; for in these it moves the courses, for the others it is too strong. 'Tis corrected wth Cinamon. The Dose is from ℥ s. to ʒ vi. and ℥ i. 'Tis used to be taken, first in a little wine with some Cinamon, or else in broath, in which hath been boyled raisins, Cinamon and Spikenard. 2 In form of a syrrup; if the juyce clarified be boy∣led up with sugar, the Dose of it is ℥ ii.
ELATERIUM. It is the juyce of the wild Cowcumber thicken∣ed, and made into troschiscks. The Election. The oldest is the best, which being held neer the candles, puts out the light, and before it put it ou, makes it sparkle upwards and downwards. The Qualities. 'Tis hot and dry in the third degree, it pur∣geth waters or any thing else, and as other gent∣ler things purge water out of the veines, this draws it forth from the cavity of the belly beyond the veines. The Correction. 'Tis corrected, because it is fretting, and ana∣stomaticall, and hurts the principall parts, with milk, gum tragant, and bdellium, and fit strength∣eners, as Cinamon, species diarhodon abbutis, and other cordials. The Dose Is gr. vi. ℈ ss. to gr. xv at most, divers will not easily give above gr. v. 'Tis ued first in pi's, as ℞ of some easy gentle pils, such as pils de tribus, with Rubarb, Aloephan∣ginae, of hiera, &c. ʒ ss. or ℈ ii. of Elater um gr. v. or x. make pils, for thus the unbridled violence of the Elaterium is restrained. 2 In form of an ex∣tract, extracting its essence according to art with spirit of wine that hath had saunders steeped in it, or diam argariton frigidum, and to every ounce of
this essence thus extracted, adde of the chymicall oyles of Cinamon and Nutmeg, and ℈ i. The Dose Is ℈ ss. with some convenient liquor, or else it may be made up in the form of Pils. ESULA or SPURCE. The shops comprehend all the sorts of the tithy∣mals under the name of Esula, because it is mani∣fest that all of them purge watrish humours; But as there are divers Authors, some take one thing, some another, some use the spurge called Ciparis∣sia, others the sweet Spurge of Tragus, others that called Platyphyllon or broad leafed Spurge, others leafed Spurge, called Peplus, others the greater Spurge or Pityusa of Dioscorid. which is now out of use. The Qualities. It is hot and dry in the third degree; it purgeth phlegme and choler, but most especially watrish humours, and that from the remote parts. 'Tis corrected with Cinamon, Nutmeg, Tra∣gant, Muscilage of Fleawort, but it is the best way to steep it four and twenty hours in vinegar, juyce of Purslane, or juyce of Lemons. The Dose. Of the bark of the root is from gr. vi. to ℈ ss. gr. xv. of the juyce or milk of it from gr. iii. to vi. or vii.
'Tis used all those wayes that any purge hither∣to mentioned is or can be used, but chiefly there is prepared of it an extract according to art, whose dose is to gr. xv. And thus far of Purgers properly so called, now fol∣low the Vomitories. VOMITORIES. Those Medicaments are so called, which do e∣vacuate, derive or revell all hurtfull things from the stomack, and surfettings of meat, and excre∣mentitious humors of other parts, and expell them by force and violence at the mouth; And this they do either by a manifest quality, as relaxing the superiour mouth of the stomach, whereby the retentive faculty being weakned, the expulsive faculty of the stomack being irritated either by the abundance or acrimony of the humours, ex∣pels whatsoever is contained within its verge up∣wards, the nether parts contracting themselves to forward that motion; and these we use when there is nauseousnesse and desire of vomiting, together with a bitternesse of the mouth, and a pain or op∣pression about the short ribs; such are sallet oyle, faire water warmed, butter, and all fat and oyly things; Or else they do it by an occult quality, by which they rather purge upwards, then down∣wards; the Matter of all these to be reduced to a practicall use, are usually divided into gentle, moderate and violent vomitories.
The Gentle. Simples. Faire water or Barly water warmed, drank plentifully to a quart or more; broath of flesh that is fatty, drunk in a good quantity; oyl Olive warmed, given to ℥ iv. or vi. butter melted and hot. Compounds. Meade largely taken, water and oyle, called Hydraeleon, to ℥ viii. or ℥ x. simple Oxymell with warm water, syrrup of Vinegar with warm water; new figs eaten, drinking after them a draught of warm water. The Moderate. Rootes of Orach, Asarum from ʒ i. to ℈ iv. in infusion from ʒ i ss. to ʒ iii. and ℥ ss. of Betony made into a potion with Meade, as Dioscorid. the roots of Garden Cowcumbers, Maudlins, Avicen. Gesner. lib. 2. epist. 11 fol. 63. of Melons, bulbes of Narcissus or Daffodils roots of Pompions pow∣dred from ℈ ii to ʒ i. in infusion from ʒ i to ʒ iii. and radish roots. Barkes. The middle bark of Wal-nut trees, to ʒ i. in infusion to ʒ iii. and ℥ ss. but chiefly the catlings of the Tree, called Juli, dryed in an oven. Seeds of Dill, Orach, garden Cowcumbers, Rocket, Radish from ʒ iii. to ℥ ss. of Nettles from ʒ ss. to ʒ i. in infusion from ʒ i. to ℥ ss. Flowers of Dill, of Walnuts, viz. Catlings, as is aforesaid, in the Barks, given to ʒ i. in wine to them that have the cholick or stone. Juyce of Radish to ounce two. The shavings of ones own nailes drank in wine. E'ectuaryes, Diasarum, Fernel. lib. 7. Meth. whose dose is ʒ iii. in Barly water, honied water or whey.
The Violent. Roots of Spurge, Sowbread, Danewort, hedge hysop to ℈ i. but in infusion from ʒ i. to ʒ i ss. or ʒ ii. white Hellebore infused in broath chiesly to ʒ ss. ʒ i. or ʒ i ss. at most, adding cordiall things to ℈ i. but it is to be given very warily, the roots of Cresses. Barkes of the roots of Danewort and Elder. Seedes of Spurge, Cataputia, ten or twelve clean∣sed from their husks, bruised and given in a reare egge; these are profitably given to them that have drank poysons or love potions; the seeds of broom from ʒ ii to ℥ ss. of Cresses of Palma Christi. Flowres, of Danewort, Broome. Fruites Nux Vomica. Juyces of sowbread, vinegar distilled with the crumbs of rye bread, to ℥ iii. it is a most strong medicine in agues. Chymicall things. Vitrum antimonii of any sort infused to ℈ i. rather gr. vi. or vii, &c. in a fat li∣quor. Mercurius vitae prepared, to gr. v. at most with ℈ i. of some fit pils. Antimony prepared, which if it be rightly used, is a famous and safe vo∣mitory. Concerning whose preparation and man∣ner of using it, because there are divers opinions of the chymicks extant, I shall give my opinion for that which they call Crocus Metallorum, which is the best of all. ℈ i. of which infused in Malmsey fourteen dayes in a warm place, stirring the wine every day, afterwards keep it for your use; The Dose of this wine is from ʒ i. to ʒ i ss. taken out of a spoon. It is a famous remedy both in Feavers and other diseases that have been deeply rooted in the
body. You may safely give of that infusion ℥ ss. or ʒ vi. nay, in a strong body you may give the whole ounce prescribed, so the liquor be cleared from the powder. Compounds. are stibiated tablets, eaten to ʒ i. or dissolved in a fit liquor, as baume water, &c. also this following infusion. ℞ the roots of Briony and Sowbread ana ℥ iii. of white Hellebore ℥ vi. diligently cleansed, powdred and dryed in the aire, pour to them aq. vitae to the eminency of two fingers breadth above the powder; let them infuse some few dayes in B.M. then distill them, and let that which remaines in the bottome be again dry∣ed and powdred, pouring to it again the former water; do this three times, dip the tip of a feather in this liquor, and then slice it about in a glass of wine, and give it to drink, it provokes vomit sud∣dainely. DIURETICKS. Those are called Diureticks which evacuate the watrish humours of the body by Urines, and they are two fold, some properly so called, others im∣properly.
Those which are properly Diureticks are for the most part hot and dry in the third degree, of thin parts, and which easily penetrate to the veines, and there melt and dissolve the blood, and seperate the watrish part from the thicker, much like the turning of milk, when it curdleth; from whence that which is grosser, returneth to it selfe with the rest of the blood, but that which is serous, is drawn by the proper faculty of the reines. Such are Rootes of Smallage, Asarum, Calamus aroma∣ticus, all the thistles of Ciperus or English Galan∣gal, of Dancus, of town cress, sennel, cammock, par∣sly, radish, madder, kneeholm, saxifrage, valerian. Leaves of Wormwood, Smallage, Betony, Moun∣tain Calamint, Dittany of Creet, Bayes, Cresses, Parsly, Penny royall, Savory, mother of Time. Flowres of Chamomill and broome. Barkes. the middle bark of broom, bayes, radishes. Seedes of Anise, Smallage, Cardamomes, Cher∣vill, red Cicers, or Italian pease, Cubebs, Daucus, Fennel, Juniper berryes, of Lovage, Groomwell, Parsly, Paliurus, of some called Christs thorne, sil∣ver mountain seed, and nettle seed. Fruites. bitter almonds, figs. Spices. Cassia Lignea, Cinamon. Rozins. Turpentine both, of Firre, and Larch, that is both Venice Turpentine, and common. Liquors, White Wine. Animals. Cantharides, to gr. ii. or iii. but with these conditions, that they be given. 1 after all other things have been tryed. 2 they are to be given whole, ex 11 simplic. 3 never to be given alone, but with some fat broath, altered with mal∣lowes, Marsh-mallowes. Locusts or Grashoppers, given to ℈ ii. Goatesblood. Officinall waters. as of fennel, smallage, and the herbs aforesaid. Syrrups. of the five roots, of the two roots, of radishes compound. Species. as Lithontribon of Nicolaus.
Conserves. of the flowres of broome, bettony, wormwood. Those are called improperly Diureticks, not which melt the blood, but those which by a cer∣tain tenuity of parts, drive the wheyish part of it to the wayes of the Urine, and so provoke it, and have either a remisse temperate heat, or else incline to cooling, and these we use in hot affections, where we may feare least the hot Diureticks by too much drying the blood, should rather stay the U∣rine; or else are such as only lenify the passages of the Urine, as Marsh mallows, mallowes, liquerish, and such like lenifiers, which are very improper∣ly called Diureticks. Of the former sort are the Roots of Sparagus, Sorrell, Eringo, strawberries, grasse, narrow docks. Leaves. of Sorrell, tops of Sparagus, Maiden∣haire, Rupturewort, Pellitory of the wall. Seedes. The four greater cold seedes, seedes of sorrell, Alkekengie or winter cherries, barly. Fruites. Strawberries, Cherry kernels, Medler stones, Lemons, Pompions, Cowcumbers, Goards. Juyces. Of Lemons, Pellitory, Gums. Camphere. This may better be referred to those, properly called Diureticks before. Officinall things. as Waters. Of Sorrell, grass, barly, pellitory. Syrups. Of the juyce of Sorrell, Maiden haire, Lemons. Troschiscks. Of Camphere. of Alkekengie, of Saunders. Chymicall things. Sal prunellae, from ʒ ss. to ʒ i. with water, adding some pleasant syrrup, as of violets.
Out of those Diureticks, divers formes of reme∣dies, both inward and outward may be composed. SUDORIFICKS. They are so called which evacuate the whole body by sweating, of the Greeks they are called Hydroticks, the nature of these is very agreeable with the Diureticks; for heat being thin and sub∣tle, insinuates it selfe far into the body and hu∣mours, which it attenuates and dissolves into e∣vaporations, but they also open the pores of the body, from whence the vapours of their owne ac∣cord breath out, and are condensed into a sweat; The same matter doth after move both sweat and Urine; Urine if the raines be hot, and the skin thick, sweat if the raines be cold, and the skin thin, such are these. Rootes. Of Smallage, Angelica, Burdock, Chi∣na, Fennel, Hops, Parsley, Burnet, Cinquefoyle, Salsa parilla, Tormentill or Setwell, Zedoary. Woodes. Box, Guaicum, Ginger, Sasafras. Leaves. Carduus benedictus, Maiden haire, Ger∣mander, Celandine the greater, Chervill, Fumi∣tary, Burnet, Scabiosse, Damesviolet. Flowres. Of Camomell. Seedes. Barly, Millet, Lentiles. Juyces. Rob. of Elder berryes, and Danewort. Earths. Terra sigillata, especially in the plague and infectious diseases. Parts of animals. Harts horn, Bezar stone.
Chymicall things. Salt of Wormwood, Ash, Sca∣biosse, to gr. x. xii. rather to ℈ i. with water of Carduus benedictus, and Scabiosse, Antimonium diaphoreticum. to gr. iv. or vi. with a fit conserve. Compounds. Out of those divers things may be composed, but potions especially; those made of decoctions are preferred before all, or else of infu∣sions, or of sudorificall things dissolved in a fit li∣quor; and although they should be taken in a bole or other forme, yet it is best to drink downe a potion after it; hither is referred the syrrup called of St. Ambrose, which consists of millet boy∣led in two parts of water, and one of wine. Officinall things are the waters of Carduus be∣nedictus, Chervill, Fumitory, Elder flowres, also Treacle, Mithridate, and others, as electuary de ovo and such like.
THE FIRST BOOK. THE FIRST PART. THE THIRD SECTION. Of Medicaments respecting the cause that offends in motion. The Type of the Section. Medicaments respecting the morbificall cause offend∣ing in moti∣on, are in re∣gard of the matter that is flowing. Thickeners. of the part receiving, Repellers. to which you may add Emplasticks. of the wayes by which it flows. Intercepters. of the wayes by which it flows. Binders. Thickeners, by the Latines Incrassantia, by the Greekes .
THey are so called which render thin and fluxible humours thicker, and so less apt to flow; such as are those which in the active qualities are cooling or temperate, without any acrimony; of a grosse and earthy substance, by the commixture of which, the thinner sort of hu∣mours acquire a thicker substance, by much; as water, by the mixture of durt becomes clay as to the matter of Thickners, because they agree in quality with the Repellers, Binders, Emplasticks, gluing and scar breeding, or wound closing me∣dicines, and with the thickeners of choller before mentioned, therefore they are to be sought in those Tables. Repellers by the Latines Repellentia, by the Greekes . THey are those which prohibit the flux of a humour into any part, or else do represse and drive back that which is already fallen into the part, so it be not yet fixed in it; They are of a cold nature, and some of them are moreover dry and of an earthy substance, which are most pow∣erfull, and are properly such; Others are watrish and moist, and these are more gentle, for by how∣much the thicker substance and more condensed, any of the first qualities are inherent in, by so much the more effectually it operates; The prime use of them is to prohibit both the beginnings and increase of inflammations; The secondary use is, in any sort of flux of humours, proceeding either from Plethora or Cacochymia; yet note that those things which are the more powerfull, may easily be known by their harsh and austere tast. The Rootes. Of Slooe tree, of Cinquefoyle, of Snakeweed and Tormentill.
Barkes. Of the root of Mandrake, of an Oake neere the root, rinds of Pomegranates. Leaves. Of Mastick, Cipresse, Brambles, night∣shade, plantain, mirtles, vine-twists, sumach, oake-leaves, prinet, hen-bane, housleek, Venus navel∣wort, purslane, lettice, endive, cichory, knotgrass, mouse eare, ducks meat, horstaile, pear-tree leaves. Seedes. Of Fleawort, Plantaigne, Mirtles, Roses. Flowres. Of red Roses, Balaustines, or the flowr of wild Pomegranates; Cytines, or the flower of the manured Pomegranate. Fruites. Quinces, Services, Berberryes, Cor∣nelians, Cypresse nuts, Mirtles, Green gals, Med∣lers, wild peares. Juyces. Acacia, Hypocistis, Verjuyce, Vinegar, juyce of Pomegranates, Lemons, and unripe Mul∣berries. Excrements of animals. Whites of egges. Minerals. Alum, Vitriol, Cerusse, Lead, Salt, Tutty. Earthes. Bole armeniack, Terra sigillata. Gums. Sanguis draconis. Waters. Of the leaves before recited, which so∣ever of them are in use in the shops, rose water. Oyles. Of roses, mirtles, quinces, sower grapes, of mastick wood, of mastick. Oyntments. Unguent Comitissae, Galens. cool∣ing oyntment; oyntment of Populeon, of bole armenack. Playsters, against the rupture, of mastick.
Emplasticks, the same name is kept both in Greek, Latine and English. THey are so called, which being spread on the poares of the body, cleave very fast to them. i.e. they daube, fill, and stop the poares; As to the Qualities of them, they are hot in the actives, with∣out any acrimony or corroding; but in the passive qualities, some of them have altogether a grosse and earthy consistence, drying without biting, and some of them have over and above, an aery or wa∣trish humour, by which meanes they cleave too, and are clammy. The Ʋse of these is in stopping all manner of defluxions and bleedings, especially at the nose, and in drying moyst wounds and Ul∣cers that are fomented by the defluxion: Secon∣darily, also to ripen or suppurate, for they fill the pores of the skin, and keep in the heat, by which meanes, swellings are the easier ripened; Such are these following, which are prescribed, chiefly in the form of a Plaister, Cataplasme or Pultis. Rootes Of Marsh mallowes, Lillyes, Mallowes, Cumfrey. The Leaves Of Vervain-Mallowes, Mallowes, Purslane. Seedes Of Fenegreek, Lupines, Sesamum. Fruites. Raisins of the Sun, Figges, Pine nuts steeped in water. Gums. Arabick, Tragant, Sanguis, Draconis, Mastick, Frankinsense, and its barke. Parts and excrements of animals. Mummy, Wax,
whites of egges, new fats, marrow of fourfooted beasts, new butter, new cheese, Oesipus, lambshead, hogs feet, calves head and feet, Spodium made of Ivory. Earthes. Bole armenack, terra sigillata. Flwry parts of seeds, or meale, of wheat, starch, fine flowr, beane flowre. Muscilages. Of all sorts. Minerals and metalline things. Alum, Litharge, cerusse, stibium or antimony, burnt lead, cadmia, or the condensed fuligo in the boyling of brasse, tutty, lime. Stones. Blood stone, plaster of Paris, lapis ca∣laminaris. Rosins. All of them, pitch. Sea things. As Corall, snailes, amber. Oyles. All that are temperate. Oyntments. Album Rhasis, ung. nutritum: dia∣pompholigos, the red drying oyntment. Intercepters or Defensives. They are commonly called defensives, which by their cold binding faculty, stop the passage of the humours, so that they cannot fall into the part. They differ from the Repellers only in re∣spect of the place to which they are applyed; for the repellers are applyed to the part affected, but the intercepters are applyed to the wayes or pas∣sages by which the humour fals to it. Therefore the matter of the intercepters is the same with that of the Repellers.
Binders, by the Latines Obstruentia, by the Greekes . and . AND commonly Binders, under the generall signification, comprehend under that word Repellers, Condensers, Thickeners, and strength∣eners of the parts; But more strictly in this place, it signifies such medicines as strengthen the larger passages of the body, and that as it were, bind them round about, to set a difference betwixt them and the condensers, which only strengthen and bind up the small pores of the skin, and other parts, and as it were make them solider; Binders are according to Galen 5 simpl. facult. c. 14. cold and dry, and of a grosse substance; The Ʋse of these are in stopping the fluxes of the belly, dysentery, catarrhes, and in staying the force of any humour, or any sensible way of excretion, as the veines of the womb, and all other fluxes; Such are these following, with which you should always mingle things something heating and strengthning the parts. Rootes of Snakeweed or bistort, the greater cumfrey, tormentill, rubarb torrified. Barkes Of myrobalanes, pomegranates, frank∣in sence, acorne cups. Woodes. As Saunders. Leaves Of Plantaines, the greater knot grasse, horsetaile, shepheards purse, mouseare, mirtle. Flowres. Of balaustines, roses.
Seedes. Of sorrel, purslane, mirtles, plantaine, white poppy, roses, stones of raysins of the sun, rice. Fruites. Quinces, peares, services, cornelians, medlars, pomegranats, English Corans, berber∣ries, unripe mulberries, cipress nuts, gals. Juyces and liquors. Starch, acacia, hypocistis, juyce of quinces, verjuyce, sowre wine, chalibea∣ted milk, and ironed milk. Animal things. Hartshorn burnt, Ivory, Mummy. Gums. Tragant, Mastick to ʒ i. sanguis draconis. Stones and Earthes. Blood stone, terra figillata, bole armenack. Metalline things. Alum, Iron, Crocus Martis. Sea things. Corall, Amber, Pearles. Waters. Of Roses, Plantane, Purslane, knot∣grasse, sorrell. Syrrups. Of quinces, dryed roses, pomegranats, mirtles, conserve of quinces. Condites. Preserved Quinces, and cornelians. Conserves and Confections. Old conserves of roses, diacodion, philonium, new treacle. Troschiscks Of rubarb, spodium, and Amber.
THE FIRST BOOK. THE FIRST PART. THE FOVRTH SECTION. Of Medicines respecting the cause offending in rest or quietnesse. The Type of the Section. The matter fixed in a part is emptied by medicines, which re∣lax. Insen∣sibly as discussers. Insen∣sibly as consumers. Insen∣sibly as drawers either by a quality manifest or occult as those that extract peculiar things. or sensibly un∣der the forme of thin water as the blisterers. or sensibly un∣der the forme of natter or corrupti∣on as suppurators. or sensibly un∣der the forme of natter or corrupti∣on as openers or breakers of impostems.
Relaxers, by the Latines Laxantia, by the Latines . THey are properly called Relaxers, which evacuate the matter that is collected and fixed in any part, ei∣ther senfibly or insensibly; Those things evacuate insensibly which attenuate, mollifie, rarifie, discusse, and sometimes they which draw, consume, and sometimes (in the beginning of inflammations) they which re∣pell; but those things do it sensibly which (when the matter impacted can neither be repelled nor discussed,) convert it into purulent matter, and af∣ter open a way for it to be emptied; All which, according to the diversity and manner of the af∣fection, may be used either severall or mixed, of which circumstances there hath been partly spoken already, and partly shall be said hereafter in its proper place, so that it is needlesse to allow a pro∣per Classis of Relaxers by themselves, because they make up the same matter with some or o∣ther of the aforesaid divisions. Discussers. Those medicaments are commonly called Dis∣cussers, Diaphoreticks, digesters, dissolvers, which by turning the humours into exhalations, empty the morbificall cause by insensible transpiration, of which some are more gentle, digesting but weakly, and are therefore called Rarifiers, of which
hereafter in the second part of this Book; others are more forcible, digesting more strongly, and are simply called Diaphoreticks, which are hot and dry, and of thin parts; for such by their penetra∣ting, attenuate grosse and clammy humours that are inherent in any part, and turne them into va∣pours, that afterwards what remaines may easily be discussed and dissipated; they are of a neere na∣ture with those that discusse windinesse, or rather the same with them; The matter therefore of these is to be sought in the Tables, of the more power∣full attenuaters and mollifiers, as also in the Table of them that discusse windinesse, which you may see in its proper place. Consumers. Those medicaments which feed upon and con∣sume a humour, (mollified and attenuated) by their strong attenuating, drying quality, are cal∣led usually in Latine absorbentia, that is consuming medicines. The Use of which is chiefly in phleg∣matick tumors, sometimes in schirrous swellings; but it must be after the use of mollifiers and atte∣nuaters; Such are these following, which may be used either in the form of a vapour, fomentation with a sponge, an Oyntment or a Plaster. Liquors. Vinegar, brine, sea water, lye of vine ashes, &c. also that lye made of the quenching of lime. Ashes. All sorts, especially that of the fig tree, of vine branches, of Ilex or dwarfe oake, of cole∣worts and other nitrose herbs. Minerals. Alum, salt, saltpeeter, lime, brimstone.
Oyles. Of Tiles, of peeter or rock oyle, of Eu∣phorbium, of Castor, of Costus. Drawers, by the Latines Attrahentia, by the Greekes . THese are those which draw forth humours seated deep in the body, to the superficies of the skin, and that either by an occult quality, of which next, or els by a manifest quality, and that either inherent, as in Thapsia, or else acquisite by putrefaction, as pigeons dung; And these are such that are hot and dry, and of thin parts; for it is the part of heat to attract; drinesse is as it were the file to heat, to make it more forcible; and tenu∣ity of parts to accelerate the action. As to the de∣gree, some are gentler drawers, hot and dry in the second degree, others stronger, which also discuss, and are hot and dry in the third degree; The use of them is in drawing humours, spirits or flatuous∣nesse that lye deep in the body up to the skin; as for example, in criticall abscessus's or separations of humours, also in buboes, sciatica, dropsy, poy∣sons, and in withered members to draw the nou∣rishment to them. This is the Matter. Rootes of Thapsia, Elecampane, Ireos, round birthwort, sowbread, pellitory of Spaine, of reeds, daffadils, onions, garlick. Herbes and Leaves, Of Ladies smock, Calamint, treacle mustard, blew flowred Pimpernel, Ivy, Ti∣thimal,
and all the sorts of spurge, flammula or stronge Clematis, pepperwort or lepidium: cuc∣koopit, sopewort, dictamny of Creet: Crow∣foots (especially the wild) nettles, water-pepper or arsmart, widdowaile, spurge, lawrell. Seedes of Mustard, nettles, cresses, treacle, mu∣stard, staves-achre, mullen, cardamomes, ginny pepper. Gums, Ammoniack, Euphorbium, Galbanum, Sagapene, Bdellium, Opopanax. (Which that I may note once for all, I have here inserted, both in this and other Tables among the gums, for custome sake, least young students in the reading of the matter of physick or receipts, should be pusled, otherwise Bdellium is properly a rosin, the rest thickned juyces.) Rosins. Drye pitch, common rosin, burgundy pitch. Excrements, Hony, Goates dung, pidgeons dung, asses dung, and all dungs. Animals, Cantharides, Scorpions, Castor. Stones and minerals. Loadestone, Brimstone. Sea things, Amber. Plasters. Oxicroceum, of Mellilat, sowr levens, plastrum Epispasticum. Drawers forth or Extracters.
Under the Attracters or drawers are compre∣hended, those which by an occult quality, draw out poysons, splinters and other things fastned in wounds. Of which because there is an indefinite number, and it is not certainly known what me∣dicament is the proper extracter of each peculiar body, therefore we must be content with the ge∣generall and undeterminate collection of them, such as help to the drawing out of any thing in∣fixed, such are these following. Rootes of round birthwort, of Ireos, with the purple flowr, reeds, wild parsnep, cuccoopits, all, the bulbe, the roots of Eringo beaten with hony. Leaves, Dictamny of Creet, Tabacco, (which two draw forth poyson) both the pimpernels, common mullen. Barkes. The middle bark of tile tree. Seedes. Of Mullen, Mustard. Gums. Ammoniack, Galbanum, Opopanax. Animals. Land snailes beaten with their shels, the head of a lizard powdred, a fox tongue prepa∣red, as its lungs are moystned with red wine, or decoction of round birthwort serves to draw out lead. Excrements. Propolis or Bee glew. Stones. Loadstone prepared draws forth Iron, Lapis Lincis, which draws out straws or the stalks of herbs. Sea things. Amber also draws straws. Emplasters. Apostolicum, Levans. Ʋnguents. as Unguentum nigrum, sen fuscum Nicholai. Blisterers, by the Latines Ʋesicantia, by the Greekes .
THey take their name from the effect of them, and those which do only make the part red, are called Phaenigmi; but those which also besides that raise blisters, are called Vesicantia. They are of temperature hot in the fourth degree, but of thin substance, by which meanes they penetrate the superficies of the part; The use of these is when the matter cannot be discussed either by at∣tenuaters, mollifiers, or attracters; for they draw violently, dissolve and melt, and raise up the skin, like a bladder full of water, in which all the hu∣midity that is attracted is gathered; As to the matter, many things use to be referred hither, out of the Table of the attracters, conducing to the o∣peration of the blisterers, for they are but few, which of themselves are reduced to this Division or Classis. as Cantharides beaten up with strong vinegar, and a little leven. Thapsia. viz. the root and the flowr. The root of the lesser Crowfoot. i. e. 5th. of Matthi∣olus, and the third of Fuchsius, which is called by Gesner Flammula. Burned Levens: Emplast. Epispasticum. Ripeners, by the Latines Suppurantia, by the Greekes .
THose are so called which help nature in con∣verting the moibificall cause into pus, or matter; The use of which is when the malady will not yeild to discussing medicines in sanguine tumors, or in those of other humours, so they be mixed with blood, because that only is capable of suppuration; for in tumors proceeding from choler, or melancholy, suppurating medicines are not to be safely administred, for they easily turn to a Cancer, or such like malignant ulcers; they ought to be according to Galen, 5 simpl. cap. 8.9. of a temper most agreeable to the body and part to which they are to be applyed, (both in heat and moysture,) that they may both increase and cherish the naturall heat, which is author of this concoction; they should also be emplastick∣all, that by their daubing quality they may stop the pores of the skin, that they may keep in both the heat and spirits, which being thus augmented, do the more easily ripen the humour, such are these of which if any seeme too moyst or too dry, they are to be temperd by the mixture of others. Rootes of Marsh-mallowes, white Lillies, Colts foot, new briony, wild Cowcumber new gathe∣red, Onions roasted. Leaves of Marsh-mallowes, mallowes, sorrell, beares breech, miscle toe. Seedes of Flax, fenegreek, barly, wheat. Flowre of barly, wheat, vetches called robus, wheat bread. Fruites. Fat figs, raysins, fat dates. Gums. Ammoniack, Bdellium. Resins. Larch, Turpentine, Frankinsence, liquid styrax, pitch, common rosin. Animals. The sat of hens, geese, hogs, marrow of a calfe, butter, oesipus, yeolkes of egges, yellow wax, bee glew, milk. Suets of all sorts.
Juyces and liquors, sope, hot water powred on, water and oyl, ladanum. Oyles. Sweet oyl olive, oyl of sweet almonds, of linseed, of white lilly roots. Ʋnguents. of Marsh-mallowes, resumptivum Basilicon, Agrippae, Aureum. Plaisters, Diachilon, simple and compound, and that with gums, levens. Openers of Imposthumes. There are divers things that let out water, among which, pidgeons dung, Crowfoot, Cantharides, Figmilk; but it is more usu∣all to open tumors when they are ripened, either with Iron, or some cautery, either a∣ctuall or potentiall.
THE FIRST BOOK. THE SECOND PART. Of Remedies, respecting the gene∣rall heads of diseases. The Division of this part. THere are three generall heads of diseases, viz. Distemper, Vitiated Composition, and separation of the continuity. Distemper is either simple, which is helped by alterers, or else it is joyned with matter, and then we are to have regard to the cause, for it requires remedies to oppose the cause, of which already in the first part. Ʋitiated composition of the parts, such as may be remedied by medicines are, 1 Too much streight∣nesse of the invisible passages of the body, which is called condensednesse, to which we oppose rarefiers. 2 Too much dilatation of the said pas∣sages,
to which are used Condensers; and if it be in the visible passages, we oppose it by Binders. 3 There are some diseases arise from overgrowing of the flesh, as the constipation or shutting up of any cavity by such excrescence, or else the great∣nesse or number of the parts exceeding what is na∣turall, and these require Catereticks or eating me∣dicines, of which where I shall speak of the Pyro∣ticks in generall. Other remedies of the diseases of ill composition, are either preservative, opposing the causes, with which they are together removed, and therefore not to be repeated here, or Chyrurgi∣call, and so not pertaining to this place. Separation or Division of the continuity of the parts, requires gluing or joyning medicines; hi∣ther also belong vulnerary things, or else they are joyned with the losse of the substance of the part, to which belong Sarcaticks, Epuleticks, ingenderers of a callous or hardnesse; of each severally. Rarefiers, by the Latines Rarefacientia, by the Greekes . THey are so called, which open the pores of the skin, to procure a free transpiration; such are hot, but moderately, very neer our natu∣rall heat, and moyst, that they may relax; for dry∣ing things streighten; of thin parts that they may penetrate. The Ʋse is chiefly externall, to prevent internall putrefaction, by exhalation of the fuli∣ginous vapours of the blood, also in externall tu∣mors,
where the matter is over hot, and the part wherein it is, is soft and thin, that the humor con∣tained in the part, causing the swelling and pain, being dissolv'd, may the better evaporate in fumes; such are these following. Rootes of Marsh-mallowes, white Lillies. Leaves of Dill, Mallowes, Violets, Elder, Dane∣wort, Beares breech, Mercury. Flowres of Chamomill, Mellilote, Elder. Seedes of Flax, Fenugreek. Fruites. Dryed Figges. Fats and Greases of Hogs, Calves, Hens, Men, and Geese. Excrements. New Butter, Oesipus. Waters of Chamomill, white Lillies, warmed water, especially a bath of it. Oyles of Olives, white Lillies, Violets, sweet Al∣monds, earth wormes, Chamomill, Dill, Linseed, of Ireos, of Jasmine. Oymments. Ung: Resumptivum, and Dialthee. Condensers, by the Latines Condensantia, by the Greekes . THey are so called, which contract the pores of the skin, and represse or hinder transpi∣ration; they are of a more watrish nature then the binders before mentioned. The use of which is to hinder too much sweat, and the dissolution of the spirits; the matter followes. The Leaves of Sengreen great, and little, Lettice,
Purslaine, Maiden hair, Endive, Sow-thistle, Dan∣delion, Fleawort, water Lillies, Ducks meat. Cold water, and generally whatsoever cooles without binding, contract the smaller pores, but they cannot bind the whole part effectually. Corrosives, by the Latines Adurentia, by the Greekes Pyrotica and Caustica.
THey are so called, which by their extreame heat, do burn the skin to divers purposes, no lesse then fire or scalding water, and therefore it is necessary that they be of a fiery nature; yet they differ both in degrees of heat, and manner of their matter. Of the first rank are the rubifiers, and blisterers, which are the gentlest of all, of which is spoken before; of the second rank are the Cathereticks or corrosive medicines, eating and consuming, opposite to the sarcoticks, yet these only work on the superficies, (without cor∣rupting the adjacent parts) and corrode, extenuate, consume and weare away that very gently. They are hot and dry in the third and fourth degree, and of thin substance, that they may insinuate into the matter that is to be taken away, and be dissipated or made invalid before they penetrate far; Of the third sort are those called Septicks or putrifiers, sharper then the Cathereticks, penetrate deeper, and dissolve, putrifie, and corrupt the thinner part of the flesh, and this they do, not so much by the benefit of the intensenesse of their heat, as by a malignant quality, wherefore they are most irk∣some to nature, and destroy the sabrick of it, and therefore there followes them the dissolution of the radicall moysture, and a carcase like putrefa∣ction; they are of much a grosser substance then the former, (but moderatly, for they are other∣wise of thin parts) for that which is too thin is easily dissipated by our heat; Of the fourth sort are those which burne to a crust, commonly cal∣led Escaroticks, or potentiall Causticks, (though some make an other distinction between Escaro∣ticks and Causticks, and induce the first as the milder, the other as the more forcible) which pe∣netrate deeply, and do not only burn the cuticle, but the whole skin, like fire, and that suddainly, causing a very hard crust, which they usually call an Eschare; They are most hot in the fourth de∣gree, of substance absolutely grosse and earthy, for which reason their extreame heat is not easily dissipated, but holding firme together, burns and gnawes violently. The use of the Cathereticks is in the excrescence of flesh, affections arising from proud flesh, as in the hypersarcosis of wounds, Po∣lipus of the nostrils, caruncles, warts and other hardnesses that are to be taken away. The use of the Septicks is also in taking away divers tumors, Polipus, ozenas, (ulcers of the nostrils) hard ex∣crescences, putrid, eating and malignant Ulcers, and corrupted parts of the body; but these because they leave behind them an incorrigible inconve∣niency, should be quite driven out of chyrurgical use, and instead of them, if need were, may be used cleansers, cathereticks, and escareticks. The use of Escareticks and Causticks is when the skin for some cause or other is to be opened, and the sick cannot well endure the opening of it by section, or burning, then are we forced to use Causticks; also when we would suppresse blood, breaking forth from some corrosion of the veines, we are faine to cause a crust or escare to cover the part from whence the blood breaks forth; to these py∣roticks may be numbred the Psylotres, or medi∣cines that take away haire, i. e. such as make the part they are applyed to bald, for these have also a corroding and burning quality. The matter of the Cathereticks or the Con∣sumers of proud flesh. Rootes of round birth-wort dryed in an oven, asphodell or kingspeare, wild cowcumbers, which are milder, black hellebor, which is stronger. Ashes of Muscle shels, of Tithimales or Spurges, of Gals burnt. Stones. Pumice stone burnt to a powder, Lapis Laznli unwashed, these are gentle. Minerals. Vitriol calcin'd, Lead burnt, Alum burnt, Mercury precipitate, Verdigreece, Mercury sublimat, peclings of brass, lime, white vitrioll, mysy, sory, antimony calcined, especially for cancers, fal ammoniack, vermilion. Oyles of vitriol, brimstone, aq. fortis. Ʋnguents. Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, Isid. Troschiscks of Musa, Passionis, Andromis, self de Plumbo, Troschiscks Poliydae, An∣dromachi.
The matter of the Septicks or Putrifiers. Arsenick pure. Arsenick sublimat. Orpment. Gedar liquor. Borax. Sandarache, of the Greeks. Wolfes bane, Osmund royall. Pithyocampe. (This is ill inserted here for it is usually given inwardly in the rickets. The matter of the Causticks or Esearoticks, i. e. crust causing-Medicines. The common matter is the lye of which sope is made, of which only it may be made, and this Heurnius prefers before all others, lib. 1. Method. prax. of whom, see the place quoted; but the particular matter is of divers kinds, so that there is scarce a Chyrurge on which will not boast of some secret way of his own in this particular; some to this lye will adde vitrioll, some mercury sublimate, orpment, salt ammoniack, salt peeter, sandever, cinis clavellatus, or ashes of vines or tartar, &c. of which they compose their divers cauteryes. Psilotres or Medicines that take off haire. To make bald any part, some use those things that actually burn, especially gold mode red hot, others, such things as work potentially, as Strong lye, Unquenched line. Emets egges, Sanderake, Arsenick, Orpment, Oyle of brimstone. Oyle of vitriol.
Agglutinaters or Closers, or joyning Medica∣ments, by the Latines Glutinantia, by the Greekes . THey are so called which conjoyne the lips of new made wounds; such are in heat tempe∣rate, lest they should hurt by their acrimony in the other qualities; they dry with astriction and grossenesse of substance, for so they hinder any o∣ther humour, either from falling or growing be∣tweene the lips of the wound. The Ʋse of them is in bleeding wounds, and also in Ulcers, so they be well cleansed; the matter followes. Rootes of Cinquefoyle, Tormentill, Cumfrey. Leaves of Sanicle, Winter-green, Mouseare, Rupturewort, hounds tongue, plantaine, St. Johns Wort, Vervain, Willow, Scabiosse, Carduus be∣nedictus, Woade, Field Cipresse, Centaury the lesse, Yarrow, Bettony, Bugle, Tutsan, Golden∣rod. Gums, Sarcocoll, Sanguis draconis. Rosins, Frankinsence, Myrrh, Pitch, Turpen∣tine. Juyces, Aloes, Hypocistis. Animals, Mummy, Earthwormes, Hares haire burnt. Minerals, Litharge, Lead, Lapis Cadmia, and Calaminaris. Ʋnguents, de Lythargiro, Betonica, Ʋng. aure∣um, of gum elemi. Emplasters, Catagmaticum primum & secundum, dia∣phaenicum. de gum elemi, de minio compound. stipticum, or Paracelsus Plaster.
Wound Medicines or Vulneraries, by the La∣lines Vulneraria, by the Greekes . THey are so called, of which wound drinks are made, whose vertues are singular in purify∣ing the blood, and cleansing it from all dreggy humours, that flesh or any other substance that is lost, may be laudably and speedily restored and ingendred from it, and thereby the part be resto∣red to its former unity; see Pareus lib. 15. cap. 28. The Roots of Tormentill, both sorts of Cumfry, Zedoary, Galengal, Angelica, Snakeweed, round Birthwort, Liquerish, Avers. Herbs and Leaves. Sea-lavender, Sanicle, winter greene, Vervain, Ladies mantle, arsesmart, peri∣wincle, Agrimony, Adders tongue, Sowbread, golden rod, horsetaile, bettony, burnet, cetrach, mugwort, lilly of the vally, centaury the lesse, Pauls bettony, knotgrasse, plantain, savine, car∣duus benedictus, mouseare, St John's wort, tansy's rupturewort, scordium, snakeweed. Fruites. Red vetches or cicers, juniper berries, bruised, walnuts. Animals. Crawfish, Mummy, Crabs eyes. Sea things. Sperma ceti. Stones and Earthes. Corall red and white, bole armenack. Waters. Those distilled out of the aforesaid herbes.
Sarcoticks or breeders of flesh, by the Latines carnem generantia, by the Greekes . THey are so called which remove those things that hinder nature in the breeding of flesh, viz. that twofold excrement that is always ingen∣dred in the repairing the flesh; one thin, which the Latines call Ichor and Saies, as it were a weep∣ing mattery watrishnesse, by which it is apt to pro∣dnce a moyst ulcer; the other grosse, as dreggi∣nesse and filth, which breeds foul filthy ulcers; The first is to be dryed, the other to be cleansed; there∣fore Sarcoticks are of nature moderatly hot & dr, within the limits of the second degree, and clean∣sing without biting; for that which is hotter dis∣solves the flesh; that which is colder binds it, and repels the blood from ingendring flesh; that which is dryer consumes that which doth flow to the part: that which cleanseth with binding doth not only suffer the flesh to grow, but also by its biting is apt to procure defluxions. The Ʋse of these is in filling up hollow wounds and ulcers. As to the Matter, those which are rehearsed as Sarcoticks, are not to be thought so simply, but are withall ei∣ther glutinative or closing, or else cleansing, or procuring suppuration, and therefore are to be temperd by the mixture of others; But these fol∣lowing are properly called such, of which note that the dryer sort are to be used to dry bodies, and those that are least drying are to be applyed to moyst bodies.
Rootes of Cumfrey, Ireos, Birthwort. Leaves of St. Johns wort. Juyces. Aloes. Flowrye parts of barly, vetches, orobus, and ervus, and of senugreek. osins. Frankinsense, Burgundy pitch, Mastick, rosin of the pine, and of the sir tree, pitch, turpen∣tine, myrrhe. Gums. Tragant, Sanguis draconis, Sacrocall. Minera's As Cadmia, Cerusse, Tutty, both white and gray called Pompholix, Lytharge, lead burnt and washed. Ʋnguents. Aureum, rubrum desuccativum. Emplasters. de betonica, de gratia dei. Epuloticks or skinning medicines, but more properly Cicatrizers, by the Latines Cicatri∣zantia, by the Greekes .
THey are so called, that skin an Ulcer or wound after it is filled with flesh; they should be in the passive qualities very drying, that they may not only consume the moysture, that flowes to the part, but also that that remaines in the flesh of the Ulcer; they are also of a grosse sub∣stance, that they may bind and contract or draw together; In the active qualities they should rather be cooling then heating, and altogether without biting; though there be many things numbred a∣mongst the Cicafrizers that dry with biting, yet such are convenient only for the hardest sort of bodies; The Ʋse is plain; The Matter followes. Rootes of round Birthwort, Tormentill. Leaves of Plantaine, Myrtle, Pomegranates, horse taile, mony wort. Barkes of Pomegranates, Acorne cups. Ashes and things burnt, as wool, linnen or cotten burnt, spunges burnt, a hares haire burnt, tiles burnt to dust. Gums and juyces. Sanguis draconis, Acacia. Fruites of the Cipresse tree, unripe gals. Flowres. Balaustines, red roses. Earths. Terra Iemnia, bole armenack, chalke. Stones. Blood stone, calaminaris, plaster of Paris. Metalline things. Scalings of Iron, burnt Alum, lead burnt and washed, powder of lead, of which see Fernelius lib. 6. M.M. cap. 16. brasse burnt, ce∣ruse litharge, Calcitis or white vitrioll, Cadmia washed, pompholix or white tutty, brimstone, aurpment, vitriol; pompholix and spodia are both sorts of tutty; why he sets tutty here by it selfe, I know not, see Screderus in his pharmacopia, lib. 3. cap. xix. tutty burnt and washed, antimony burnt, lime washed, spodium or grey tutty. Animals. Hearts horne burnt, scutle bone, Ivory burnt, oyster shels burnt. Sea things. Corall. Oyntments. Ung. album Rhazis. Nutritum, or oyntment of Litharge, oyntment of Cerusse, of tutty or red lead, and rubrum desiccativum. Things that take away Sears, which for brevity sake may be called Scar Curers. Fats and marrowes of men, asses, harts, the fat of the fish Thymallus.
Oyles of Myrrh, yeolkes of egges, campher, ori∣entall balsame. Flowre of beanes, Juyce, of Ivy. Seedes of rocket, mustard. Minerals. borax, salt peeter. Waters of Lilly flowres, beane flowres, out of which things are made divers compositions, oynt∣ments and liniments. Things breeding a Calleus or hardnesse in joyning broken bones, may properly be called Call-breeders, by the Latines callum gene∣rantia, be the Greeks . THey are so called, not because they properly breed a Calleus, for that is the work of na∣ture, but because they assist nature in that work, such are in the active qualities moderatly hot, (lest they should dissolve and consume that juyce of which the Calleus is ingendred,) in the passives they should be drying; as to the second qualities they thicken, harden and bind, and are either Internall, as the juyce of primroses, the rootes, juyce or powder of Agrimony, and especially the stone Osteocalla or bone glew given to ʒ i. in cum∣frey water. Externall things, as Aloes, Acacia, bole arme∣nack, Mill dust, Osteocalla or bone glew, nuts of Cipresse, Frank in sence, Gum tragant.
THE THIRD PART OF THE FIRST BOOK. Of Medicaments respecting the most common and most urgent Symptomes. The Type. Symptomes that are the most frequent are these fol∣lowing, toge∣ther with their opposite re∣medies. Paine to which are opposite anodine things and Narcoticks. watching Hypnoticks. flux of blood. stenchers of blood. swounding. refreshers of the spirits Anodynes, by the Latines dolorem mitigantia, by the Greekes .
THey are so called which ease paine without stupisying the senses, though the cause of it remain; such medicines should be temperate in the active qualities, much agreeable to our naturall heat; but in the pas∣sives moyst, either watrish or ayery, of thin sub∣stance voyd of all astriction, for these by their mild and gentle heat, foster the heat of the part, and by their tenuity of substance, penetrate into the parts, and by their gentle moysture relax them, by which meanes the cause contained in the part by transpiration, may be the easier discussed, and evacuated. The Matter is this, which is for the most par externall, and topicall or applyable to the very place. Rootes of Marsh-mallowes, mallowes, lillyes. Leaves of Elder, mallowes, violets, dill. Seedes of Flax, fenugreek, wheat, barly, and the meale. Flowres of Chamomill, mellilot, mullen, saf∣fron. Animals, their parts and excrements, Warm milke, new butter unsalted, Oesipus, yeolkes of egges, flesh of animals whilest it is warme, lungs of ani∣mals new killed, the kell of animals also. Marrowes. All that are kept in the shops. Fats and greases. Hogs fat, gooses, hens, man's. Oyles. Sweet oyle Olive, of earthworms, cha∣mon ill, sweet almonds, sillies, linseed, yeolks of egges, of dill, jasimine, wall flowres, of sesamus, water and oyle mixt together. Wheat bread new baked whilst it is yet hot. Crumbs of white bread. Mucilages of the seeds of Mallowes, fleawort, marsh-mallowes, fenugreek. Suets of a Hart, of Goates. Oyntments. Pectoral oyntments, Dialthea, un∣guent. anodynum, resumptivum, oyntment of the opening juyces.
Narcoticks by the Latines Stupefacientia, by the Greekes . THey are Medicines which take away or stu∣pifie the sense of the part, that it cannot be sensible of that which manes the paine. The Ʋse of these is in the most vehement paines, and they are all extreamly cold, but do not stupifie so much by their coldnesse, as by an occult quality they possesse. Roots of Mandrake, Henbane. Leaves of Henbane, Mandrake, Poppies, sleepy nightshade, Tobacco, Hemlock. Flowres of Henbane, Poppy. Seedes of white and black Poppy, Henbane, Darnell. Thickned juyces of Mandrake, Henbane, Opium. Syrups of white and red poppy, diacodium. Oyles of Mandrake, white poppy seed. Opiates, New Treacle, requies Nicholai, Phi∣lonium romanum, persicum, Philon Magistrale. Pils of Cynoglosse, of Styrax, Laudanum and nepenthes opiatum, to gr. iii. iv. v. Sleeping Medicines by the Latines Som∣nifera, by the Greeks .
THey are so called that procure sleep, by send∣ing mild vapors up to the head, to temper the hot, dry and sharp fumes that are in the brain, whose Ʋse is chiefly when overwatchings are cau∣sed by sharp fumes, such are these following. Leaves of Lettice, Sengreen, Dill. Seedes of Lettice, the four greater cold seedes, white Poppy seeds. Fruites. Sweet Almonds, Peach kernels. Waters of Violets, water Lillies, Lettice, Pur∣slane, Nightshade, Roses. Syrups of Violets, water Lillies, Poppies, Cowslips. Conservs of Violets, water Lillies, Cowslips. Candied things, Stalkes of Italian Lettice, Candid. Juyces of Lettice, ℥ iii. of the juyce of Lettice is a deadly draught, therefore be wary, water Lil∣lies, night shade. Species. Diamargariton frigidum, powder of Haly, diatrion santalon. Tro chiscks, Gordonii. Oyles. To anoynt the forehead, remples and soles of the feet, oyle of violets, water Lillies, sweet Almonds, Dill, Willowes, Mandrake Frogs, Poppyes, Roses. Marrowes of the thigh bones of calves, harts. Ʋnguents. Populeon, out of all which divers re∣medies to procure sleep, both internall and exter∣nall may be prepared. Stoppers of Blood by the Latines Sanguinem sistentia, by the Greekes .
THey are so called that stay or stanch blood flowing out of the veines or arteries, whe∣ther opened by relaxation of the orificies, or by corrosion, or violent breaking, or cut as in a wound; and this other medicament can performe besides caustick medicines (which stop it by in∣ducing a crust or escara instead (as it were) of a stopple) and that divers wayes, viz. i. by an em∣plastick quality; for such as are of a grosse and clammy substance, they stop and fill up the orifi∣ces of the veines; Secondly by a cooling, binding, drying vertue, or lastly by some other propriety or occult quality; The Matter of all which is this following. Rootes of Cumfrey, Cinquefoyle, Rubarb tor∣refied, nettles. Barkes of Pomegranates, Pine trees. Leaves of Plantain, knot grasse, horsetaile, pe∣riwinkle, burnet, both sorts, ursan, nettles, wil∣lowes, ducks meat, lettice, purslain, night shade, both the sengreens, bramble buds. Flowres. Balaustines, Citrines. Fruites. Quinces, sowre peares, services, med∣lars, bramble berries, mulberries unripe, of su∣mach, unripe gals, burnt gals that are suddainly quenched in vinegar or sowre wine. Juyces and liquors. Acacia, Hypocistis, Aloes, vinegar, vinegar with water, called Posca, ver∣juyce, cold water, juyce of gourds, purslain, sowr wine. Rosins. Frankinsence, myrrh, mastick, rosin rubbed, Fernel. 5. M. M. 3. Gums. Sanguis draconis. Sea things. Corall, Amber, Sponge burnt. Animals, their parts and excrements. Glue, Mum∣my
both inward and outward, white of an egge, spicers web, especially it it be such as is full of the fine flowr of mils or bakehouses, clots of blood dryed, Spodium mode of Ivory, hens feathers burnt haire of horses and men burnt, bones burnt to a fine powder. Stones. Bloodstone, Schistus, Jasper, plaster of paris washed. Earthes. Common earth. 8 Simpl. bole, terra sigillata. Flowre of wheat, beanes, starch. Sootes. Soot scraped from the oven mouth or off a brasse pot, foot of Frankinsence or Mastick. Minerals. Litharge, Cerusse, white Tutty, Vi∣triol, Alum. Refreshers of the spirits, by the Latines spiri∣tus reficientic, by the Greekes . I intend not to speak here of such things as re∣move the causes, that oppresse the spirits, or of them that by accident restore them, nor of those which strengthen the heat of the heart, for they are to be referd to the Cordials; but only of such as with their gratefull sent, or vapours suddainly restore the spirits, whose Ʋse is in swounding and faintings; such are the Rootes of the true Acorns, Angelica, Avens, Ci∣perus, blew flowre deluce of Florence. Barkes and Woodes of Citrons, Oranges, lignum Aloes, Saunders, especially the yellow.
Leaves of mountain Calamint, Hysop, Laven∣der, marjerome, baume, mints, bazill rosemary, penyroyall, mother of time, time. Flowres of Oranges, clove gilleflowers, Citrons, Jasimine, Lilly of the vally, limons, all sorts of spike, roses, purple violets. Berries of Juniper, Bayes. Fruites. ripe Quinces, fragrant apples. Spices. Cloves, Cinamon, Mace. Rosins and Gums. Styrax, Camphere. Excrements. Musk, Civet. Waters and Vinegars. Water of Cinamon, Ci∣tron and Orange, and Limon flowres, of Laven∣der, Jasemine, and roses, vinegar of strong wines, of clove gilleflowers, of roses. Sweet Oyles. as of Cinamon, Costus, Nutmegs, Spike, Camphere, Jasemine, Cloves, oyl of Bal∣some, of Citron peeles, and such like. Note that in women, such fragrant things are not to be held to the nose, least it should cause fits of the mother, but rather ill sented things, as Caster, Rue, &c.
THE SECOND BOOK Of the particular matter of Physick. SECTION. I. Of Remedies belonging to the head. The Type of the Section. Remedies dedicated to the head, are ei∣ther de∣dicated to the brain, as Cephalicall things. purgers of the head, as Errhines. Sternutatories. Apopheleg∣matismes. Eyes, as op∣thalmicall things which are either sharpeners of the sight. anodines, or easers of pain. repellers. digesters. cleansers. Eares, as Oticks, ro ear medicines. Teeth, as teethish medicines.
Cephalicall medicines, by the Latines Capi∣talia, by the Greekes . THey are properly called cephalicall medicines, that have a virtue to preserve or restore the naturall heat and vigor of the brain, and which strengthen it, being first cleansed from the anoying filth that molests it. The Ʋse of which (as also of all other strength∣ening medicines that have their denomination from the part) is both before diseases beginning, and in them, and also after they are removed; but most usually after, generall purgations, to restore strength to the parts, (from whence they have their name of strengtheners) least they should againe heape more vitious humours, and by that meanes occasion new affections, or conduce to the return of the old; And although the faculty of these strengtheners seeme something occult, yet hath it either heat or coldnesse joyned with it, by whose helpe the relicks of a cold or hot distemper are re∣moved, together with the other operation, so that in speciall cephalicall things are twofold; hot in cold affections of the brain, cold in hot affections of the brain, and also the dry, as those things that are proper for mitigating deliriums. The hot are these.
Internall. Rootes of Birthwort, which is famous in the fal∣ling sicknesse that proceeds from the womb, cala∣mus aromaticus, Acorus and Galingale, for wine∣dinesse, of Male pyony against the falling sick∣nesse, and vaine feares, also misle of the oake, flo∣rentine reos, English Galingale, Zedoary. Leaves of Betony, Marjerome, for windinesse, narrow leaved sage, Centaury the lesse to strength∣en the nerves, rosemary for the trembling and palsy, bayes, mirtles, for catarrhes, mountain ca∣lamint, lavender, primrose, bazill, savory, hyssop, baume, wild marjerome. Barkes and Woodes, Barkes of Citrons, guia∣cum, asaphras, lignum. Aloes. Seedes of Coriande Fennel, silvermontan. Berries of Juniper, bayes, mirtles, graines of kermes, seeds of Piony and Nigella. Flowres of Saechas of Arabia, which are as it were the life of the braine and nerves, most sefull in the swimming of the head, falling sicknesse, and melancholy, lillies of the vally, cowslips, line tree, spikenard, centaury the lesse, betony, of rosemary, mellilote, chamomill. Fruites. Anacardines, but warily, because they burn the blood. Spices. Nutmegs, Cubebs, gr. v. swallowed e∣very day, Cardamomes, Mace, Cloves, Cinamon, Ginger and Pepper for a moyst brain. Rosins. Frankinsence against forgetfulnesse, Mastick, Styrax Benzoin.
Animal things. Castor which is famous, Muske, ashes of Swallowes, dung of Peacocks, in the fal∣ling sicknesse. Sea things. Amber, Ambergreece. Distilled waters of the aforesaid leaves. aq. vitae with Castor, treacle, water with the juyce of Be∣tony, imperial water, aq. caelestis, cinamon water. water of Piony compound, spirit and water of la∣vender compound of Dr. Matthias, spirit of castor. Oyles Chymicall. of Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinamon, marjerome, amber, rosemary. Syrups of slaechados, of bettony, chamepitios, of Piony compound, syrup of the infusion of Pi∣ony flowres, of the juyce of sage. Conserves of the slowres of rosemary, betony, sage, french lavender, and of the lintree flowres. Candied things and preserved things. Citron peels, roots of Acorus, Myrobalanes, Nutmegs, Walnuts, Coriander candyed. Confections. Treacle, old Methridate, the con∣fection aurea alexandrina, and of anacardines, but warily; diacorum, diacinnamomum. Powders. Those mentioned in the preparers of phlegme. Treschiscks. de carabe, gallia moscata. Externall heating things. The Seedes of Nigella or Gith, of Cummins tor∣rified, put in a bag, and applyed to the mould of the head. Oyles of these are rather cooling. mirtles, these are rather cooling. roses, bayes, spikenard, nutmeg by expression. Plaisters, de betonica, de baccis lauri, and in
the long lasting pains, Emplaister de Ranis, or Plaister of Frogs of Vigo, with Mercury. Rue and wild Time for pains, idle headednesse, disturbance of mind, and over-watchings; and Vervain the same way. Cold things internal. Hearbs. Sorrel, Lettuce, Purslain, Violets, Cow∣cumbers, twinings of Vines called Capreoli. Woods. All the Saunders. Flowers. Roses, Violets for sleep, water Lillies. Seeds. The four greater cold seeds, of Lettuce, Fleawort, white Poppy. Juices. Of Citrons, Pomegranats, Currans, Vinegar, Verjuice, Opium, have a care. Gums. Camphier. Distilled Waters. Of the Flowers and Leaves aforesaid, black Cherry water. Conserves. Of the Flowers aforesaid. Candied and Preserved things. Lettuce stalks, and the flesh of Gourds preserved. Powders or Species. Diamargariton frigidum, Diatrium santalon, Diatragacanthi frigidi. Troschischs of Camphier, of Saunders. Cooling external things. The aforesaid simples; to which add the Leaves of Henbane, Nightshade, great Hous∣leek, Mandrake, Willow, Vine branches.
Oyls. Of the the aforesaid Flowers, and the seed of white Poppy, Oyl of unripe Olives, Oyl of the flowers of Willow, for anointing of the Nostrils and Temples. Ʋnguents. As Oyntment of Roses, Refrigerans Galeni, Populeon, Searcloth of Saunders. Opposite to these Cephalical things are those which hurt the Head: such are these following, taken from Galen, lib. 2. compos. med. sec. loc. cap. 1. neer the end. The seed of Agnus castus, juice of Wormwood, Olives that are black and ripe, the fruit of Arbutus, or Strawberry tree, Myrrh, or Frankincense, if it be drank when one is healthy, as Diascorides will have it: For according to Avi∣cen, they are good for the Memory; the tops of Ivie, also the berries of it, Saffron, Sulpherwort, Sowbread dried, and drank in Wine; much Sto∣rax makes troublesom dreams, but a little drives away sadnesse. Lastly, all things that are oderise∣rous induce troublesom sleeps, and the Hag-riding or Night-mare, because they fill the Head with vapors, especially in those that are plethorick. ¶ To these he might have numbred Coleworts, Beans, and all sort of pulse, which cause troublesem, heavy sleepi∣nesse, and fearfull Dreams. Erthines, or, Snifting Medicines; by the Latines, Nasalia: by the Greeks, .
THey are Medicines that are to be snifted up in∣to the Nose, to draw forth the Flegm that lurks about the Brain and tunicles of it; either with∣out any agitation of the Brain, when the excre∣ments come down of themselves, or else with sneezing; and then they are properly called Ster∣nutatories: they should be hot, thin, sharp, and cleansing. Among which, some are to be chosen that are also Cephalical: the Matter of these is ei∣ther Simple or Compound. The simple ones are either dry or moist. Dry Ones. Powder of Acorns, Castor, Saffron, Cloves, Ela∣terium, (but warily, and dissolved with other li∣quid things) Hellebore white and black, Nutmeg, white Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, Ginger. Roots of Sow-bread, and Beets cut like tents, and put up into the Nose. Leaves of Tobacco dried and put into the Nose: this is the best Errhine. Fumes of Marjoram, Hysop, Time, Tobacco, all taken through a pipe. Moist Ones. Juices of purple-flowred Pimpernel, Beets, Coleworts, Bettony, Celendine the greater, Sow∣bread, wild Cowcumber, roots of Ireos, of Tree-Ivie, Hysop, Marjoram, Horehound, Tobacco, Nigella, wild Marjoram, Pennyryal, Sage, Savo∣ry, Elder, Ground-Ivie, or Alehoof. New Butter put up in the Nostrils. Compounds. Hony of Roses, of Rosemary, Oxi∣mel. simple, and Oximel of squils: Syrup of Hy∣sop. Confections: as Mustard, Aurea Alexandrina, Anacardina, old Treacle and Methridate. Oyls: of Pepper, Ireos.
Sternutatories, or, Sneezing things: by the Latines Sternutatoria: by the Greeks . THese are the stronger, thinner, sharper sort of Errhines, or snifting Medicines, which stimu∣late the Expulsive faculty very strongly; of which these following are the most usuall. The Roots of Ireos, white Hellebore, Euphor∣bium; then which nothing is quicker, if you mix a little Castor with it: Pellitory of Spain, powder of Tobacco blown up; out of which, with other sharp Errhines finely powdered, are made sneez∣ing Powders: to ʒ i. s. or ʒ ii. mixing Cephali∣cal things with it, in equal proportion with the rest; of which gr. i. or ii. blown up into the No∣strils with a quill, or, if they be vehement, let them be put in a brazen box, and the box only held to the Nose: or let a Nodulus, or Knot be prepared of Pellitory of Spain ℈ s. of black Hel∣lebore, ʒ i. Cresses, ʒ s. all powdered, and tied up in a Lawn rag, for a Nodulus; which being steeped in Rose-water, and held to the Nose, pro∣vokes sneezing without trouble. To these add Ptarmica or Sneeswort, and Stavesacre.
Apophlegmatisms, or Spitting Medicines: by the Latines Pitissantia: by the Greeks . THose Medicines are so called, which either chewed, gargarized, or daubed on the Pallat like a liniment, procure much spetting, by drawing out a great deal of phlegm from the Head, either by their heat or acrimony, whereby they attenuate the matter contained in the Head, and melt it (as it were,) and withall irritate the Ex∣pulsive faculty of the Brain, to cast it forth: Such are these following. Roots. Of Acorns, Angelica, Ireos, Costus, English Galingale, Gentian, Galingale, Master∣wort, Pellitory of Spain, Valerian, Ginger. Barks. Of the roots of Capers, Oranges. Spices. Cubebs, Nutmegs, Cloves, Pepper, grains of Paradise. Leaves. Of Hysop, Bayes, Pepperwort, Arsmart, Marjoram, Cresses, Tobacco. para; The Leaves of To∣bacho (the stalks taken out) being tied up, as it were, in a round pellet as big as a Nutmeg, is an excellent one held in the mouth in the morning once or twice a moneth, and is before all other. It should be held half an hour: let not the juice go down; and if you can be early enough, take a sleep after it. Seeds. Anniseed, Fennel, Mustard-seed, of Stavesacre, Treacle-mustard, Sesely, Silvermon∣tan. Fruits. Figs, Raisins, bitter Almonds, Juniper berries, Bay-berries.
Gums. Mastick, Ammoniack, Myrrh. Animal things. Castor. These Simples, as to their use, are either chew∣ed, as is usually the roots of Pellitory of Spain, steeped all night in Vinegar, to ℥ i. or else a pow∣der made of the aforesaid things to ʒ iii. or ℥ s. is taken with s. q. of wax, and made up into Tros∣chischs, as big as Lupines; one of which is chewed in the mouth, and so rolled up and down a rea∣sonable while. Opthalmicks, or, Eye-Medicines: called by by the Latines and Greeks Opthalmica. THey are called so in general which are used to heal diverse affections of the Eyes, and are divided chiefly into three Classes: The first con∣tains the Oxidorcicks, or Medicines that sharpen the sight. The second contains those Medicaments that are for the inflāmation of them, either in the beginning, as Repellers, and Anodynes, or easers of pain: or else in the state and declination, as Digesters or Discussers: the third includes the Cleansers, that are used in the Ulcers, Spots, Suffu∣sions, and such like affections of the Eyes.
Oxidorcicks, or, Sharpners of the Sight. Internal. Roots. Of Fennel, Celendine the greater, Avens, Valerian. Leaves. Of Eye-bright, Celendine, Fumitory, Fennel, Vervain, Rue, Clary. Seeds. Silvermountain seed, Rape seed, Radish seed, Fennel, Carraway seed. Clarified Juices. Of Fennel, Vervain, Eyebright, Marjoram, Rue. Distilled Waters. Of Eyebright, Vervain, Ce∣landine, Fennel, Rue. Wine. Of Eyebright. On the contrary, these hurt the Sight: Radi∣shes, Garlick, Onions, Mustard and Cresses. Externall Oxidorcicks, or Quickeners of Sight. Water of Hony, if the dimnesse proceed from the thicknesse of the tunicles, distilled Waters of the aforesaid sight-sharpning simples mixt toge∣ther, adding Gall, and the Urine of a Boy under age, white Wine and Hony. Antimony to ʒ i. infused in ℥ iv. of Water. The Juices aforesaid dropped into the Eye: the Juice of Rocket, and of flowring Willow, that which drops out at a cut in the Bark.
Anodynes, or Easers of Pain. Mucilages. Of the seed of Fleawort, of white Poppy seeds, where you would also Lenifie: of Quince seed where you would also bind. Waters. Of Roses, of pickings of Roses, of Plantain, Nightshade, Housleek, Purslain. Womens milk, white of an Egg beaten with water. Sweet Apples roasted under the Embers, or boiled in Milk, juice of Apples. Crums of Bread steeped and boiled in Milk, adding a little Saffron to gr. iv. or v. White Troschises of Rhazis, where there is great pain. And in vehement pain Opium to gr. ii. in li∣quid Colliriums. Repellers. Waters. Of Roses, Mirtles, Plantains, Violets, Purslain, Nightshade. Juices. O Quinces, sowr Apples, Pomegra∣nates, white of an Egg. Muscilage. Of Quince seed, pulp of Quinces boiled in some binding Water, as in the Water of stalks or pickings of Roses. Discussers. Decoctions. Of Fenngreek, Camomile, Melilot. Fomentations and Vapors. Of the same things, together with the Oxidorcicks before named.
Waters. Of Eyebright, Aqua vitae. ¶ Of Fen∣nel, Celendine, Rue, with a little white Vitriol, or salt peeter in it. Animals, their parts and Excrements. Womans milk, the blood of Pigeons and turtle Doves, the feathers of young Pigeons that are full of blood, drawn forth and pressed into the Eyes, the gall of Fishes. Gums. Sarcocal fed with milk. Rosins. Myrrh and Frankincense. Juices, Aloes, Verjuice, where there is also a burning joined with the others. And lastly, Saffron. Cleansers. Some are gentle without biting, the use of which is in the declination of Inflammations, as Sugar-candy, Hony, juice of red Roses, Antimo∣ny washed, Cadmia, Pompholix, or white Tutty, gray Tutty, Skuttle-bone, Pumice-stone, Lead burnt and washt. Others are stronger, and joined with a biting; the Ʋse of which is chiefly in Suf∣fusions, Skins, and sometimes in Ulcers; as gals of Fishes, which are the gentler, of four-footed Beasts which are moderate, and of Birds which are the strongest, to which add the gall of Vipers and Serpents; (Note, that the gall of Partridges is the strongest of all, and that of Hens is the gentlest.) Juices. Of Fennel, Quinces, Celendine, blew flowred Pimpernel, Urine, water of Hony com∣pounded with the Oxidorcicks. Others are the strongest of all; as Vitriol burnt, Verdigrease,
white Vitriol; a liquor of which made with the whites of Eggs, is excellent in the inflammation, Itch, and rednesse of the Eyes, crude Antimony. Oticks, or Ear-Medicines: by the Latines Auricularia: by the Greeks , & . THese are Remedies that help the Hearing, and are two-fold; Internal and External: The In∣ternal are the Cephalical Medicines before rehear∣sed, which alter, consume or discusse the Humor contained in the inward cavity of the Ear; whe∣ther they be hot, if the Malady come from cold and grosse Humors: or cold, if the cause of the Deafnesse proceeds from hot Humors; which useth to happen in acute Diseases, after the Crisis, the matter of the Disease being sent to the Ears. External also are two-fold; Hot and Cold. The Hot are these following. Waters. Aqua vitae simple, or compounded with some of the other Cephalical things, made in white Wine; this cuts, cleanseth, digests any sli∣my Humor: And to this purpose, there are infu∣sed the roots of Radish, Leeks, Onions, Sowbread, white Hellebore, Castor, Saffron, salt Peeter, Cows gall; besides the Cephalical things. ¶ Crato com∣mends Carduus benedictus, infused in Spirit of Wine, and then distilled, for a singular Experiment. See Cra∣to, Ep. 59.
Decoctions made of the same things in Aqua vitae, simple Vinegar, or Vinegar of squils. Juices. Of Onions, Leeks, Radishes, Rue, Ash. Common Oyls. As of bitter Almonds, Spikenard. Distilled Oyls. These following (besides the Cephalical Oyls aforesaid) of Sage, Rue, Cum∣min seed, Carraways, Fennel seed, Bay berries, Spike. Animols. The fat of an Eele that drops from it whilest it is roasting, dropped into the Ear, for is mollifies and relaxeth, by reason of its fat sub∣stance, attenuates and discusseth, partly by the quality it obtains from the fire, but chiefly by that it gets from Bay leaves, wherewith it should be stuck full when it is laid down. ¶ To these may be added the fat of an Hedgehog, prepared after the same manner; and Woodlice, which some call Monks pease, others Cheeslogs, powdered and mixed with somu auricu∣lar Oyl, and dropped into the Ear. Suffumigations made of the like things as are be∣fore spoken of. Musk wrapped up in wool or cotten, and put into the Ear. ¶ Civet is much more forcible, especially if you add to it a drop or two of Oyl of Cinamon or Cloves. The Cold are these. Oyls. Of Water-lillies, Roses, Violets; Wo∣mens milk warm from the brest. Juice, or liquor of Vines which distils from the branches, cut in the Spring.
Decoctions of Cooling things, as Roses, Mal∣lows, Violets, Willow, Lettuce, Water-lillies. ¶ Plantain, Endive, Straw-berries, Purslain. Odonticks, or Teeth-Medicines. THey are so called that strengthen the Teeth, and by cleansing them from the filth, whiten them: these are a fit matter for Dentifrices; and they are these following. Of Plants, the stalks of Burnet, Pellitory of the wall, Beets, Maidenhair: Leaves of Mirtles, Mastick tree, wild Olives, Penniryall, wild Mar∣joram, Hysop, Mints, Sage, Rosemary, either several, or many of them mixt, burnt and redu∣ced to ashes. Of Animals. Skuttle bone, Crabs eyes, all sorts of shels, and the shels of Land snails, Harts horn. Of Stones. Pumice stone, Sponge stone, Alabla∣ster, Chalk, all of these most exactly powdered; or if that cannot hand somly be, let them be first burnt, and then powdered. Stones of Dates, Mirobalanes, Olives, Cypres nuts, Medlars, burnt. Sea things. Coral, Sea froth, Amber. Earthy juices. Common salt, salt Gemme, Alum, salt Peeter, melted on a Tile-shard, and burnt: sal Alkali, or the salt they make Glasse of, and the fattinesse that swimmeth on the top, when it is dissolved in water, called Glasse grease: Tartar of white Wine, crusts of Bread burnt. To these are to be added, the powders of Spices,
as of Lignum aloes, and other odoriferous Plants, the root of Ireos, Musk, Amber greece; and for the strengthning of the Gums, Mastick Frankin∣cense, Mirrh. ¶ And to those that will resolve to en∣dure the taste, there is no better thing then Aloes dissolved in Claret wine. THE SECOND BOOK. SECTION II. Of Remedies of the BREST. The type of the Section. Remedies of the Brest re∣spect either the Heart, as Cordials. Lungs, as Bechical, or Expectorating Medicines. Pneumonical, or Medicines that alter the distemper of the Lungs. Brest, as Breeders of Milk. Driers of Milk.
Cordials: by the Latines Cordialia: by the Greeks . THey are so called that are either proper for strengthning the Heart, resisting malignity, or encreasing the Spirits: such are all the Alexi∣pharmacal internal medicines before rehearsed, except that there the hot are confusedly mixed with the cold, which in the use of them are to be distinguished: but besides those, these following are profitable, which are not there cited. The Hot Cordials. Roots. Of Doronicum, or wholsom Wolfs∣bane, Zedoary, Cinquefoil, Avens, Butterbur. Barks. Of Oranges and Citrons. Leaves. Of Carduus benedictus, Sage, moun∣tain Calamint, Motherworts, ground Ivie, Mints, Bazil, Rosemary. Flowers. Of Sage, Lilly of the vally, Spike∣nard. Rozins. Frankincense, Storax, Benzoin. Animals. Mummy, Silk. Sea things. Amber. Waters. Of Carduus benedictus, Balm, scabiosse, Sage, Cinamon, Treacle water. ¶ Angelica water the greater composition, Aqua Petasitis, or water of But∣terbur compound, Bezoar water, Gilberts water, Scor∣dium water compound, Aqua Imperialis. Aqua Mariae. Oyls. Of Cloves, Cinamon, Saffron.
Condited things. Citron barks, roots of Scorzo∣nera, or Spanish Vipers grasse. Troschischs. Of Gallia Moscata, Alipta Moscara, Trosch. Alexiterii. Species or Powders. ¶ Bezoardicus Magistralis, Cardiacus Magistralis; temperate, cordial Species, Powder of Crabs claws compound, Diamoscum, Species of the Electuary Rosatae Novellae. See the Alexiphar∣macal Medicines before. Cooling Cordials. Roots. Of Sorrel, Buglosse. Leaves. Of Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Borage, Bu∣glosse, water Lillies, Mirtles. Seeds. Of Quinces, Plantain. Fruits. Sowr Cherries, fragrant Apples, Quin∣ces, sowr Pomegranats. Flowers. Of Willow. ¶ The four cordial Flowers, Clove Gilly flowers. Juices. Of Sorrel, Roses, and the Fruits afore∣said. Stones. Garnets, Rubies. Minerals and Sea things. Gold, Silver, Coral, Pearls, mother of Pearls prepared. Waters. Of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, water Lillies, Sorrel, Cheries. Syrups. Of Vinegar, Pomegranats, Limons, Verjuice, of the juice of Sorrel, Violets, Roses, Quinces, water Lillies, Apples, Currans, Oxisac∣carum. Conserves. Of Roses. ¶ Borage and Buglosse flow∣ers, Clove Gilly flowers, of wood Sorrel.
Condites. Lemons preserved, Barbaries, Cur∣rans, sowr Cherries preserved. ¶ Quinces, Pippins, Oranges without the peels, Borage roots. Species. Diamargariton frigidum. Treschischs. Of Spodium, Camphier. Ʋnguents. Of Roses, of Sanders. Expectoraters: by the Latines Expectoran∣tia: by the Greeks . THey are such Medicines as render those things or Excrements contained in the Lungs, fit to be purged out by coughing, and are called Be∣chicks, from their manner of evacuating by cough∣ing; for the Greek word Bex signifies a Cough, from whence comes Bechicus. They are otherwise called procurers of spetting, and Anacatharticks; as also from the part that is to be evacuated, they are called Thoracicals, and Expectoraters: and they are of two sorts, according to the variety of Excrements, viz. attenuaters, and thickeners: the first expectorate by attenuating, cutting and cleansing the grosse Humors: the others by thick∣ening, and also lenifying. Where is to be noted, that if any thing among the attenuaters seems too sharp, it is to be tempered with the lenifiers, least the Cough be too much irritated, or least the grosse Humor by too much using them, be hard∣ned.
The matter of the Attenuaters. Roots. Of both the Birthworts, marsh Mallows, Angelica, Cuckoo-pits, Enulacampain, Ireos, Squils, Onions, Ginger. Leaves. Of Maidenhair, Calamint, ground Ivie, Hysop, Tobacco, both for a Syrup and suffumi∣gation, wild Marjoram, Penniryal, Jerusalem Cowslips, Horehound, Catsfoot, or mountain Cudweed, Scabiosse, Sundew or Ros folis, Colts∣foot. Seeds. Of Annise, Coleworts, Carthamus, Fennel, Cresses, Massilian Seseli, Silvermountain, of Nettles. Berries. Of Bays, Juniper. Flowers. Of Rosemary, Camo∣mile, Scabiosse, Saffron from ℈ s. to Never exceed ℈ s. for it causeth faintnesse by over mollifying. ℈ i. Fruits. Bitter Almonds, dried Figs, Capers. Rosins. Myrrh, Turpentine. Animals. Hony, Fox-lungs prepared to ʒ s. ʒ i. Chymical things. Flowers of Brimstone made ei∣ther into a Loach or Tablets; oyl of Brimstone, a few drops of which use to be mixed with the Lo∣hochs. Waters. Of Carduus benedictus, Hysop, Colts∣foot, Scabiosse. Syrup of Maidenhair, Hysop, Horehound, Colts∣foot, of Catsfoot, simple Oximel, Oximel of squils. ¶ Syrup. de Erisimo, botruos. Conserves. Of Enulacampain, Maidenhair,
Rosemary Flowers, of Coltsfoot Flowers. Powders. Dia Ireos Solomonis, and simple Dia∣calamintha. Lohochs. Of Fox lungs. ¶ Sanum & expert. Lo∣hoch de Farfara, or Coltsfoot, de Passulis. External things. Oyls. Of bitter Almonds, Ireos, Camomile. Oyntments. Resumtivum, Dialthea, Pectoral Plaisters, Filii Zachariae. The matter of the thickning lenifying things. Roots. Of Liquorice, Holihocks. Seeds. The four greater cold feeds, white Pop∣py, Lettuce, Mallows, Barly, Rice. Flowers. Of water Lillies, Violets, red Poppy. Fruits. Sweet Almonds, Dates, Jujubes, Pine kernels, Phistick nuts, sweet Prunes, Raisins, Se∣bestens. Juices. Of Liquorice, Starch, Penidies, Opium with caution. Animals. Butter, Marrows new drawn. Waters. Of Violets, red Poppy, water Lillies. Syrups. Of Liquorice, Jujubes, water Lillies, red Poppies, Violets, white Poppies, Hony of Vi∣olets. ¶ Diacodium simple and compound, Syrup of the Muscilages. Conserves. Of Violets, water Lillies. Powders. Of Diatragacanthum frigidum, and Diapenidium.
Pneumonicks, or altering Medicines for the Lungs. THey are those that are used to correct the di∣stemper of the Lungs; the matter of which is the same with that of the Expectoraters: among which, to heat the Brest, the most excellent is flower of Brimstone, given to Rather to ℈ i. ʒ i. in a soft dressed Egg: also ʒ ii. of Turpentine dissolved in ℥ ii. of Oximel. Outwardly, the Sul∣pherous natural Baths. But to cool the Brest, the use of sowr things, of Milk, red Saunders in the beginning of a Con∣sumption, and to prevent the spetting of Blood, will suffice. Also Conserves of Roses, made sowr with a little oyl of Vitriol, used often morning and evening at going to bed. See for others a∣mongst the Expectoraters. Encreasers or Breeders of Milk. THey are so called properly or unproperly; they properly breed Milk that cause much and good Blood: such are Meats of much and good nourish∣ment, and temperate Medicines: for of such things Milk is the material effect. They
improperly breed Milk, which are endued with a moderate cutting quality, whereby they render the Blood fluid, and move it to the Dugs, that it may there be convert∣ed into Milk; of which this present Discourse is. Where note, that some certain of them do force the Blood, as it were, to the Dugs. Some are ex∣ternal, some internal. The Internal. The Leaves of the true Macedonian Parsley, of Dill, Smallage, water Parsnips, Polley; all of them must be green: Poligalaor, Milkwort, Let∣tuce in hot tempers, for in cold ones it diminish∣eth milk. Green Seeds. Of Annise, Fennel, Rocket, Ni∣gella. Juices. Of Gourd, Dandelion, blew Goats∣beard, Ptisane, or thick Barley broth. Powder. Of Christal made very fine, and given to ʒ i. in a fit Liquor, Lac Lunae given to the weight of ʒ i. External things. Mollifying simples; as the Roots of marsh mal∣lows, the Leaves of Dill, mallows. Seed of Flax, flowers of Camomile mixed with the aforesaid Leaves and Seeds for a Fomentation: Also Rubifiers, if other things will not avail. See Rubifiers. Things drying Milk.
THose things diminish Milk, that either by their vehement coldnesse thicken the Blood, or by their too much heat discusse and dry it up; or else by a propriety of substance, hinder the breeding it. Such are either Internal, and those either Hot, as Bazil, Rue, Calamint, Sage, Agnus Castus: or cold, as Purslain, Housleek, Gourds, This should ra∣ther have been re∣ferred to the hea∣ters, for it resists Milk by drying and consuming, and is withall hot, as appears by its aerimony and small. Cam∣phier: or external, as a Cataplasm of the hot things aforesaid, boiled in Oyl. 2. Linnens dipped in Ver∣juice, and applyed. 3. Smallage stamped with Vinegar, and apply∣ed. 4. A sponge dipped in the Decoction of Cum∣min, or Coriander seed, made with sharp Vinegar and applyed: 'tis the secret of some people. ¶ I have seen this very succesfully and speedily done by a Mid∣wife, only first fomenting the Dug with Vinegar, and af∣terwards applying a Plaister of Diachilon simple, which was suffered to lye on two or three dayes; this prevented any hardnesse that otherwise might have happened.
THE SECOND BOOK. SECTION III. Of Remedies of the inferior Cavity, viz. The BELLY. The Type of the Section. Remedies of the in∣ferior Ca∣vity, or Belly, are properly these, viz. for the Stomack, Stomachical things. Intrals chiefly a∣bove other parts are used Discussers of windinesse. Killers of Worms. Liver, Hepatical. things. Spleen, Splenetical things. Kidneys or reins, Nephritical-things, and those either lenifiers, cleansers, brekers of the Stone. Bladder, cistical things. Testicles, encreasers of Seed. diminishers of Seed. Womb: Histeri∣cal things, and those either strengthning the Womb. or moving staying the courses.
Stomachical Medicines. THey are called Stomachicals, which by a pe∣culiar faculty alter those humors that are contained in the stomack, and also help together with it the Concoction, and other functions of the stomack, and strengthen it; of which some are hot, some cold; and both these must not be too much opening or diuretical, but somewhat astringent. The Hot. Roots. Of Calamus aromaticus, Cvpresse, Ga∣lingale, greater Gentian or Felwort, Zedoary. Barks. Of Oranges, Citrons. Woods. As Lignum Aloes. Leaves. Wormwood, Betony, Mint, wild Mar∣joram, Rosemary, Sage. Seeds. Of Annise, Citrons, Cummin, Fennel, seeds of Chermes. Flowers. Of Bettony, Sage. Fruits. Bitter Almonds, Peach kernels. Gums. Mastick ʒ s. given with a little Ginger or Zedoary in a rear Egg. All Spices, especially Ginger and Pepper, swal∣lowed whole. Sea things. Ambergreece, Amber. Waters. Of the Leaves aforesaid, of Cinamon, Aqua vitae, spirit of Anniseed. ¶ Spirit and water of Wormwood, the greater composition, Aqua Mirabilis, Imperialis, Mint water distilled with Wine, D. Steevens his Water.
Distilled Oyls. Of Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinamon, mace, Cummin seed, Amber. ¶ Especially Oyl of citron, and Orange Barks. Syrups. Of Wormwood, mint, Bettony. ¶ Of citron peels, of cinamon. Conserves of the Flowers of Wormwood, Bet∣tony, sage. ¶ Of the tops of Mint and Balm, of Roses with Mithridate. Condites. Citron peels; Acorus Condite, Nut∣megs, Walnuts, Ginger condited. Confections. Alcherms, mithridate, Treacle. ¶ Diacorum, Diacinnamomum, Electuary of Bayberries, Electuary of Sasafras. Species, or Powders. Aromaticum Rosatum, Diagalanga, Diacidonii cum speciebus. ¶ This last had been fit among the confections, not here. To these add Aromat. cariophillatum, Species Elect. Rosatae no∣vellae, Diatrion Piperion, Diaspoliticum, Dianisum, pow∣der of the roots of Cuckoopits compound. Troschischs. Of Wormwood, Rubarb, Gallia moscata. External are Oyls. Of Wormwood, mint, mastick, Nutmegs by expression, of Nard. ¶ Distilled Oyls of Worm∣wood, Amber, Nutmegs, Mace. Emplasters. Of Bay berries, stomachale Galeni, stomachicum magistrale. Cold things for the stomack. Roots. Of sorrel, sccry, Plantain. Leavs. Of sorrel, Endive, sowthistle, succory,
the five capillary Herbs, Dandelion, and the Leaves of mirtles. Seeds. The four greater and the four lesser cold seeds, mirtleberries, Barley. Flowers. Of succory, red Roses, Cytines, or flowers of Pomegranats. Woods. All the saunders. Fruits. Barberries, Quinces, Pomegranats, Cherries, medlars, services, strawberries, Citrons, all the mirabolans especially. ¶ Prunelles, currans, Raspes. Juices. Of the Leaves and Fruits aforesaid; al∣so Acacia, Hypocistis. Gums. Camphier, adding Binders with it. ¶ Camphier taken in any considerable quantity offends the Stomack and Head, especially if nothing be joyned with it, Faculties of Cam¦phier. to allay that fumous acrimony wherewith it is fraught, which is so search∣ing and fiery, that it rather dissolves Na∣ture with the heat, then cools otherwise then by accident being outwardly applyed. Sea things. Coral. Waters. Of Roses, Plantain. ¶ Of Quinces, Brambleberries, Succory. Syrups. Of Verjuice, of the juice of sorrel, of Quinces, Pomeganats, mirtles, rob of Quinces, juice of Oanges. Preserves. Cherries, Quinces, Currans, Bar∣berries, sowr Grapes preserved. ¶ Oranges and Lemons preserved without their peels, Goos-berries, Raspes. Species. Diatrion sanralon, Diarrhodon abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum.
Troschischs. Of Camphier, Spodium, Maudlins. ¶ Trosch. of Saunders, Barbaries. External Coolers. Oyl of Mastick wood, of Quinces, of Mirtles, of Roses, omphacine. Oyntments. Unguentum Rosatum, Orange flow∣er oyntment, Unguentum sumach. KILLERS of WORMS. Called by the Latines Vermes necantia, by the Greeks . THose are called Killers of Worms, which the Worms abhor, either for some manifest qua∣lity; as sharpnesse, bitternesse, sowrnesse, which tasts are loathsom to them: or else such as by an occult quality are destructive to them. Where note, that without a Feaver we may use the hotter sort, but in a Feaver, them that are lesse hot, i. e. sowr ones; or else things mixed with such. Roots. Of Birthwort, Swallow-wort, Alkanet, Snakeweed, white Dittany, Gentian the greater, Crosswort, Fearn male and female, Carline Thi∣stle; Enulacampain, Devilsbit, Tormentil, Zedoa∣ry, Rubarb, Madder, Burdock, Butterbur. Barks. Of the roots of Mulberries, Capers.
Leaves. Of Wormwood, (Pontic and sea worm∣wood) Time, Mints, Rue, Dandelion, Polly, Asa∣rina of Matthiolus, Savine, Horehound, Cala∣mint, Tansie, Arsmart, Peach leaves, Carduus benedictus, Goats rue. Flowers. Of Century the lesse, Hops, Hysop. Seeds. Wormseed, Lupines, of Coleworts, Co∣rianders prepared, Purslane, Citrons, Oranges, Grach, Dill, Hedisarum or French Honysuckle, Pseudomelanthium, or St Katherine flower, Nigel∣la or Fennel flower, Cresses, garden and wild Rocket, of Turnips, Lovage, Hops, Sorrel, Hemp, Leeks, Barberries. Gums. Of Juniper or Vernish, Myrrh, which is a Rosin. Animals. Shavings of Harts horn and Ivory, powder of earth Worms, the cochal bone of an Ox, Unicorns horn. Earths. Bole armoniack, Terra sigillata. Minerals. Brimstone, salt Peeter, Quicksilver given to ℈ s. ¶ Pewter filed small. Sea things. Coralline, red Coral. ¶ Amber. Juices. Of the aforesaid things, of Limons, Pur∣slane, Verjuice. Waters. Of Wormwood, Gentian, Grasse, Pur∣slane, sea Radish, Perwinkle, Rue, Mints, of the flowers of Sloe tree, Endive, Succory. Condites. Orange and Citron peels. Syrups. Of Wormwood, Endive, Succory, of the juices of Citrons, Oranges, Barberries, Cur∣rans, Sorrel, Bizantinus. ¶ Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, Syrup of Peach flowers, of the juice of St. Johns wort, of wood Sorrel, Syrup of Rubarb augustan, Syrup of Reses solutive with Hellebore, Syrup of the juice of Scordium.
Conserves. Of Peach flowers, Clovegilly flow∣ers, Orange and Citron flowers. Oyls. Of Olives, bitter Almonds, Peach ker∣nels, of Vitriol, one, two, or three drops. Confections. Treacle, Mithridate. ¶ Treacle∣diatessaron, London Treacle, Diascordium, confect. de Hy∣acinth, Elect. Amarum, Magistrale utrumque. Powders. Diaspoliticum, Diacalaminth compound, Dialacca, Purging powders, Diaturbith cum Rhabar∣baro, Warwick powder, Mercurius dulcis: Salts of Wormwood, Centory, Broom, &c. External things. Oyls. Of Wormwood, Rue, Coloquintis, i. e. of Coloquitis infused in Oyl, and boyled; Oyl of Bayberries. ¶ Oyl of Myrrh, Savine, Sicionium. Oyntments. Unguentum de Arthanita, Oynt∣ment for the Worms of the Augustan Physicians; Gall applyed to the Navil, or anointed on the Belly. ¶ The Oyntment called in the London shops Ʋn∣guentum amarum, or the bitter Oyntment, is worth them all. Note, that the chymical Oyls of any of the aforesaid simples, are used both inward and outward, if there be no Feaver.
DISCUSSERS of WIND. Called by the Latines Dicutientia, and Sar∣minativa: by the Greeks . THose simples are so called which are of the like nature with the Diaphoreticks before mentioned: they differ not in faculty, but in the intention and use. The Ʋse of these is in pains of the Chollick, and griefs of the Womb. Roots. Of Angelica, Galingale, Masterwort, Indian spikenard. Barks. Of Oranges, speciall in curing and pre∣serving from the Chollick. Leaves. Of Bayes, Calamint, wilde Marjoram, Dill, Majoram, savory, Rue, Pennyrial, Hysop, mint, Bazil, Time, wild Time. Seeds. Of Annise, Fennel, Carraways, Cuni∣min, Daucus, Bishopsweed, Parsley, Agnus castus, Angelica, Oranges, Citrons. Flowers. Of Camomile, Centory the lesse; for Wind in the short Ribs Region. Fruits. Bayberries appropriated to pains of the Cholick and Womb, Junipe berries. Spices. Mace, saffron, Cloves, Ginger, Cina∣mon, Pepper. Animals. Castor. ¶ Wolf, guts dryed. Waters. Of Cinamon, Aqua vitae, and Waters of the Leaves aforesaid. Distilled Oyls. Of Anniseed, Fnnel seed, Car∣raways, and Camomile, which is the best.
Electuaries. Of Bayberries, Treacle, Treacle∣diatessaron to ʒ i. in white Wine. Species. Diacumini, Diagalingal, of Rosata no∣vella. External things. Oyls. Of Wormwood, Dill, Rue, Mints, Bays, oyl made by infusion of the seeds and flowers of Agnus castus; this is admirable in the Collick. Plaister of Mellilate, Cataplasms and Bags made of the aforesaid Leaves, seeds, flowers, are most profitable in the Collick. A great Cupping glasse with much flame set upon the tumisied place, and in the Collick appli∣ed to the Navil, it easeth pain as it were an in∣chantment, as Galen affirms. Hepaticks, or Medicines for the Liver: cal∣led by the Latines and Greeks Hepatica. THey are so called, which correct the distemper of the Liver, and hinder its obstructions, to which 'tis very apt; or else which help it when 'tis come to passe, and withall do a little binde its substance, that the spirit and heat of the Liver, as of a principal part, may be preserved. Such are those that cut and cleanse without vehement heat, and that are withall somewhat binding. ¶ These also are either hot or cold; internal or external.
The hot internal. Roots. Of Cypresse, Enulacampain, Calamus aromaticus, Rubarb, sulpherwort. ¶ Sharpdock Roots. Leaves. Of Wormwood, Agrimony, German∣der, field Cypresse, Fumitory, Hops, white Hore∣hound, Mints, Bettony, squinant, Rosemary. Seeds. The four greater hot seeds. Flowers. Of Rosemary, Century the lesse, Spike∣nard. Spices. Cloves, Ginger, Nutmegs. Fruits. Fistick nuts, Raisins. Waters distilled of the aforesaid-Leaves and flowers. Syrups. Of Wormwood, Agrimony, Bettony, Byzantinus, of Fumitory, Mints, of the 2. and 5. Roots. Condites. Acorus, Walnuts, Nutmegs. ¶ Eringo Roots, stalks of Burdocks. Confections. Treacle, Methridate, Diacrocuma. Conserves. Of the flowers of Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, Enulacampain. Species and Powders. Aromaticum rosatum, Di∣arrhodon abbatis, Laetificans Galeni. ¶ Dialacca. Troschischs. Of Wormwood, Maudlins, Dialac∣ca, rubarb. External hot things. Oyls. Of Wormwood, Spikenard, Mastick, Mints, Nutmegs by expression. ¶ Of Myrrh per de∣liquium, of bitter Almonds.
Oyntments. Dialthea, Martiatum, and of Mostick; Cataplasms of the aforesaid Herbs and Seeds, with Wine. Cooling Hepatical Medicines. All those things that are contained in the Ta∣ble of the cooling stomachical things, may also be reckoned of this number amongst the coolers of the Liver; to which adde these following, which are lesse agreeable to the stomack, but very profi∣table for the Liver. Roots. Of Kneeholm, Sparagrasse. Leaves. Of Agrimony, Strawberries, Ducks meat, Grasse. Seeds. Of winter Cherries. Flowers. Violets. Waters. Of Agrimony. Syrups. Byzantinus, of the 2. and 5. opening Roots, where there be lasting Obstructions. Externall. Oyls. Of Roses, Omphacine, or of unripe O∣lives, of water Lillies. Oyntments. Unguentum Rosatum, Refrigerans Galeni, Ceratum santalinum. Epithemes of the distilled Waters and Spices is most usual.
Splenetick things: by the Latines Splene∣tica: by the Greekes . THese are of the same kind as the hepaticall medicines, according to Galen; only they are more powerfully attenuating and opening, and lesse binding, by reason of the grosenesse of the excrements of the spleen; They are two fold, hot, for naturall melancholly, and cold, for the corre∣cting of burnt choler. The Hot. See the Table of the preparers of naturall me∣lancholly, to which adde these following. Rootes of both one thing, see Sero∣derus. Calamus Aromaticus, Birthwort, asarum, bryony, radishes, the true both one thing, see Sero∣derus. Acorus these are two seve∣rall plants., or these are two seve∣rall plants. galangall the greater, Ireos, squils, hops. Leaves of betony, calamint, St. John's wort, Germander, Rue, Pennyroyall. Seedes of Madder, Ash keyes. Fruites. Ivv berrynes. Spices. Saffron, Cinamon. Minerals. Steele prepared. ¶ Chymicals. Tar∣tar vitriolated, creame of Tartar, Tartarus chalibeatus, Crocus martis, ¶. Liquors. Vinegar of squils, ¶ spirit of wine tar∣tarisated, lye of the ashes of tamariske and broome, ¶. Syrups. Oxymel simple, and of squils, ¶ syrup of ammoniack, of epithimum, ¶.
Conserves of the flowres of tamarisk, of broom. Condites. The roots of Acorus condited. Species. Diacurcuma, Dialacca. Distilled oyles of Cummin, Cinamon, Vitriol, ¶ of the barkes of citrons, of tartar by deliquium. The Externall are Oyles of Capers, tamarisk, wall flowres, rue, bitter almons. Ʋnguents. de Althea. ¶ Ʋng. splanchnicum, and Ʋng. splanchnicum magistrale, oyntment of the juyces, commonly called vng. è succis. Emplasters. de mucilaginibus, Diachilon cum gummis, ¶ de ammoniaco, and the compound plaster of Melilot, ¶. And other magisteriall oyntments, wherin gum ammoniack, bdellium, and the pow∣ders of Ireos, Asarabeck and sowbread, should be prescribed, and divers other formes, made for pre∣sent use of the aforesaid things, especially rue, cresses, nettles, mustard, centaury the lesse, asarum and sowbread. Cold splenetick things. These are to be sought out of the Table of the attenuaters of choller, which also are convenient for burnt choller gathered in the spleen, to which add narrow leaved docks, and these external, to∣picall things. Oyles of violets, water lillies, Ʋnguents refrige∣rans Galeni. oyntment of roses, cerecloath of saunders, sharp vinegar, ¶ juyce of hemlock, vinegar of hemlock.
Animadversion. Sweet things by themselves are hurtfull to the spleen, but added with other things are good con∣veighers: Pythagoras when he was scandald by a certain fellow, recited this metaphorically, sharp and bitter things help them that are splenetick, but sweet things hurt them. And this is now be∣come a practicall rule. Nephriticall things i. e. Medicines appro∣priated to the reines or kidneys: by the Latines Nephritica: id in etiam Greè, ut etiam .
NEphriticall medicines are three fold, divided according to the structure, office, and pecu∣liar affections of the reines to which they are sub∣ject. 1 Lenifiers, the use of which in the scalinesse and roughnesse of the reines, as also in the heat and sharpnesse of the Urine. 2 Cleansers, the use of which is in the obstruction or suppression of the Urine, either by the stone, mucilaginons matter, or sand, these are comprehended under the Diu∣reticks. 3 Lithontripticks or breakers of the stone, the use of which is in crumbling, and diminishing the stone, that it may the more easily be expelled. The cleansers are to be sought in the Table of the Diureticks, with which they agree, only there they have a more generall use, here a particular one, wherefore I shall here only recite, the lenifi∣ers and the Lithontripticks. The Lenifiers. Rootes of marsh-mallows, liquerish, grasse, spa∣ragus; eringoes. Leaves of Plantain, common maiden hair, Pel∣litory, sorrel, lettice, mallowes, water lillies, pur∣slain, sowthistle. Seedes of marsh-mallowes, cotton, mallowes, flax, fenugreek, four greater and four lesser cold seeds, of plantain, fleawort, white poppy. lowers of violets, chamomill, water lillies, red poppyes. Fruites. Sweet almons, jujubes, sebestens, fistick nuts, raysins, sweet prunes, dry figs, apples. Gums. Tragant, of the bitter almon tree, cher∣ry tree, camphere. Animals. Butter, Milk, Whey. Juyces of Licorice, almon milk, barly creame. Chymicall things. Sure these are not lenifiers. spirit of vitriol, sal Sure these are not lenifiers. prunellae. Waters of the leaves in the table aforesaid. Syrups of violets, jujubes, water lillies, apples, of marsh-mallowes, by Fernelius. ¶ syr. de muci∣laginibus, of water lillies compound. Conserves of violets, water lillies, ¶ mallow flow∣ers, ¶. Condited things. Lettice stalkes condited, the flesh of goards and melons condited.
Species of diatragacanthum frigidum, dia peni∣dim, ¶ pulvis hali. troschisch. gordonii, trosch. of saun∣ders, trosch. of camphere, bechicinigri, alkekengy: Ele∣ctuaries somewhat purging, Diacatholicon, Lenitive elect. passularum, pulp of Cassia: altering Electuaries, Diaspermaton, antidotus analeptica, ¶. Oyles of sweet almons, camphere, ¶ Ʋnguentum potabile. Externall Lenifiers. Oyles. Violets, water lillies, ¶ of poplars, oyle of wall flowres, chamomill, asmine, ¶. Ʋnguents. Oyntment of roses, refrigerans Ga∣leni, ¶ of orange flowres, anodynum, dialthea, resump∣tivum, ¶. Lython tripticks, o breakers of the stone.
SOme medicines that break the stone, doe it by a manifest quality, of cutting and cleansing without any extraordinary heat, as Galen, lib. 5. simpl. c. 13. doth affirme; for such medicines doe easily passe through narrow exile passages very far, and so by insinuating it selfe, and peircing all the parts dissolve its continuity; but too much beat doth the more concoct and harden the stone that is already gathered together; Others doe by their asperity, as it were shave and scale the super∣ficies, and by that meanes diminish the stone: O∣thers are thought to do the same by an occult pro∣perty, to which the Author of that treatise of the knowing and curing the affections of the reines, gives little confidence; but be they as they will I will here propound the matter of them all that are used by authors in breaking the stone, except only those that are to be found among the Diure∣ticks, which are to be joyned with these follow∣ing, as the use of them shall require, where note that those that are marked with a star are the most excellent. Roots of Birthwort, By Pliny's descrip∣tion it is teasels, by others it is englished corne marigold, or chrysanthemum. damaso∣nium, elecampain, dropwort, galingale, acorus, bastard rubard, Ireos, lovage, saxifrage, burnet, pyony, sea radish, brambles, net∣tles, squils. Leaves of southernwood, hares eare, the capilla∣ry herbs, germander, field cipres, coleworts, cel∣tick, hard Roman chamomil, ground Ivy, wild marjerome, polly, hyssop, fluellen, oake and wil∣low leaves, scordium, all seed, teasel, golden rod, dead nettle of Fuchsius, for the stone in the bladder. Barkes of Acorns, the middle bark of hazell. Flowres of larkespare. Seedes of dill, caaway, cummins, silver mon∣tan, bishops weed, macedonian parsly, corian∣ders, sampier; I think he meanes that by tretama∣rina, kneeholm, bazill, radish, St. John's wort, la∣dyes thistle, ash, nigella, cresses, burnet, lupines, broome, small burdock. Fruites. bay berryes, peach kernels, Ivy ber∣ries, the spongy, dog or wild rose. ¶ Juniper ber∣ries.
Spices. Ginger, lignum, aloes, red saunders, nutmegs, mace, cloves, ppe, carpobalsamum or balsam berries, cubebs, spike, squinant, saffron, which also add a gracefull relish to the medicines. Gums of cherry-trees, plum-trees, wallnuts, vinces, arabick, tragant, elemi, Olibanum, bdellium. Rosins of the Larch Tree, Firre Tree, true Tur∣pentine. Animals. blood of a Goat prepared, taken to ʒ i. in wine, hares blood. Ashes of earthworms, of hedge hogs, of an asses liver, feathers of wild pigeons, of a whole hare burnt, with the skin, flesh and haire, or else the skin of it daubed with its blood burnt, reed spar∣rowes burnt, ashes of scorpions, cheese logges or wood-lice, or monkes pease, beetles, hares kid∣nyes, powders of a Man's skull, of the warts and hoofes of horses, of the cocall bones of a hare, Ivo∣ry, pikes jaw, craw fish, the stoppings of snailes shels in the winter,, egge shels, crabs eyes, mouse dung, stones voyded by Urine from a man, kings fishers burnt, 3 Dioscorid. the stones found in the gall of an Ox. Stones. Lincis, Nephriticus, of sponges, judai∣cus, cristall prepared. ¶ Irish clat. Sea things. Amber. Earths. Ochre. Minerals. the ashes of glasse burnt. Juyces. Vinegar allayed with water, naturall vitriolated waters, juyce of sowr oranges, ¶ and lemons, winter cherryes, of yarrow, of fennell.
Distilled waters. Pellitory, Mallowes, marsh∣mallowes, broom flowres, bean stalks, restharrow or chammock, saxifrage, sparagus, parsly, fennel, toad flax, then which these following are more ef∣fectuall, water parsnep of Cratena, sampier, ra∣dishes, Ivy berries, winter cherries, chamomill, vervain, peach kernels, larch turpentine. Oyles of eech kernels, cherry kernels, of bitter almons by expression, given to ℥ i. oyl of vitriol. Alimentary things. Radishes eaten with vinegar, sea radish bruised with almons for a confection, roots of parsly boy∣led, the tops of sparowgusse and hops, water, pars∣nep, ladismocks, and water-cresses eaten in a sal∣let with vinegar, sampler pickled, lemons, hips, boyled with wine, and made into a confection or conserve, haires flesh, red sparrowes, especially the wagging rump. Cystick medicines, called by the Latines vesicae appropriata, by the Greekes . THese are such medicines as are appropriated to the bladder; now the same things that are good in the affections of the reines, are also pro∣fitable for the bladder; only the situation of the blader (as being more distant) requires the strong∣er sort of them, least their vertues should be dissi∣pated before they could penetrate so far; But more especially in its hot distemper, or the heat of the urine, see for those things which cool the li∣ver and lenifie the reines; because the Urine is made sharp either by the hot distemper of the li∣ver or the reines.
INCREASERS of SEED: called by the Latines Semen gene∣rantia, by the Greekes . THose things increase seed properly that are ei∣ther nourishments of good juyce, or medi∣cines temperate in heat and moysture, and those improperly, which affect it by stimulating the seed, or exciting venerall thoughts (of which in its place) such are those things that are sharp and flatulent. Rootes of Eringoes, slatirions, turneps, all eat∣able bulbous rootes, of sparagus, rocket, potatoes, galingall, green ginger, navew, ¶ Parsneps, Skir∣rets. Leaves of rocket, clary, cresses, crowgarlick, ¶ The sprouts of Sparagus, ¶. Seedes of red vetches, beanes, rocket, navew, nettles, kidney beane, ash seed, linseed. Fruites. Pine nuts, fistick nuts, kernels of Indian or Coconuts, Artichoakes, both the bottom and stalkes. Animals. The pisle of a bull or red deere, scin∣cis, musk, civt, cocks stones, sparrows bines, oysters. ¶ Egges, especially those of the goose, pheasant and partridg, emets or pismires, especially made into a∣qua magnanimitatis distilled with honey, spice and wine. Spices. Saffron, pepper, nutmeg, cloves. Sea things. Amber greece taken in a rear egge.
Condites. the roots of satirions, eringoe, meates condited, the confection diasatirion taken to ʒ i. or ʒ ii. in muskadine after supper. Note that many things that are hot may be referred to this Classis, as also salt things, which provoke lust by making the seed the thin∣ner, not by increasing it; hither may be referred the use of cantharides, which provoke it even to decoction of blood and exulceration. Extinguishers of seed or allayers of blood: called by the Latines Semen extinguentia, by the Greekes . THey are either very cooling, or discussing; of the first sort are water Lillies, Lettice, Cam∣phere, but this may better be referred to the latter, as hath been before hinted at, for it heats, dryes, attenuates, rarifies and discusseth. ¶ purslane, hemlock, &c. the latter sort are agnus castus, rue, mints, dill-seed, and the seed of agnus castus, frankincense, syrrup of Nimphea. ¶ of agnus castus, the troschisck of agnus castus, externally, oyle of rue, water lillies, anoint∣ed outwardly on perineum, allay the too much turgency of the instrument.
Histericall medicines: called by the Latines Histerica: by the Greekes idem, usually Womb medicines. THese Medicines so called, from the intention or end they are directed to, some are emptiers of the womb, viz. those which move the courses, ex∣pell the birth and afterbith, and cleanse the womb from all dreggy humours: Others are binders stay∣ing the immoderate flux of the courses; and lastly others are strengthners, which preserve its own proper temper and naturall heat; The use of which is in helping the actions of the womb, viz. concep∣tion, or the child, (from whence they are called helpers of conception, and preservers of the child, hither also are reduced those which bind) or else in curing the symptomes, which disturb the acti∣ons of the womb, or of the whole body, viz. in ap∣peasing fits of the mother. Movers of the Courses: called by the Latines Menses moventia, by the Greekes . THey are called Movers of the Courses, either properly or improperly, they are properly mov∣ers of the courses, which open the obstruction of the veines of the womb, and bring blood to it, they are hot either in the second or third degree, and dry in the first or second, almost height,
not absolutely of a thin substance, but moderatly grosse, least their vertue should be dissipated in the passage; among which sort those are the most effectuall which have a bitternesse mixed with sharpnesse: Those that improperly move the courses, are the Diureticks, which attenuate and melt a grosse blood, that at the time of the courses, it may flow the more plentifully; but these ought not to be used alone, (because by the draw∣ing away of the watrishnesse of the blood, the blood afterwards becomes grosser, by which meanes the courses stop,) but used with the appro∣priated things: This following discourse shall be only of them that properly move the courses, the stronger of which do a so expell the birth and after birth: the matter of them is this following. Roots of Cocco pits, Birthwort, Asarum, Brio∣ny, Bilinguis, Ciperus, Sowbread, Centanry the lesse, Dittany, Gentian, of yellow flags, Ireos, Bayes, Lillies, Pionies, siivermontan Valeri. Leaves of Mugwort, Souchernwood, I fear it ra∣ther stayes them, Garden Daysies, Maiden haire, Motherwort, a spoonfull of the powder provokes the birth, Lillies, Feaverfew, Wood bine, Marje∣rome, baume, Wild mints, Mercury, Bazill, wild Marjerome, mountan polly, horehound, yellow Maiden haire, Savin, Clary, Scordium, water-parsnep; for the birth, Sage, Rue, sweet trefoile. Seeds of Agnus Castus, Amomum, Bishopsweed, Bazill, Nigella, Pyony, Rue.
Flowers of Southernwood, Marygolds, Centau∣ry the lesse, St. John's wort, wall flowres dryed, Saffron, for the after-birth, Cadings of a walnut-Tree (viz the long flowry tassels, of the wallnut-Tree, given in powder to ʒ i. is a famous remedy for the fits of the mother) of Feaverfew, Spike∣nard. ¶ Chamomill. Gums. Assa fetida, Bdellium, Galbanum, myrh, Opopanax, Sagapene, Storax calamita. All Spices. Especially Saffron and Cinamon. Animals. Hawkes or Faulkons dung given to ʒ i. with wine, powder of horse stones, cut in sli∣ces, washed in wine and dryed, given to ʒ i. in hippocrasse, a turtle dove rosted, the belly stuf∣fed with Cinamon, bay and juniper berries, eaten every other day before the time of lying in, the after-birth of an Ewe dryed and given in powder. Juyce of Scordium given to ℥ ss. with Saffron, to provoke the birth. Minerals. Native Borax is excellent to provoke the birth, given to ℈ i. in liquor. Waters of the aforesaid herbs, which are usuall in the shops, Briony water compound. Syrups of Mugwort, horehound, Bettony, ¶ Of the juyce of St. Johns wort, of Mercury, of the juyce of Scordium. Distilled oyles of Castor, Savin, Cinamon, myrrh. ¶ Ambr, Mugwort, Rue, Turpentine, Sulphur. Trosciscks of Myrrh, to ʒ i. in the forme of pils. ¶ Troschischi Hysterici. Externall things. Oyles of Lillies, Chamomill, Wall flowres. Stones. The stone Aetites tyed to the thigh, pro∣vokes the birth, so doth a Loadstone held in the left hand. The Gall of an Oxe, pulp or powder of a wild
Cowcumber, and Coloquintis, in Pessaries. Animals. Thee hoofe of an Asse, fumed, pro∣vokes the birth and afterbirth. Stoppers of the Courses. BEcause these are very near the same, with the binders, expounded above in the first Book, Part. 1. Sect. 3. therefore the matter for such me∣dicines is to be sought in the Table of Astrin∣gents or Binders. Strengtheners of the Wombe. Rootes of Snakeweed, Calamus Aromaticus, Costus, Cyperus, Galingall. Leaves of Bettony, Marjerome, Sage, which two are eminent, Rosemary, Baume, Nigella. Flowres of Marjerome, Rosemary, Sage. Fruites. Juniper Berries, Bay Berries. Animal excrements. Musk, Civet, Ivory. Sea things. Amber, Corall, Ambergreece, Mother of pearle. Rosins. Storax, Benzoin, Frankincense, Mastick. Spices. Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Spikenard, lignum Aloes. Waters of Bettony, Marjerom, Baume, Sage. Syrups of Bettony, Baulme. Oyles of Amber, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg. Condites. Acorus condited, Walnuts and Nut∣megs preserved, Myrobalans, and Satirion roots condited.
Opiates. Triphera magna, both with and with∣out Opium, Treacle, Methridate: ¶ Diascordium, Alchermes, Diacinnomomum, Tripheia masor. Species. Aromaticum rosatum, Diambra, Dia∣moscum: ¶ Species diacurcuma, Dialacca, Diagalan∣ga, Diacalaminth, Dianisum. Externall things. Oyles of Nutmeg by expression, of Nard, of myr∣tles: ¶ Oyle of Costus, Mints, Mastick, Quinces, Ca∣stor, of St. Johns wort, Moschaeleum. Oyntments. Ʋnguentum comitissae, Martiatum, Mastichinum, Sumach. Plasters. Promatrice, ad herniam, of mastick, ¶ Cerecloath of Galbanum, Emplast. Caesaris. de crusta panis, Diaphaenicum utrum{que} Metropropiolicon. ¶ Note that to the best of these, some adde the more strengthening provokers of the courses.
THE SECOND BOOK. THE FOƲRTH SECTION. Of the Remedies of the LIMBS. Arthriticall things, or things appropriated to the joynts, Latine and Greeke called Arthritica. THey are called Arthriticall medicines which are destined to the strength∣ning of the sinewey and membra∣nous parts, of which the joynts are composed. The Ʋse of which is both to prevent and cure the severall sorts of the Gout. They are twofold, Internall and Externall; the matter of the internall things is the same with the cephalicall things, whether you understand this of the hot cephalicks in a cold defluxion, or of the cold ones where it proceeds from a hot cause; for there is the same reason for the sinews as for the head; but particularly these following are appro∣priated to the joynts.
Externall or topicall medicines for the joynts are usefull either in the beginning of the Gout as to mitigate both the heat and pain; or else in the end to dissipate the reliques of the impacted matter, least it turn to a stony indissoluble hardnesse. The mat∣ter of each particular is this. The chief Arthritical internal Medicines. Roots. Of Achorus, Elecampain, Ireos, Cinque∣foil. Leaves. Of Mullen, Cowslips, field Cypresse, Calamint, Gentory the lesse, St Johns wort, Bet∣tony, Sage. Woods. Sassaphras, which is excellent. Flowers. Of red Roses. ¶ Sage, Rosemary, Ste∣chados. Animals. Castor, ashes of Harts horn, a Man's skull. Sea things. red Coral burnt. Spices. Indian Spikenard. Rosins. Of all sorts, especially Turpentine. Juices. Opopanax. Conserves. Of field Cypresse, in a cold Cause; of red Roses in a hot Cause. External things mitigating the heat & pain. Leaves. Of Nightshade, Plantain, marsh Mal∣lows, Henbane, both sorts of Housleek, Mallows, Pellitory, Danewort, Elder, Ducks meat. Flowers. Of Roses. Juices. Vinegar, Phlegma, or insipid water of Vïtriol, whites of Eggs, Vinegar with water, Sal Prunellae dissolved in red Poppy water. Gums. Camphier.
Mucilages. Of the seed of Fleawort and Quinces. ¶ of marsh Mallow roots, Pulp of Cassia. Waters. Of Roses, Nightshade, Plantain, red Poppy. Oyls. Of Violets, water Lillies, Roses, Oyl of Man's blood, called the Elixar of Man. Oyntments. Unguent of Roses, Populeon. External things dissipating the relicts of the Humours and pain. Roots. Of Elecampain, Sowbread, Briony, Co∣loquintis. Leaves. Of Mullen, Cowslips, field Cypresse, Calamint, Cresses, Centory the lesse, Nepe, Pen∣nyroial, Danewort, St Johns wort. Rosins. Mastick, Bdellium, Turpentine. Rather Roots.Fruits. Hermodactils. Thickned Juices. Ammoniack, Opopanax, Fu∣phorbium. Animals. Castor. Fats. Of a Cat, Badger, Fox, Bear, Serpent. Oyntments. Martiatum, Dialthea. Oyls. Of Tiles, Castor, Turpentine, St Johns wort, Hony, Wax, Ireos, Foxes, Euphorbium, (which is to be used warily) and of Elder. Plaisters. Of Frogs of Vigo, of the Mucilages, Mellilote, Oxicrocum. To these are numbred those which strengthen the Sinews; called by the Latines Nervos Roboran∣tia, by the Greeks .
Roots. Of Acorns, Eringo, Masterwort, Sulpher∣wort, or Hogs Fennel, Rhaphontick, Costus. Woods. Sassaphras, Misle of the Oak. Leaves. Of field Cypresse, Hysop, Lavender, Marjoram, Cowslips, Rosemary, Sage, the three sorts of Spike, viz. Indian nard, Celtick and Italian, wilde Time, Goats marjoram. Fruits. Anacardines, Pine nuts. Berries. Of Juniper, Kermes. ¶ Bayes. Spices. Cinamon, all the Peppers, Ginger, Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cardamomes. Rosins and Gums. Myrrh, Venice Turpentine, with the Powder of field Cypresse, Opopanax, Sagapene. Animals. The Brain of a Hare roasted, Castor given to ℈ i. in Pils. Conserves. Of Rosemary, Cowslips, Sage, Erin∣go, Bettony. Confections. Treacle, Methridate, Confectio A∣nacardina. ¶ Diacorum. Powders. Diagalanga Pleresarconticon. ¶ Dian∣thos, Diamoscum dulce, Pulvis Antilyssus. Waters. Of Lavender, Sage, Marjoram, Treacle water. ¶ Sp. of Lavender compound of Matthias, Piony water compound, Aqua Imperialis, Spirit of Castor. Syrups. Of Bettony compound, of Chamepitis, or field Cypresse, of Staechados. External strengthners of the Sinews. Fats. Of Vipers, Foxes, Stags, Men.
Oyls. Of Tiles, Wax, Camomile, St Johns wort, earth Worms, Nutmeg by expression, Tur∣pentine, Foxes, Vipers, Costus, oyl of Peeter, Dill, Ricininum, of Rue. ¶ Of Mace by expression, oyl of Amber chymical. Baths. Those which are sulpherous, nitrose, bi∣tuminous, aluminous; and let the drippings of these fall on the beginning of the Back bone: also the mud or slime extracted from them, may be ap∣plied profitably to the part affected. Grease. Of a Goose that drips from it whilest it is roasted, being filled with Frankincense, Myrrh, Bdellium, Mummy, &c. Aqua vitae poured on the part, helps much. Fomentations and Bathings. Of Mugwort, Flea∣bane, Calamint, Rue, Camomile, Sage, Dill, field Cypres, wild Marjoram, St Johns wort, salt Peeter, common Salt. Cataplasms. Of the same. Cold strengthners of the Sinews. They are the same with the cold Cephalicks, or Head Medicines. To which add Among the Seeds, Barly; among the Species, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diatrion santalon; and a∣mong the external things, Mucilage of Fleawort, Vine leaves, Vinegar, Rose water, chalibeated water, and natural Iron Baths. An APPENDIX of Remedies for BƲRNINGS.
REmedies for Burnings, according to Ferneli∣us, l. 6. M. M. cap. 20. are three fold: Some ease the inflammation, and draw forth the fire: Others hinder the rising of Pustles, and ease the pain: Others mitigate the ulcerated and painfull parts, and by moderately drying heal the sore. Of the first sort are, 1. All things that are cold in the first degree, which extinguish the inflammation, as are those Juices and Liquors, Water, Vinegar, Water with Vinegar, white of an Egg, juice of Housleek, Lettuce, Night∣shade, Endive, Plantain, Purslane. Distilled Waters of the aforesaid Herbs. Earths. Any that is next hand, but chiefly the Cimolian, Bole armoniack dissolved in any con∣venient juice, water, or oxycrat. i. e. water with vinegar, and anointed on the place. Minerals. Ceruse, Allum dissolved in water, or with the white of an Egg; Dioscoride, used to a∣noint the place with writing Ink dissolved in wa∣ter. Gums. Camphier. 2. Some certain hot things that call out the fire; as, Leaves of Cookoopits, Leeks rubbed on the place, Elder and Danewort applied in the same manner. Roots. Onions bruised with Salt, and laid on the Burn, the Root of Kingspear boiled in Oyl, and the juice anointed, helps both Chilblains and Burnings. Of the second sort are these Remedies follow∣ing.
Leaves. Of Privet, Sage, Mirtles, made into a Searcloth, or Salve, with Hogs fat, and applied: also the same green stamped up with Hogs grease, and onely laid on; the leaves of Mallows and hor∣ned Poppy used the same way. Glue mollified in warm water, Dioscord. The Leaves of mircles burnt, and the ashes mixed with the white of an Egg. Salt Peeter with oyl of Roses, or oyl of Eggs. Waters. Of mullen, Plantain, Nightshade, Ro∣ses, adding sometimes red Saunders, and a little Camphier. The juice of Fennel and white Wine with cold water poured on the part that is burnt. Of the third sort are these. Oyntment of Lime washed, which is compound∣ed, of Lime washed, and oyl of Roses, or Butter; adding other things as you please, as Ceruse, Cam∣phier, mucilages. Oyl of St Johns wort with washed Lime, is effe∣ctual in any Burn, though of Gun-powder. Ʋnguentum album, of Rhasis, or of Ceruse. See more in Fernelius in the aforesaid place, I have on∣ly added these as a finishing Complement to fill up the empty pages.
¶ Note, that without this methodical proceeding, I will undertake a Burn or Scald may be healed onely with the Oyntment of Stramonium, or Thorn-apple, described in Gerard's Herbal, in the Chapter of Stramonium; make two sorts of that Oyntment: one onely of the Leaves and Apples bruised, boiled up with Hogs grease: and another by adding a little Turpentine and Wax, as he there shews. When the Burn or Scald is now made, apply the first for two dayes, till the fire and inflammation be fetched out; then apply the other twice a day, till it be whole: and if you see it fit to skin the sore, take Ʋnguentum rubeum Desiccativum, or de Cerussa, and heal it up. With these any curable Burn will be healed speedily and safely. Ge∣rard healed one burned with Lightning. See his own words in the aforesaid place. GOD be Praised.
The Treatise or Tract of pre∣scribing the forms of Re∣medies, con∣tains two Books: one of Internal Me∣dicines Liquid: Apozemes. Juleps. Potions. Syrups. Vomitories. Medicinal Wines. Emulsions. Almond Cream. Barley Cream Milk and Whey. Mead. Sugred water and Diet Drinks, Cock broth. Distilled Restoratives. Broths. Soft: Boles. Opiates. Lohochs. Preserves. Solid: Paste royal or Morsels. Pandalcon. Marchpane and Pineolate. Tablets. Pills. Troschischs. Powders. another of Externall Medicines Common to many parts: Epithemes. Lotions. Fomentations. Half Baths. Baths. Stoves. Embrochations. Liniments. Unguents, Oyntments. Searcloaths. Plaisters. Spanadrape. Cataplasm. Rubifiers Deopax. Vesicatory, Sacculets. Proper to certain parts: Frontals. Oxit redinum. Caps quilted. Collyriums. Gargarisms. Apophlegmatisms. Dentifrices. Snifting Medicines. Suffumigations. Perfumes. Scutes. Pessary. Nascale. Suppostory. Clister.
The Matter of PHYSICK is either Universall, respecting The Morbificall cause offending in Qualityes, manifest, As in the first, Alterers. Second, as if in Grosnesse, Attenuaters. Cutters. Thinness, Thickners. Hardnes, Mollifiers, Dissolvers of clotted things. Clamminesse, Cleansers. Sharpnesse, Mitigaters. Occult, are Alexipharmacals, or Resisters of Poyson. Quantity, are either Preparers of the Humors, as Digestives. of the Body, as Openers. Universal Evacuaters, as Purgers, Vomitories, Diureticks, Diaphoreticks. Motion, and are in respect of the matter flowing; Thickners. part receiving; Repellers and Emplaisticks. wayes, by which it flowes Intercepters, Binders. Rest, which is to be eva∣cuated ei∣ther insensibly, by Discussers, Consumers. Attracters by quality. manifest, occult, as extracters. Watrishnes, by Blisterers. matter by Ripeners, Breakers of Imposthumes. The chief heads of Dis∣cases which are either similar, as Distemper, which if simple, 'tis cur'd by alterers. material, by emptiers and alterers. Orga∣nical, which are ei∣ther in the Streightness of the in sensible passages, wch requires Rarefiers; but in the insensible requires Openers. Too much dila∣tion of the Pores. insensible, requires Con∣densers or Thickners. sensible, requires Binders. Over-growing of the parts, as Stopping of the Cavities, by excrescence of flesh, and are cured by Cathereticks. Exuberancy of the parts, ei∣ther in greatnesse or num∣ber, and are cured by Chy∣rurgery. Continuity dissol∣ved, and is either simple, and requires Agglutina∣ters, and vulnerary things. Or Continuity dissol∣ved, and is either with losse of the substance of the part, and requires Sarcoticks and Epuloticks. Symptomes that are most common, and most urgent, as Pain, to which we use Anodynes, if not great. Narcoticks, if violent. Over-watching, to which Hypnoticks, or sleepy Medicines. Bleeding, to which stoppers of Blood. Swouning, to which Restorers of the spirits. or particular, respecting Medicines dedicated to Head, which are either Brain: To strengthen it, as Cephalicks. Purge it, as Errhines, Sneezing Powders, Apophlegmatisms. Eyes, as Opthalmicks, which are either Sharpners of Sight. Anodynes. Repellers. Digesters. Cleansers. Ears, as Oticks, or Ear Medicines. Teeth, as Odonticks, or Medicines for any affection of the Teeth. Brest, either for the Heart, as Cordials. Lungs, as Expectoraters. Alterers of the Lungs. Dugs, as encreasers of Milk. dryers up of Milk. Belly, either to the Stomack, as Stomachical things. Intrals or Guts, as Discussers of Wind. Killers of Worms. Liver, as Hepatical Medicines. Spleen, as Spleneticall. Kidneys, as Nephritical Me∣dicines, which are either Lenifiers, Cleansers, or Breakers of the Stone. Bladder, as Cystical Medicines. Stones, as encreasers of Seed. diminishers of Seed. Womb, as Hyste∣rical Medicines, which are either Strengthners, Purgers, as movers of the Courses. stayers of the Courses. Limbs and Joints, as Arthritical Medicines, internal, Hot, as the Cephalicks. Cold, as the Cephalicks. external, in the beginning as mitiga∣ters of heat and pain. end of the Gout, dissipaters of the relicts of the Hu∣mors imparted in the parts. Place this Table at the end of the Book before the Index.
Here follows an Expository INDEX of such Words as I was fain to use in the translating, for which our Lan∣guage hath not so fit Expressions that are Intelligible as some might wish; so that to satisfie them that might think I strove to speak strange Words, as some Novices use, to shew themselves more then they are: I have given an Exposition to make every word that is innovated by Me (and somewhat more) in∣telligible, if they have recourse to this TABLE, as they read and find words not facile to them. A ABbreviation, A shortning. Abscessus, a parting a∣way of an Humor after a dis∣ease; converted into a Swel∣ling, or such like, into some other place: Absolete, out of use. Accumulated, gathered to∣gether, or heaped up. Acquisite, obtained by use, or otherwise, not natural. Active qualities. See Qua∣lities. Acuated, made sharp, or more violent in working. Alchol, a fine Powder. Alexipharmacal, Alexiterial, both signifie Medicines resisting the Plague and Poisons. Ana, of each alike. Alluminous, having Alium in it.
Analepticks, Restoratives. Anastomaticks, openers of the Orifices of the Veins. Anodynes, casing pain. Antidote, a Medicine a∣gainst Poyson. Anus, the Fundament. Appropriate, convenient and particularly fit for. Apozem. See the other In∣dex of the Leaves. Aromatizing, spicing, or seasoning with spices. Arthritical, belonging to the Joints. Ascarides, Worms in the Fundament gut. Asthma, a difficulty of Breathing Astringent, binding. B B. M. Balnco Mariae, or a distilling by setting the Still in water boiling. Balaustines, Flowers of the wild Pomegranate. Basis, a fundamental, or chief thing in the compositi∣on; that that giveth the ru∣ling quality. Bechical, purging the brest by coughing. Bituminous's having Bitu∣men in it, which is a fat sul∣pherous substance arising out of the earth. Bulbous, knobby, as any knobby Roots, as Turnips, Onions, &c. are buibaus Roots. C Cacochymical, full of ill Humours. Carthamus. See in the o∣ther Index. Caruncles, excrescences of flesh in sore parts. Cathartick, purging, or a purger. Chalibealed, properly that hath steel quenched in it. Cholagogne, that purgeth Choler. Chranical, lasting long. Citines, the Flowers of ma∣nured Pomegranats. Concrete, grown together, or hardned. Concretion, such a harden∣ing. Corroborate, strengthen. Coronary, used in garlands. Costice, bound in belly. Crust causing Medicines: See the other Index in Escaro∣ticks. Cute, Wine boiled to the thicknesse of Hony. D Decocted, boiled. Digestives, Medicines that reduce Humours or parts to a good condition, either by concocting or discussing that which is noxious. Diureticks, provokers of U∣rine.
E Eminency. in this book it signifies the height of liquor above the matter 'tis poured to. Emplasticks. See the other Index. Energy, vigor, vertue, force. Epicerasticks, mitigaters of Acrimony. Epicrasis, it is a sort of gentle purging, often repea∣ted in weak bodies, and that are full of Humours, yet can∣not suffer them to be purged out strongly. Epuloticks, Medicines that close and skin a Wound, or join the scar. Equivalent, here it is often used for such things as may serve turn in stead of others that are harder to be gotten. Any thing of like vertues and substance. Eradicate, to root out. Erisipelas, a fiery hot in∣flammation called S. Antho∣nies fire. Expectorate, to cough up any thing out of the Lungs. F Factitious, made by art. Ferment, any hing that setteth other mixtures a working together, as Yest doth Beer. Fermentation, such a work∣ing together. Feid, stinking, ill sented. Fraulent, windy, breeding windinesse. Friability, an aptnesse to break or beat to powder: Function, the same that Faculties. G Gonorrhea, a disease called the running of the Reins. H Hectical, inclining to, or sick of a Hectick Feaver. Hepatical, appropriated or belonging to the Liver. Hydragogue, a purger of wartish Humours. I i. e. that is to say. Impregnated, fraught with the vertues of any thing. Imbibing, drawing forth, or drinking in the vertues of a∣ny Medicine. Imminent, near at hand, ready to happen. Incorprate, to mix through∣ly those thing that are to be mixed, that they may seem as one body.
Indication, that reason of the mind in the Physician that perswades him what is to be done in the curing of the sick: You may call it a direct on taken either from the cause, the Disease, symp∣toms, or circumstances a∣bout the sick. Insipid, without taste. Ironed, having Iron quench∣ed or steeped in it, or other∣wise naturally infected with Iron. L Lenifie, sometimes 'tis ta∣ken for to make smooth, soft or gentle, a part that is rough, hard or stubborn: sometimes to mitigate the sharpnesse of Humours, and ease pains. M Macerated, steeped. Magisterial, a prescription of the Physician, invented peculiarly for his present pur∣pose: any Composition that is not usually sold in the shops. Materia Medica, the latter of these Books so called: sometimes also named in the first Book by the name of the Magazeen Physical. Med, a drink of Hony and water. See the Index. Melanugogue, a purger of Melancholy. Minorative, those purges that are given before prepa∣ration of the Body, are usual∣ly called a Minorative, be∣cause it is given to diminish the Humours, least being co∣pious, when attenuated by preparation, they should be apt to move to some ill pur∣pose, or stir up an Hyper ca∣tharsis, or excesse of the working of the Physick that is after prescribed. Modern, of late times. Mollisie, to soften or make gentle. Morbifical, encreasing or breeding the Disease. Mucilage, a Jelly stuffe, as it were, drawn out of some Seeds and Roots by much boyling, but it should be such as are onely of a slimy na∣ture. Also the dissolving of Gum Tragant and Arabick is usually called a Muclag. Mucilaginous, of such a sli∣my substance as a Macilge is: or full of Mucilage. Must, new Wine before 'tis purged, at the time of Vin∣tage. N Narcoticks, Medicines that have a stupifying, benum∣ming quality, forcing violent sleep, driving away pain, not by mitigating the cause, but by dulling the sense. Nitrous, full of salt Peeter, or of such a like quality. O Odontcks, Medicines ap∣propriated to the Teeth.
Officinal, belonging to the shops, or usual in the Apo∣thecaries shops. Opthalmical, appropriated to the Eye. Otick, things appropriated to the Ears. P Panchimagogue, a Medi∣cine that purgeth all Hu∣mours together Passive Qualities. See Qua∣lities. Pectoral, appropriated to the Brest. Perincum, the distance ke∣tween the Fundament and sitting place. Phlegmagogue, a purger of Elegm. Phtisick, the Consumption that cometh with Ulceration of the Lungs. Phtisical, inclining to, or sick of such a Disease. Pincolate, a Marchane made of the kernels of Pine Nuts. Premonitions, admonitions or directions, set at the be∣ginning of any thing. Pulse, usually taken for any kind of Grain that grows in cods, as Pease, Beans, Vet∣ches, &c. Q q. s. or s. q. a sufficient quantity of any thing. q. v. as much as you will. Qualities are either First, Second, or Third: Manifest, or O cult: Active, or Passive Mention of all these is divers times used. The first Qualities are counted those obvious ones that we call Heat, Coldnesse, Moisture, Drinesse. The second are Qualities arising from the former, through a peculiar mixture of substances, as softnesse, hardnesse, thicknesse, thin∣nesse, saltnesse, sweetnesse, cleansing, daubing: cutting, making clammy; attenua∣ting making grosse; opening, stopping; making slippery and rough; loosening, bind∣ing, &c. The third Qualities are the proprieties of things to this or that part: as to purge this or that Humour, strengthen this or that part; as Head, Brest, Heart, Stomack, &c. or to be good for this or that Disease. These are occult Qualities. Manifest Qualities are usu∣ally meant of some of the a∣foresaid, viz. Qualities for whose operation Reason can give it self a , at
least, if not a plenary satisfa∣ction. Occult Qualities are the same with the third Quali∣ties; onely of late by a new distinction some distinguish those Medicines that resist Poyson, Plague, Infection, &c and call them Qualities ari∣sing from the form or whole substance of the thing, and will have these onely to be occult, and poisons their op∣posites. Active Qualities, are heat and cold. Passive Qualities, are moi∣sture and drinesse. R ℞ ♃, these two marks are the usual notes by which Physicians begin their Re∣ceit, and stand for Recipe, i.e. take. S s. q. or q. s. as much as is sufficient. Sape. See Cute, 'tis the same. Scope, the course that the Physician is to take in his ap∣plying of Remedies, the way of martialing his Indicati∣ons. See Indication. Schirrus, a hard swelling of the Liver or Spleen, or any other place. Schirrous, hard like such a swelling. Septicks, corroding, poy∣sonous Medicines. See the other Index. Series, a scroll or roll, or numberlesse company of things, yet orderly. Sincere, without mixture. Somniferous, provoking sleep. Splenetick, if it signifie Me∣dicines, it is such as are good for the Spleen: if Persons, such as are troubled with the Spleen. Splenetical, the same. Stibiated, fraught with the vertue or strength of Stibi∣um, i. e. usually understood of the Vitrum Antimonii. Stomachical, appropriated to the Stomack. Sudorifick, a Medicine pro∣curing Sweat. Sudorifical, that hath such a vertue. Sulphur, 'tis usually spoken of Brimstone, and also very often taken for any fatty, strong sented substance, ei∣ther in the Earth, or in any Vegetable. T Tenesmus, a vain desire of going to stool, wherein the party voids little or nothing. Testudimate, a Marchpane made of Tortose flesh and Almonds, &c. Thoracical, appropriated to the Brest.
Torrified, that is, scorch∣ingly dried by the fire, but not burnt. Turund, a kind of a tent made of pith of Elder or Gentian root; sometimes of a sponge dipped in any melt∣ed Plaister, and put into any very deep sore, that is like to harden round about, or turn to a Fistula: also if any proud flesh arise in any hollow sore, or in the Nostrils. V Ʋomitory, a Medicine to provoke vomit. Vomitive, having such a quality. BOOKS sold by Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in CORNHIL. Wits Interpreter, the English Pernassus, or a sure Guide to those admirable accomplishments, that compleat English Gentry in the most acceptable qualifications of Discourse or Writing: also the whole Mystery of those pleasing Witch∣crafts of Eloquence and Love are made easie, in the Art of Reasoning, Theatre of Courtship, Laborinth of Fancies, Love-Songs, Drollery, The perfect Inditer of Letters, A la mode, by J. C. The floating Island, a Tragi-Comdy, acted before the King by the Students of Christ Church, by Dr Stroud. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the Mysteries of Nature, and his Secret of Alchimy. Illustrious Shepherdesse, Imperious Brother: translated out of Spanish: A famed Romance. Short-hand-Writing mad most plain and easiest that ever was, newly published by J: Rich, in short-writing. Tectonicon, shewing the exact measuring all manner of land, squares, timber, stone-seeples, pillars, globes: also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, &c. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meaters, Joynets, Carpenters and Masons: by I: Diggs. Heaven and Earth shaken, a Trearise shewing how Kings and Princes, and their Governments are turned and chan∣ged: by J: Davis Minister in Dover. The tears of the Indies, being an Historical Relation of the cruelties of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hish mela, Cuba, Iamaica, &c. in the West Indies; by Casus Bishop in Spain, an eye witnesse.
Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rossie Crosse, written by Count Mayerus, and now Englished for to inform that honourable Society of wise Philosophers, by T:H Compleat Midwifes practice, in the high and weighty con∣cernments of the birth of Mankind: or perfect Rules deri∣ved from the Experiences and Writings, not onely of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute Practice of many French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations, fitted for the weakest Capacities, in a short time to attain the know∣ledge of the whole Art: by T: C: and others. I: Tradescon's Rarities, published by himself. Art of Simpling, an Introduction to the knowledge and gathering of Plants, wherein the Definitions, Divisions, Pla∣ces, Descriptions, Differences, Names, Vertues, times of flourishing and gathering, Uses, Temperatures, Signatures of Plants: To which is added, a Discovery of the Lesser World, by W: Coles: Wilsford's Arithmetick, made plain to the easiest capacity, in two Books, viz. Natural and Decimal, being most useful for all Gentlemen, Merchants, Shop-keepers, and all others, by Tho: Wilsford, Gent: An excellent piece. Adam in Eden, the Paradise of Plants, a Description of all our English Plants, wild or otherwise, with their Signatures applyed to the parts of the body of Man, with their Physical use, that a man may be his own Physician, the Ingredients being to be had in every Field and Garden; made publick by W: Coles, D: for the benefit of all English men: A piece of worth. The perfect Cook, a right method of the Art of Cookery, restoring the whole practice to a more refined way then ever was before extant. A Dictionary explaining all the terms both in Physick, Anatomy, Chyrurgery and Chymstry, by I: D: Medicina Magica, Tamen Physica, the method of curing Diseases by Sympathy and Antipathy, a work fit to be known by all, S. Bolton: Timothies vade mecum, or a pocket companion for the sons of the Prophets, wherein are treated of matters appertaining to Ministers, and such as intend for the Ministry, by T: Crave The treasury of the Soul. History of Metors, by Thomas Wilsford, Gent: The Queens Closet opened: Incomparable Secrets in Physick, Chyrurgery; Preserving, Candying and Cooking, as they were presented to the Quen, transcribed from the true Copies of her Majesties own Receipt-books, by W: M: one of her late Servants.
