P4060 669.f.10[90] 99869408 162623
SCOTLANDS PUBLICK ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF GODS JUST JUDGEMENT upon their NATION For their frequent BREACH OF FAITH, LEAGVES, and SOLEMNE OATHES made to their Neighbours of England, in former Ages, to gratifie their treacherous Confederates of FRANCE. Recorded in their own publick Liturgie, Printed at Edenborough by Thomas Bassandine, Anno Dom. 1575 page 54. 57. 58. under this Title, Prayers used in the Churches OF SCOTLAND in the time of their Persecution by the FRENCH∣MEN (in the year 1560.) from whose Tyranny and Vassalage, they were then delivered by the Free Brotherly Assistance and Forces of the ENGLISH, to whom they had been formerly so Perfidious. Published to prevent the like Breach of Solemn Leagues, Oaths, and Covenants between both Nations now (for fear of of incurring the like, or a worse Judgement,) by a Well-wisher to both Kingdomes. BUT Now, O Lord, the dangers which appeare, and the trouble which increa∣seth, by cruell Tyranny of forsworne Strangers, compelleth us to complain before the Throne of thy Mercy, and to crave of thee protection and defence against their most unjust persecution. That Nation, O Lord, for whose pleasure, and defence of whom, we have offended thy Majesty, and Violated our Faith,See Tho. Walsingham, Hist. Ang. an. 1383 p. 133. & Antiqui∣tates, Eccles. Brit. p. 295. 296. oft breaking the Leagues of unity, and concord which our Kings and Governours have contracted with ourTo wit, of England. Neighbours, that Nation, O Lord, for whose alliance our Fathers and predecessours have shed their blood, and we (whom now by tyranny they oppresse) have oft sustained the hazard of battaile, that Nation finally, to whom alwaies we have been faithful, now after then long practised deceit, by manifest tyranny doe seek our destruction: Worthily and justly may thou,Note. O Lord, give us to be slaves unto such Tyrants; because, for the maintenance of their Friendship, wee have not feared TO BREAK OƲR SOLEMN OATHES, made unto others, to the great dis-honour of thine holy Name; and therefore justly mayest thou punish us by the same Nation, for whose pleasure we feared not to offend thy Divine Majesty. In thy presence, O Lord, we lay for our selves no kinde of excuse, but for thy deare Sonne Jesus Christ his sake, we cry for mercy, pardon, and grace; Thou know∣est, O Lord, that their crafty wits in many things have abused our simplicity: For, under pre∣tence of the maintenance of our Liberty, they have sought, and have found the way (unlesse thou alone confound their Councells) to bring us in their perpetuall bondage, &c. This Text needs no Commentary: the summe of it is: Nationall perjury will certainly punished with Nationall Misery; and those who break their Solemn Oathes, and Leagues wi their neighbour Brethren, to gratifie any other Nation or Party, shall by Divine Justice bee betraed, enslaved, or endangered to be destroyed by that very Nation and Party, for whose ends they th violated their Oathes and Covenants. A strong engagement both to our Brethren of Scotland and us, to take heed of Covenant breaking one with another, least thereby we expose our selves to Heavens Vengeance, and to th Tyranny and slavery of the Common Enemy. AMOS 1. 9. 10. Thus saith the Lord; for three transgressions of Tyrus, and for foure, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, they delivered up the whole Captivity to Edom, and REMEMBRED NOT THE BROTHER COVENANT. Therefore will I send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devoure the palaces thereof. Printed at London for M. S. 1646.
