R606 E181_25 99873131 125587
woodcut of an agricultural cycle. At the top is a cross-section of crops growing in the ground. Below are 8 numbered panels: 1. a man scattering seeds over a ploughed field; 2. a man cutting crops with a scythe; 3. a man flailing crops in two tied bushels; 4. a woman sifting or separating grain from sacks through a sieve; 5. a woman tending a fire over which sits a large pot; 6. a man seated, drinking from a mug, with a jug and several barrels nearby; 7. a man vomiting; 8. a woman sweeping with a broom
THE REBELS TVRKISH TYRANNY, in their march Decem. 24. 1641. As it was taken out of a Letter sent from Mr. Witcome a Merchant in Kingsale to a Brother of his here. Shewing how cruelly they put them to the Sword, ravished religious women, and put their Children up∣on red hot Spits before their parents eyes; throw them in the fire, and burn them to ashes; cut off their eares, and nose, put out their eyes; cut off their armes, and legges, broyle them at the fire, cut out their tongues, and thrust hot Irons down their throats, drown them; dash out their brains, and such like other cruelty not heard of amongst Christians. With a great and bloody skirmish fought between Captain Hull, and the Rebels: and the names of the chief Rebels of that Regiment. And the firing of a Town within a mile of Dublin. LONDON: Printed for W. R. 1641.
THE FRISH REBELS TƲRKISH TYRANNY: Decemb 24. 1641. A Mongst other sad diasters of the Rising of the Rebels in Ireland, there was the 24. of December 1641. an Army of about 5000. Rebels, who were gather∣ed together about Croke Haven in the Countie of Corke, which is in the South west part of Ireland. There was a Religious and godly man, that li∣ved there by name M. Dabnet; who perceiving that the Rebels were come near, sent his servants to his neighbours and Tenants, perswading as many as he could to stand with him at his house, upon their guard, if possible keep them out: So that he had gathered together about 500 that were able to bear Arms; but there was but little provi∣sion. So that they barred the gates to them as well as the fence of the house would permit them, and betook them within the house to such provision as they had. But poore souls, it was all to little purpose, for when the Rebels approached, they fell upon the house, and soon entred, and slew all
the guard after a most butcherly and cruell manner as soon as ever they entred. Then they took M. Dabnet his wife, a religions godly woman, and threw her down upon the floore, and ravished her before . And having to done, they took one of their chil∣dren, with trickling teares running down its pretty face, stript off its clothes, and barbarously spit the harmlesse babe upon a red hot spit, which they had heated in the fire, before its parents eyes, and yet were they not herewith satisfied; but upon the same spit they put another of the children also, to the great and unspeakable grief of their parents. These two babes, they laid down upon a pair of Racks that stood in the chimney, to roast before the fire, and by force made another of the children (bigger then either of the other) to turn the spit about, which was done with an heavy heart. And when he had turned a little, they took him away from the spit, and threw that boy into the fire, and held the poore childe down till he was dead, and let him lie till he was burnt to ashes. Here was a heavie sight for the parents. Afterwards they took M. Dabnet himself, and before his wifes face, cut off both his eares, and his nose, and put out both his eyes, and cut off both his arms, and his legs also; and having so done, they stripped him naked, and laid him along close by the fire to scorch him, where he lay untill his flesh did rise up in blisters with the heat of the fire: then they took him up and asked him (in derision and scorn) if he were not acold: Who languishing be∣tween
life and death, as it were, all his blood being in a manner gone, and his vitall spirits, in much weaknesse spake to them thus, That the worst that they could do to him, he doubted not but that it was for his eternall good; and he did admonish them to take heede; for all these things will rise up at the day of Judgement against them. This speech did but the more inrage them a∣gainst him, when they saw, that all these tor∣tures would not make him yeeld, but that he was resolved to die a Protestant; insomuch, that they pulled open his mouth, and cut out his tongue, and run an hot Iron downe his throat, and so he died. His Wife, poore soule, standing by, beheld all this, with what sorrow, let all loving wives, and tender hearted mothers judge; then they deman∣ded of her if shee would turne to them, and follow with them; but what with feare, sorrow and the distraction that shee was in, was not able to speake, or make them any Answer; onely with weeping eyes in an abundant manner, fell upon her knees, like one halfe dead: But they pulled off her head∣cloaths, and dragged her out of the house by the haire of the head into the yard, where there was a Well, into which they threw her, and drowned her; and after this set the house on fire. From hence they matched to Buiton, to Sir Wil∣liam Hulls Castle; entending to take the Castle, but they could not enter the Castle; for it was well fortified, both with men, powder, shot, and other provision for Warre, good store of Muskets; be∣sides
two brasse Pieces of Ordnance mounted on the wall; and a great murderer planted against the coming in at the gate, which was fast shut also so that in a short space there were a hundred of the Rebells slaine, and the rest were forced to retreate backe. So they went into the Towne, and with wild fire burned up the most part of it; which forced the Inhabitants to flie out of their houses to save their lives, and they fled to the Castle thinking there to finde shelter; which was about the space of a mile off from the Towne, But in the way the Rebells fell upon them, and slew the greatest part of them. From thence they marched to the Bantry, a place about ten miles from the said Castle, where was Captaine Hull with five hundred men. The Re∣bells fell upon him and his Army, and there was a bloudy Skirmish betweene them, but Captaine Hulls Army was but an handfull to them in com∣parison. In the Skirmish whilest the Captaine fought, there was about two hundred of his men slaine, and about a hundred of the Rebells. And Cap∣taine Hull himselfe being slain band so many of his Army; the rest were driven backe by the Re∣bells towards the Sea and there some of them were battered to pieces upon the Rocks, and o∣thers drowned in the Sea; to the great griefe of the Protestants thereabouts. Then the Rebells returned into the Towne, and tooke it; and used the Protestants in it cruel∣ly;
defloured the women before their husbands faces, dragged them up and downe the streets by the haire of the head, and dashing out their chil∣drens braines against the walles, and against the stones in the streets, and pulled them in pieces be∣fore their parents faces; and putting Christians to unheard of torments. Some they hanged by the haire of the head; some they hanged by the hands, and whipped them to death; and other such like cruell torments. Then they tooke those Armes that were in the Armory for the County; which were about a thou∣sand Armes, which they carried away, and fired the Towne. After such cruell manner have the Rebells de∣stroyed the Towne in the space of one weeke, in the West part of the County of Corke. The Names of the chiefe Rebells of his Company. Oswelren Beere. Filminey Makecue. Onen Marmuffe. Darmon Ofanen.
There is a little Towne within a mile of Dublin, which the Govemours there have caused to be burnt, for feare that a∣ny of the Rebells should come and har∣bour there. FINIS.
