S2785 E603_17 R205836 99865089 165658
Several Occurrences, TOUCHING The further Proceedings of the SCOTS with their Declared King. Containing these ensuing particulars; viz. I The Parliament of Scotlands new Act and Declaration to be published throughout the Kingdom. II Their declared Kings sailing from Holland with seven men of War, 500 Mariners, and about 140 pieces of Ordnance. III The Declaration of Van Trump the Dutch Admi∣ral, to the King of Scots. IV The bloudy murthering of Mr. Ascram (the Parlia∣ment of Englands Agent) at Madrid in Spain, the manner thereof, and the Kings Proclamation concerning the same. V The Duke of Yorks Letter from Jersey, to his mother in France; and the L. Hoptons resolution concerning the Scots. LONDON, Printed for G. H. 1650.
Severall Occurrences, touching the fur∣ther Proceedings of the SCOTS. Right Honourable, THis morning we received Intelli∣gence, that the King of Scots em∣barqued himself on Sunday the sixth instant, but upon his going aboard, a great storm arose (which many conjecture to be ominous) The Convoy that is to guard him, is said to be 7 ships of War, carrying in all about 140 Guns, and man'd with about 500 men, which were design'd to meet the East India fleet, that are now co∣ming to Holland, but the Prince of Orange prevailed with the States, for them to transport him into Scot∣land, which otherwise might have been retarded; for Van Trump (the Dutch Admiral) seemed unwilling to undertake the Voyage, having other employments; and being solicited (by the young King) for accom∣modation and assistance, he positively declared; That he was a sworn servant to the States of Holland, and could
not act or do any thing, without their permission or grant, and therefore humbly desired to be excused, in not answer∣ing him with a return, sutable to his desire, &c. As for the Scots proceedings, it is the general talk, and daily discours of most in these parts; but their results are kept extream secret, as in reference to the making a War with England: Some report they will make no war for him, till they see how he proves; and whe∣ther he be worth the engaging so deeply for or not: but it's more like, till they see what forces he can pro∣cure, to make some diversion; by invading you by sea, in several places at once. And though you may perhaps think it something improbable, you should be invaded at sea, and that it will be impossible to pro∣vide a Navy, either so secretly as you should not know it, or so great as you shall not be able to deal with it; they are of another minde, and give out that they have potent numbers in several parts, and are not without hope of a port or garison, in the West or in Kent (ther∣fore look well to them) where a few shall land at first, and the young titular-Kings party, will flock to them in multitudes; and this (as they say) will draw your forces to one place, till they shall have opportunity to land more in another; and as soon as these distractions are among you, then the Scots (like a swarm of Lo∣custs) to come in upon you (as one man) to make fertile England as miserable by war, as their own coun∣try is without it: and to the end, that they may ob∣tain the most easie and facile way, for the carrying on of this designe, they have prevailed with General Wal∣demar (the King of Denmark's brother) to assist them; also General Carp and some other German Command∣ers, have agreed with the Prince, to serve him for no∣thing
in England, and that they will have no pay, how long soever the war shall last, provided, that they may make booty of what ever shall come in their way: It may very well be doubted, whether their rapinous fingers will be able to distinguish, between Cavaliers goods, and those of Presbytery or Sectary (especially if they should be most valuable;) and divers of the Duke of Lorains men have undertaken the like, who are pretty skilful in this art, only they desire some advance money, which (we hear) the Prince of Orange will furnish them with. This is the evil that threat∣ens you, special care had therefore need to be taken; 'tis very facile to prevent dangers fore-knowing of them: Therefore begin to act strenuously and beware you be not deluded by a beaten fawning Spaniel. The Lord Digby's Secretary is lately arrived here from the Isle of Jersey, who reports; That the Duke of York passeth his time very merily in that Island, and in continuall exercise, and desires to see the War be∣gin this Summer, that he might serve his brother in the head of the Scots; of which his desire, he hath writ∣ten to the Queen in France, who was very well pleased with it, and accounted it a very honourable designe. But Sir George Cartwright (the Governour) and the L. Hopton, do not like that he should hazard himself, and do what in them lies, to alter his minde. And it is fur∣ther reported by the said Secretary, that the Lord Hopton will not engage with the Scots, who saith they are a perfidious people, whose hearts harbour nothing but deceit. Their bloudy proceedings against Mon∣tross, Spotsford, &c. hath quite turned the tide here, and those Officers designed for that service, will not engage with them.
By an Express from the City of Madrid in Spain, we are advertized of the brutish and barbarous assassina∣tion of that honest and ingenuous Gentleman, Master Ascram, Resident for the Common wealth of England with his Majesty of Spain; which bloudy Tragedy, was acted by some desperate persons, as followeth; viz. Upon his landing at the Port of Santa Maria, ha∣ving intelligence of divers threats uttered against him, a Spanish Colonel with a guard of 200 Horse, was ap∣pointed for his Convoy, by whom he was conduct∣ed to Madrid, where he arrived the fifth of this Mo∣neth, and that night lodged unfortunatly in a com∣mon Inn, intending the next day to be better provi∣ded. The day following, Master Fisher (his Steward) went to seek a house, and having found one very con∣venient, agreed for it; In the mean time, it happened as Mr. Ascram and one Signeur Riba (his Interpreter) sate alone at dinner, only with one servant attending them, the murtherers knocked at door, and pretend∣ing to be friends, easily got accesse; there was six of them in number, three being habited like Merchants, the other like souldiers: Upon their approach, Mr. Ascram rose from the Table to salute them, but the foremost laid hold on his hair, and returned the salu∣tation of Joab, stabbing him into the head; which his Interpreter perceiving, endevoured to escape, but was listewise stabbed in the Belly, and they both fell immediatly. The Assassinates were English, who post∣ed for refuge to the Venetian Embassadors, but he ab∣horring the fact, denied them entrance, so that they were constrained to take Sanctuary in the next Church; and being closely pursued (by command and Proclamation from the King of Spain) five of them
are laid in prison to be made exemplary, and one esca∣ped. This execrable fact (with that of Dorislaus) ren∣ders that party odious to all Nations. Brill, the 16. 1650. An Abstract from Scotland. Sir, THe young King is expected within a day or two, (as many give out) but the people are divided, and the meaner sort begin to see what slavery they live in under the great Laurds, so that there is great probability they may in time shake off those shackles. Yet notwithstanding, the Parliament of Scotland have published an Act for the raising of every fourth man; A Copy whereof followeth, viz. The States of Parliament now convened, taking in∣to consideration the good and service of the Kingdom, and Shires thereof, they Ordered the Committees of War of every several Shire of the Kingdom, to make new rolls of all the sensible persons, within each of their several Shires, and to cause the fourth man of the whole number of their sensible persons, to be trained, armed, and formed in Companies, and made ready upon all occasions for the publike service, and good of the Kingdom and Shires, according to the rules and Acts formerly set down. And the Estates declare, that those persons who shall be inrolled, as the fourth man in the severall Shires, by vertue of this Act, to the effect aforesaid, shall no ways be employed
for recruiting of former Regiments; And ordains the Shires to have the nomination and Election of the Of∣ficers of their severall Companies, and Regiments to be made up of the fourth man in the said Shires. Which nomination and Election, the Estate Or∣dains the Committees of War, of the several Shires to represent to the Committee of the Estates of Parlia∣ment, to whom the Parliament hereby gives power to allow or disallow of the same nomination and Ele∣ction, as the Committee shall think fit, and to place others for such as they shall not allow, for the good of the publike service: And the Estates do further declare, that this present Act is always without pre∣judice to any former Acts, made for the putting of the Kingdom in a posture of defence, and ordaining all betwixt sixty and sixteen, to be trained and armed. Subscribed, A. Gibson, Cler. Regist. FINIS.
