S4038A E91_17 99859443 111526
The Protestant INFORMER, OR Information to all Protestants: Shewing the causes and end, of this unjust warre, Plotted by Romish Jesuites, and now managed by English Papists, and their abbettors against this Parliament, and in this all other Parliaments: Proving by forepast proceedings, present actions and persons acting that: this warre is no new quarrell, nor caused by the Militia But divellish malice, against the true Protestant Religion, and Lawes of this Kingdom, to set up, and establish Popery, and hath beene fifteene, or sixteene yeares last past, preparing. Also justifying this Par∣liaments proceedings, by Nature, Law, and Religion, against the false Calumniations of all Malignants: With an exhortation, to courage, liberality, patience, and Con∣stancy, to the hazard of life, and fortunes: in defence of Gods true worship; your own Rights, Liberties, and this present Parliament; with con∣fidence of a blessing, and victory, like Caleb, and Ioshua: For your GOD is with you. Published for Information to the Ignorant. By Gregory Thims Gentl. PSAL. 37. 14. The wicked have drawne out their swords, and bent their bow, to cast downe the poore and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation. JUD. 5. 23. Curse yee Meroz (saith the Angell of the Lord) Curse yee bitterly, the Inhabitants thereof: because they came not forth to the helpe of the Lord, to the helpe of the Lord against the Mighty. GAL. 5. 15 But if ye bite and devoure one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. London Printed 1643.
The Protestant Informer. WEE all complaine of our present misery, by the bloudy distractions of the kingdome, by this unna∣turall Warre: But few of us consider seriously of the cause, whence these distractions come. For information herein, take notice, that sinne is the only cause of every affliction, and of all punishments, whether to pri∣vate men, or whole kingdomes. Wee by our sinnes have provoked God Esay 26. 9. Deut. 6. 15. Deut. 28. 63. to anger, and God sheweth his anger, by his judgements upon us. King and Subjects have sinned, and now King and Subjects are punished. God causeth us to punish one another; He doth it either to reforme us or to destroy us. But God is the efficient cause of all. The cause of all causes: all other causes are but Gods instruments. Now the instrumentall cause of our di∣stractions, is wicked men: God useth one sinner to punish another, as Is∣raels 2 Chro. 12. 2. Esay 10. 5. 2 Sam. 12. 11, 12 sinnes was punished by wicked Shishake, and by Idolatrous Asher: Whom God calleth the rod of his anger, and the staffe in his hand: So God punished Davids sinne, by wicked Absolom: and King Rehoboams 1 King. 14. 16. sinne, by his rebellious people: and the sinne of the people by their King Jeroboam. Yet bee informed, that though God doe use wicked men for his instru∣ments, wicked men do wickedly even in the things which God useth them, to doe his will for they are naturally the Devils instruments, to execute his will, and their owne devillish malice: as we see in Iob. That which God Iob 1. 15. doth by wicked men is just, but that which wicked men doe is unjust: for they have no eye to the doing of Gods will, but to their own wicked ends, which is alwayes unjust and sinfull: For example, It was just with God, to punish Davids bloud-guilt nesse and adultery, by Absoloms rebellion, and defiling of Davids concubines: But it was unjust and wicked in Absolom, to doe it: It was just with God to punish Rehoboam, by the revolt of his people, but unjust in them to cast him off from being their King. So it is just with God, to punish us at this day by these distractions, and
unnaturall warres: and to suffer the King to be misled by a wicked counsell, to afflict, and spoile his people: but it is unjust in that counsell: and er∣ror in the King to be led by them to doe such things. For their ayme is wicked and devillish, and are naturally the Devils in∣struments, to make warre against Christ: their end is to destroy the true protestant Religion, to subvert our good Lawes, and to establish popery: and bring us and our posterities, our bodies and soules, into spirituall, and slavish bondage for ever: and to root out protestant Religion from all places in Christendome. This is a certaine truth: and will clearely appeare to any rationall man: That will but take a view of their fore-past proceedings: Their presnt war, and the persons contriving; and acting it. First, take a view of their fore-past proceedings, and consider, (not to looke so farre, as to the Raigne of Queene Elizabeth, or King Iames, both of blessed memory) in whose times that Jesuiticall faction, were active in treasons; by poyson, stabbing, blowing up Parliaments, destroying post∣rities of Kings, Nobles, and massacring whole kingdomes. Onely note their proceedings, in the passages of things, since the first of his Majesties Raigne: at which time we may remember, the Duke of Buckingham was the great Favourite: who (by confederacy which Je∣suites and Priests: First in Spaine and after in France, when his Majestie married with the French Kings Sister) gave great incouragement to the popish party in all places, and furthered their designes in England by un∣controlled power; For through the favour, and authority, the Duke  from the King, hee ruled, and swayed, the course of thing in the King∣dome: and it was evident by those times, that the Jesuites, swayed him: And by his greatnesse, brought many of their owne faction, into the great∣est places of command: whom they desired, hee put in; and whom they disliked, he put out: that most at the Counsell-Table were their such  such as  not oppose them. And to make way for their designe upon England, they set upon the protestants in France, to weaken them, and to that end His Majesties Shippes were ent against Rochell: which destroyed their shipping and blocked up the passage; and when the Duke was questioned in Parliament, The answer was, the Ships were not lent with intention to hurt Rochell; but in complement to the King of France. Then a Fleet was prepared, the Duke himselfe ould go with it; preten∣ding to relieve Rocell: but when they came to the Isle of Ree, al our brave Souldiers were betrayed to the Sword: Rochell robbed of their provision,
and the protestants Sold into their enemies hands. What other Voiages were made (to Cadis and other places we remem∣ber too) and observed then that their end was nothing but to weaken the kingdome, and prepare to the ensuing treason, against our Religion, and Lawes. Then they began the work of England, by crying up Arminianisme de∣fending those tenents, patronizing their writings, printing, and publish∣ing, those dangerous books of Mountagues; which (before, King James had seene: disallowed, condemned, and forbid to be printed) Mountague was made a Bishop, and Doctor White also: for defending those bookes at a packt conference. All others were presently preferred, that favoured those tenents: as Conzens, Wrene, Corbet, &c. Thus they sowed the seeds of popery, through the whole kingdom, which shewed they expected to have a crop of pure popery. To bring this forward, the power, and professors of protestant Religi∣on were disgraced, and persecuted, I will only give you a view of some particulars; and you may Judge of the whole, as the Geometrician did at the body of Hercules, by his foot. We can remember (it is so lately) that all our best Divines, and honest Orthodoxe professors of Religion, of the Laity, were by Authority scof∣fed at, and persecuted in the High Commission, and all other Courts of that nature; if it were but for going from a dumb arminian Reader, out of his owne parish, to heare an Orthodoxe Preacher: All laborious, Orthodox Preachers were pecked at: and by some foule mouthes almost devoured: I am sure very many suffered under the little Wren: for he peckt up all those pretious plants out of his Diocesse. Then Lectures were put downe in all places, and afternoone-Sermons forbidden on the Lords day. Books were also published and commanded to be read in all Churches, giving liberty to prophane that Holy day, con∣trary to the expresse command of God; and against the enacted law of the kingdome: all Ministers that refused to read these books were suspen∣ded: thus good men were weeded out in all countries, and all to displant religion, and plant popery. The Arminian Priests and Court-Chaplains, cryed out against the San∣ctifying of the Lords day: called Sunday, no Sabbath, and denied the mo∣rality of the fourth commandement, &c. And these men would not be called Preachers, nor Ministers (names that Saint Paul gloried in) but called themselves Priests; the holy Table might no longer be called table, but Altar: and the standing of it was (al∣tered,
and it made a reall Altar ascended to by steps, with bowing, crin∣ging, and reverence to it; Crucifixes set up, Basons and Tapers, were set upon it: nothing was wanting of Popery, but the name popery and the Idol Sacrifice of the Masse. Nor was that Idoll altogether wanting; for it was daily in Summerset-house, Saint Iames-house, and divers other places; common to all that would go to it: nor durst any man question those that went, though they were seen to go every day. Prieste frequented Papists houses in all counties, and no man might question them, if any by lawfull authority did apprehend a Priest, they were checked for it, and the Priest discharged, by speciall command from the Queene, or under some Privie Counsellors hands. Court Chaplains and Bishops preached justification by works, free will, seven Sacraments, and consubstantiation: (a faire way to transubstantiati∣on) with a number of other popish doctrines: and maintained, that there might easily be a conjunction between the Papists and us: so it is plaine that we must have gone wholly to them: for they professe they will not come one jot to us. The presses were allowed to Arminians, and the popish faction, to print any popish tenents: but forbid to the good Protestants, none might preach against their positions, much lesse print any thing for confutation of their errors or heresies, upon paine of imprisonment, fining suspensi∣on pilloring, cutting off eares, slitting noses, banishment, &c more cru∣elty, that hath beene inflicted upon any Protestant, among the Turks: when these and more have been questioned in Parliament, our Parliaments were broken, the evils increased. Yea, Parliament men were disgraced and imprisoned; and because Parliaments would not give the kingdome money, without redresse of these and other evils: they devised wayes to rest by force, great summes of money out of the subjects purse, by illegall and unsufferable taxati∣ons. First by loane, and the refusers were imprisoned, or put to intollera∣ble charges by continuall attendance at the Councell-Table: and many eminent Gentlemen died, without mercy in the prisons: others p∣sent into remote Counties. Then Souldiers were billeted in all Coun∣ties, and many Horses, which their riders were sent for from beyond th Seas, to awe and subdue the kingdome, and by strong hand to wrest from us our religion, and lawes: but divine providence, (by Feltons hand) cut off the actor of that designe at that time.
Here observe and cleerely see, that this warre is no new or sudden thing: nor occasioned by the Militia, as they now pretend: but the same in effect that was intended, fifteen or sixteen yeers agoe: after this an∣other Parliament was called, voices were forced, and illegall meanes used; but when this would not serve to their purpose, that Parliament as others was dissolved Then came other taxes for non-knight-hood; who and what persons See the first Remonstrance of boh the Houses. was brought within this taxation we all know, and the multitudes that were imprisoned, and made to attend the Counsell-Table, we cannot for∣get. After that came shipmoney, a boundlesse and endlesse tax; also taxes for compositions for Cottages, for Forrest-lands, Timber, Woods, &c. Mighty exactions upon customes, and Monopolies almost of all things of If this Parlia∣ment had not taken away those Monopolies and taxe the king∣dome had suffe∣red as much by this time in their estates, as they have by this ware, (except the spoile by plundering) which is not the Parliaments fault. necessary use: thereby inhaunsing the prizes, to the prejudice or the whole kingdome, yea, to the utter ruine of divers Trades and Corporati∣ons: So that multitudes of Masters and Prentises cried out of the burthens which is now forgotten by them: and no thankfulnesse is returned by them, either to God, or the Parliament: Other cruell taxes were impo∣sed upon buildings, together with many other oppressions, all against law, and yet law could not helpe us; all Courts of law and our Courts of justice were corrupted; Iudges and great Officers bought places deer, and sold their service in them deerer, to make themselves gainers. Be∣sides many Iudges were displaced for doing Iustice; or for refusing to judge unjustly: the whole kingdome was oppressed, all were wronged, and all left without remedy: Gunpowder, and other ammunitin was ta∣ken from us, and we left destitute of necessary defence, Popery broke in upon us, Parliaments were neglected, Prerogative was set up; and they began to promise themselves a speedy accomplishment of all their de∣signes: onely they had some feare that Scoland might be some obstacle in their way (as indeed it prove) God infatuating their counsels, to thrust upon the Scots their new Liturgy and Popish Canons, before they had fully finished the worke in England: (though under a faire pretence of a glorious uniformity which our brethren of Scotland did not so well fancy as we: nor did they give Land any great praise for the present; but re∣fused it: though it was manifest that it was no worse, then was contrived A great provi∣dence of God. at Rome, and from thence sent into England. Then the little (great) Bishop (like a Pope) sent his commands by his Legats, and Commissioners, that they should receive that Liturgy, but not obeyed: the honest Scots were proclaimed rebels and traitors, and
and an army raised to compell them: his Majesty was incensed and per∣swaded (with his army) to advance to Barwick: but by Gods providence there was a pacification, and his Majestie returned home in pee. Though quickly after he returned to that wicked Counsell of Bishops and popish affected: (all promises buid in oblivion) was perswaded o raise another Army: New Proclamations and Declatations were printed, full of btternesse against the Scots: and a Parliament called to raise monies for that warre; the Parliament refusing, was presently dissolved: But the warre notwithstanding went forward: then the Scots (as we all know) entred Newcastle, standing upon their just defence. Then this Parliament was called to debate of the war; which through Gods goodnesse they againe pacified, to the great content of both king∣domes; onely Bishops, Papists, and popish affected, stormed at the peace: especially, that his Majestie had graciously signed the Bill (be∣cause of the many great affairs in hand) that this Parliament should not be broken without the consent of both Houses, and presently they plot∣ted how to breake it. First, they endeavoured to bring the Kings army from York against it, the Earle of Strafford having in readinesse 8000 Souldiers in Ireland, to be brought hither to assist that worke: and to subdue the kingdome, as was before intended, by the Duke of Bucking∣ham: but this plot being (by Gods mercy) discovered, Lictors axe tooke off this actor, as Feltons knife the other: then they laboured to hinder the proceedings in Parliament by their votes, (as we are informed by the Parliaments first Remonstrance) when votes could no longer hinder, they bread division in both houses: and then betweene the King, and both Houses, caused his Majestie to accuse some of both Houses of treason: but could never shew what the treason was, though desired by both Houses. But indeed they thought to have put all in a present uproare, and so to have broke the Parliament: Having during the time they were with the King in Scotland, (as they hoped) made a party there: and by the Honour blinds the eyes, and corrupts justice, as Solomon speaks of gifts. honours which they had perswaded the King to bestow upon some of the Citizens, they thought they had blinded the City too: and then having actually raised that bloody rebellion in Ireland: intending the se in England: they prevailed with his Majesty, to come in hostile manner against his Parliament, to take from thence by force those members, be∣fore accused: having in a scrowle divers others, they likewise intended to accuse; so to have broken the Parliament or forced it to their own ends which Gods Providene and the Parliaments wisdome prevented.
Then presently, they endeauored, to make themselues masters, and posses∣sors, of all the armes, and strong holds, of the kingdome; first they bought out Sir William Belford out of his place in the tower: whom they knew to be vncorrupted and no instrument for their treason: and put Collonel Luns∣ford in his place, after him Sir Iohn Byrone & Captain Leg to be gouernor of Hull; then the Earle of New castle; Alluery fit men to betray a King∣dome. These passages declare euidently their intention was to make warr against the Parliament, and Subiects: and hence it was that the Parliament desires to setle the militia of the Kingdom in safe hands; and for this cause most Countyes petitioned to haue it soe: Soe that the Militia was not the cause of their warr: but their preparation caused the militia. They also made mutinies and tumults against the Citizens: First Luns∣ford began in westminsterhall; then others of that faction in westminster: and after at white hal gate, and the strand: cutting and slashing, vnarmed and harmelesse citizens: and then they perswade, the King from London, pre∣tending danger to his maiesties person by tumults when indeed there was no tumult, but what themselues caused. But it is a paradox: if his maiestie The letter that came from L. D. to the King makes it ceare, wishing the king to be take him to a strong hold. left London because of tumults: that they should endeauor (as they haue done) to make mutinyes and tumults in the city, to bring him thither againe: But it is manifest, that his maiesty was not (indeed) afraid of any hurt by the city; for then he would not hau gone through the city (with onely one coach, and a lesse attendance then ordinary) to guild-hall: a lite before his goeing from London: and it is clear there was no cause of feare, because his Maiesty had no affront: but Supplications and prayers from the people: But wee now See they had an other end in perswading his Maiestie The answer to the London Pe∣tition in part promiseth so much. away: as well as in sending the Queene beyond the sea, as alsoe, the Lord Digby and others, to trafficke for men, and armes, to assist their bloudy designes: then they might not be suffered to gather an army at Kingston, windsor &c. Then they perswade the King to York: where they also pretend danger (yet there was no tumults but what they made in abuse to good prote∣stants) and prouide a guard of armed men and trayned bands: which as we haue Seene) quickly grew to an army of offence, first to Hull, and since to the whole Kingdome; and thus you see what their preparation were. Now let vs consider and see what their war is: They could vs they would
make no warr against the Parliament: But they told vs of the Kings rights and prerogatiues which they would maintaine: and defend the protestant religion, the priuiledges of parliament and the rights and libertyes of the Subiect against innovations, and arbitrary government. But if that were the cause of their warr, they would not fight against the parliament; for all these the Parliament would have to be established for ever: first for his maiesties just rights and prerogatiue, they offer to con∣firme to him and his posterity: yea more, to make him the happiest of all his progenitors. And for the establishing the protestant religion, together with the con∣tinuance of the just, and ancient priuiledges of Parliament; and the knowne rights of the Subiect; it is all that the Parliament destre of the King: that which they from the beginning (and still) doe humbly Suplicate his maje∣stie for, against all innovations and arbitrary government: therefore that can be no cause of their warr. Besides, I thinke, no man needs information to assure him, that the cause why Popery is broken so farr in vpon vs: and foe much innovation, and arbitrary government as of late years, hath bin want of Parliaments, and would with greater violence break in, if this Parliament were not. Nor was it ever knowne, that any free elected Parliament, of 500, or, 600 Lords, and gentlemen, of Severall countyes, and familyes, were the cause of any innovation or arbitrary government: nor is it likely can be. But contrary have ever beene and at this day are the securitie of this kingdome against both: And therefore it is that this warr is made against this Parliament, to destroy it, and with it all other and to bring in an arbitrary government &c. It is true particular men, and private counsells may be corupted, to please Kings (in hope of present honors, and great estates) to betray a kingdome; as private counsels at this day. And particular men, lately fied from this parlia∣ment, to achiev their privat ends: care not to destroy the priviledges of par∣liament: or to take away all Parliaments (or which is worse) by the same ar∣my they break this, to force a pact Parliament of their owne choyse: and soc make vs slaues by act of Parliament; let up popery, by the authority that threw it downe: and kill us with our owne weapons. This is clee as the light, yet men will not see it; but are willingly held in the fols paradise, and suffer themselvs to be deluded, by proclamations, declara∣tions, and protestations, which are but the snares of the wicked, to catch simple men: al which though they have passed under the kings nams, I hope his maiestic neuer saw nor heard of. Because they have beene all falsified:
and their actions quite contrary to their promises, and protestation: like  who set their faces eastward, when hey meane to now westward. Therfore it will be the wisdom of every man, to make his eyes judge in this cause rather hen his ears: actions best shew the intentions: every tree s knowne by his fruite. At the entrance of Queene Mary to the Crowne, great protestations was made to maintain the protestant religion: but wee see her actions, were destructive to it. The like protestutions we have heard concerning Ireland: and great calling on the Parl. for assistance for that kingdome, but as often as preparations were made, all assistance, and helpe was hindred, and the rebels were from hence strengthened. Wee have heard severall proclamations, to put lawes in execution against Papists: but wee see that the Parl. themselves were restrayned, and might not execute the knowne Laws vpon them: though they by humble petiti∣ons sought it and now wee see them in best esteeme and most trusted. Wee have heard great promises, that there was no intention to make warr against the Parliament, and seen it testified vnder many Lords hands (now in the Kings army) onely a guard desired for the Kings Person, but wee see a miserable and bloudy warr, to destroy the Parliament. We heard great protestations, that no papist should bee admitted into the Army, but we may see papists swarme in that Army (yea in the kings Court) like wasps, about a hony pot: and in the north under the command of the Earle of Newcastle, you may see eight thousand professed papists of one cluster. We have heard heaven and earth called to witnes, that their war was to defend Protestant Religion: but it were strange to see so many papists fight for it; but if it were so, why do they set up publike masse in Yorke and other places where that Army is? and imprison Protestant Ministers, and al o∣ther that doc but say they fight for the Protestant religion? We have heard protestations that priviledges of Parliament should be maintained, and the liberty of the Subject, but if a Parliament may be broken by force, how can priviledges and liberties be preserved? You will ay we have triennial Parliaments, I answer that is nothing, for the king is no more bound to be present at any triennial Parliament, to con∣firme any act (if it bee called) then at this: besides the King is no more  to call any trienniall Parliament, then he is bound to preserve this. We haue heard Proclamations prohibiting plundering by the Kings Ar∣my,
and molesting his good subjects, but wee see the doe plunder dayly in all places, except where they cannot overcome, or where nothing is to bee had. We have heard of an acceptation of an accommodation, and seen it pub∣lished by their owne faction, but we see them the next day come furiously and treacherously upon part of the Parliaments Army at Braiford; and barbarously slue many men, more righteous then themselves, an act  themselves. We have heard of a gratious acceptance of the City petition, and a rea∣dinesse to imbrace propositions of peace, but we have seen some of the pe∣titioners excepted against, and accused of treason. He that hath but  an eye, may see their aime when they flatter, and animate the rudest of men, to rebell against authority, and overthrow the governement of the great City to make way to overthrow the lawes of the whole kingdome: l∣full fishers will fish in troubled waters, and bankrupt Cavaleers can make best pillage in a divided City, and this is their aim: without difference to friend or foe, the pillage of one is as sweet as the other: propositions of peace have been sent as we desired, and they expected, with an humble petition of both houses to the King to remove the cause of the war, and accept of their propositions: what effect it hath wrought let the world iudge, and the Parliament consider to whom the answer is directed. Yet thus much we may observe in it (which shewes no forwardnesse to peace) that no authority is ascribed (or allowed) to the Parliament, save on∣ly the name, (both houses) and wee may feare some designe against them and us, if there be a cessation of armes without dispanding the armies. But the people of this kingdome ever have, and I hope ever will account Parliaments the fittest and best expounders of Law, and Iudges of offen∣ders either to acquit or condemne them; they never wrest the Lawes for private ends, as other expounders (or rather forgetters) of Law have lately done: when the Subject (had lesse use of the Law, and lesse liberty) were imprisoned contrary to Law, beyond the knowne power and rights of any Kings of England, their habeas corpusses and all baile denied them. Nor knew we by what Law to proceed against any papist, though the Lawes were knowne to us. And by the discipline of our Church governement, we could not well distinguish between protestant religion and popery; the booke of com∣mon prayer (though no idol was idolized) which hath in it good and ho∣ly things, may be, and was abused contrary to the institution and meaning
of the Parliament, first instituting it. Things ceremoniall were urged as substantiall, what the arch-bishop and his Romish pensioners pleased, and ye bee no innovator, but for the Parliament to desire any dimination (though of things offensive) is innovation: whatsover makes for popery, may be added, but nothing popish taken away. For my prt, I protes before God, the searcher of al hearts, hat I am no Sectary, (so called) but a true prtestant, according to that established doctrine or Queene Elizabeth, and King Ims of blessed memory I disal∣low the opinion of the Brownists, as I condemne the opinion, doctrine, and It is a great dis∣quiet and trou∣ble to a state when men will go bfore the law, and not follow the law in obedi∣ence. practice of Papists, or Anabaptists, and never contemned or (willfully) neg∣lected he common-prayer in any assembly. Yet I am condent (and I thnk upon good ground) that the common-prayer hath some neelesse things in it, and some offensive, (as they may bee in the worst sence interpre∣ted, thus much for information of the present war. Lastly consider who, and what persons, are the contrivers, and actors in this war: which are all of one of these six kindes, First, Jesuits, and professed Bapists. Secondly, Bishops, and corrupt Clergy. Thirdly, Lords, and Gentlemen, popishly affected. Fourthly, Delinquents, and Pattentees. Fiftly, men of broken fortunes. Sixtly, Athiests, and extreme deboyst men. And these al agree in one finall e (viz.) to betray Protestant religion, Luies, and the just Luierty of the subject. But the three last srts, named, ave each a particular end to themselves. The Delinquents aime, is, their owe present preservation, to rescue their persons and estates from the iustice of the Law, preferring themseles be∣fore Religion Law, or Posterity. Those of broken fortunes, aime at pillage, to make themselves great e∣states, out of the ruines of the Kingdome, which they cannot doe if law bee not destroied. The deboyst Athiests, seeke to enjoy their licentous liberty, which they prefer before Law, or Religion. They hate the very name of reformation in others, yet these are the men, that tell us they fight for the Protestant re∣ligion, priviledges of Parliament, and the Subiects liberty. But we must be∣lieve that they have learned that damnable art of equivocation, or mentall reservation of the Iesuits. That when they potest to fight for the Protestant religion, priviledges
of Parliament, and the Subiects liberty, their meaning is, that they fight for all these, as ours: to take them from us as they doe our estates, or as a chiefe fights for a true mans purse, and this is these mens warre. Now if we examine why the Parliament and Kingdome have raised an army, and consider their forepast proceedings, their present actions, and the persons engaged in their war: we shall plainly see that they aime at no∣thing but Gods glory, the safety of the Kings person and posterity, the de¦fence of the true Protestant religion, Parl. priviledges, and the iust Li∣berty of the Subiect: against those that (say they fight for them) and would take them from us: all which, are at once assaulted by the severall armies of the Cavaleers. In their proceedings in this Parliament, consider the declined, and adul∣terated condition of things, in Church and State, as they found them when the Parliament began. And then take notice of their care and wisedomes, to make pece betweene the two nations, England and Scotland, His Maie∣sty being then (by a malignant counsel) engaged in a warre against hs good Subiects of Scotland, which that counsell could not manage for him, not his Maiesty desert with honour, they vindicated his Maiestie, stayed blood∣shed, reconciled the nations, satisfied the wronged Scots, payed the Kings armie, disbursed great sums out of their owne purses, and engaged them∣selves for much more. Consider their pious care, for the setling good order and government in the Church, presenting their most humble desires to the King, that lear∣ned and godly divines might consider of it, and his Maiestie passe a bill to that purpose, declaring their purpose was not to destroy our Liturgy, onely take away unnecessary Ceremonies, but were denied. Their diligence to suppresse, and take away our many oppressions, and free us from the vexations of them. Their Iustice and good endeavour to put the lawes in execution against Iesuits, Priests, and Papists, addressing themselvs in all humility to his Maje∣stie for the same, but could not prevaile. Their industry in providing severall Bills for the good of the Subject, be∣sides those his Maiesty was graciously pleased to sign, (as they made known to us by their first Remonstrance.) Their thankfull gratitude in readinesse to raise monies for his Maiesties present occasions, and future store, promising to make him the richest ing in Christendome. Their unweried pairs for almost two years and an half, in spending their
time, strength and estates, neglecting whatsoever was their owne for the common good. Their carefull provision for the safety of the Kingdome against Papists, nd popish affected, by putting the Militia of the Kingdome into trusty hands, when they saw eminent danger, which hath hitherto preserved us, and disappointed them, which till they saw eminent danger they medled not with, nor desired a guard for their owne safety in sitting, but his Maje∣stie then promised they should need no guard, but should be as safe s his Queene or children, yet within very few dayes after, he came in person, with about foure hundred desperate Cavaleers armed with swords, pi∣stols, &c. against some of them: therefore no marvell if the Parliament doubt to trust the King with all our rights, religion, lawes, and librties; Kings are not Gods but men, and subject to mens infirmities: yet I say not, the King is not to be trusted, (God forbid) I am bound to judge the best, and believe when his Majesty promised safety to his Parliament, hee inten∣ded it, and was thrust upon that breach in some violent passion, caused by that wicked counsell on purpose. You will say the King hath acknowledged that fault, and i is no more to be thought on. Answer, acknowledgement is nothing without repaire, 1 Sam. 24. 16. 17 1 Sam. 6. read the lves of King Iohn. Hen. 3 Ed. 2. Rh. 2. and con∣sidr. but no repaire is made. Saul confessed his fault in seeking Davids life, and confessed it with teares, ye Saul by the wicked counsell of the Ziphites sought it againe. And whilest his Maiesty still retaines such counsellors, hee may still forget his promises. That which hath been may be againe. Who is that man, for his owne particular, that would bee willing at the Kings request, to cancell all his evidence for his lands and inheritance, and rest onely upon a bare word, to posterities? much lesse a Parlament to trust all the righs and inheritance of a kingdome, upon the bare word of a King, when guided by a malignant counsell, who seeke the kingdomes ruine. Consider also their tender care of Ireland, to suppresse that bloody rebel∣lion so soone as it was discovered, earnestly supplicating his Maisty to ioyne with them, by passing a bill for a speedy and sufficient expedition thi∣ther, which was graciously promised, why not performed, let the world iudge. Their many messages and petitions to the King, sent from place to place, till (at York) their messengers were beaten, Parliament men threat∣ned, their houses besieged, plundered, their friends abused and pillaged, be∣fore the Parliament had any Army on foote, and after they had an army
they never struck, before they were strucken: such was their backwardnesse to warre, else they might easily have fetcht all that masignant counsell from Yorke, and prevented all the mischiefe they have since made and done in the Kingdome; which if the Parliament had foreseene, and prevented, men would not have believed what now they see, but would have blamed the Parliaments forwardnesse more then now. That the Parliament have no end to themselvs in this warre but onely Gods glory, and the publike good, is manifest in their contempt of disho∣nourable honours, and corrupt dignities: doe but consider what some of them have lost, and what other of thm might have, if they were or would be corrupted. Some have lost the favour of their King, and the highest pla∣ces of honour and profit, others might receive what favours honours, and dignity a King can give: if they would betray Gos truth, and the king∣domes trust: yea, those very men that are for this cause hated, dshonoued, and proclaimed traitors, and Rebels, should not bee denied what outward honours a King could bestow upon them. And shall wee not honour such Champions for Christ, and such Patri∣arches of their countrey, and defend them while they defend us to the ha∣zard of our lives, and best fortunes with them, who willingly sacrifice themselves to honourable deaths, rather then to preserve their lives by any dihonourable act, to prodite their trust reposed by God and men, counting it as the Poet said, To be a sweet and noble gaine, in Countries quarrell to be slaine. To all the former, add this, that (after their offers, petitions, and propo∣sitions, formerly for peace, were all reiected) they, at the request and hum∣ble petitions of many of Vs, in the City of London, and ther counties; will∣ingly offered again, new propositions, more low then the former: accom∣panied with the humble petition of both houses to be accepted,  manifest testimony of their desires of Peace and vnwillingnesse to warr, if necessity constrained, not. In the second place, consider their present actions, in the managing of this their defensive war, hauing no other choyse but two extreams either to Fight or lose all, all being challenged, and at once assaulted, by men ing armyes. Now we know that nature, hath taught all creatures to defend their  but nature, Law, and religion teach; and allow men to defend themselves from vniust violence, the law of the kingdom allow a man to kill rather then be killed, and religion restrained not that kingly prophet David, to take armes in defence of his life against Saul his King, if David might de∣fend himself against Saul, thn much more against Sauls evill counsellours.
But it is objected, That David would not lay his hand upon Saul (the Lords annointed,) when he had twice opportunity put into his hands. Answer. It is true, David would not, nor might not, kill Saul, in a treacherous manner; But if Saul would wilfully thrust himself in∣to battle against innocent David, and perish, David should have been guiltlesse, as appeareth, 1 Sam. 26. 9, 10. David took Arms in his own defence; The Parliament and Kingdom in defence of their Religion, and Hereditary rights; and not onely so, But to defend the Kings Per∣son, and to rescue Him from the hands of cursed Dam-my, Ram-my Cavaliers: Therefore scandalous are those mouthes; that report, the Parliament takes Arms against the King. We have made choice of the men, and have trusted them with all our Rights; The King hath accepted of them, and acknowledged them His great Counsell; And they according to their trust, defend our Rights, and His Person, and Posterity. They freely venture their lives, and estates for us, and for our King, against wicked Councellors, who seek His Majesties ruine, as well as ours; Therefore we are bound by conscience, Law, and Religion to defend them: Should we neglect them, because they do His Majesty, and us right; or shall we dissert them, because they will not betray us: Though Saul had sworn that Jonathan should die, the people would 1 Sam. 14 39. Vers. 44. and 45. rescue him, and said, Jonathan should not die; Much more would they have rescued Saul against wicked Counsellors, that sought his ruine? Our Parliament is not onely in danger, and with it, all that is ours; But the Person of our Soveraign Lord King Charles, by Jesuites and Popish Traytors; who if they cannot poyson His soul, will poyson, stab, or destroy His body? We cannot think they will deal better with Him, then they did by Henry the third, and Henry the fourth of France, whom they slew; The one, because he would not suffer them to sway the Scepter, The other, because he refused to break his Covenants with the Protestant Princes. If these men should prevail in their Warre, These words are by the Arch B: minced and altered as may ap∣pear by comparing the first Coppy with the late Editi∣on. and afterward be denyed any thing, what they will further desire, for the establishment of Popery, They will as treacherously end his dayes, whose Religion alows it, and commends us meritorious, to kill any King, that is a Protestant, or favourer of Protestants: Therefore we may in this see, how farre our Clergy is faln toward Popery, who now defend them, and most confide in them; who of late they declared to be Idolaters, Terming their Religion Rebellion, Their Faith Fact∣on, And their practice the murdering of bodies and soules: God in mercy deliver His Majesty from their doctrines, and treasons. Thirdly, Consider the Persons ingaged in this defensive Warre, and
it will appear, That they are all His Majesties best, and most faithfull Subiects; True Protestants; Yea, a Parliament; The Kings great (and known) Counsell; Able, Honest, and Godly Men, Not corrupted by flattery; nor misled by the hopes of fleeting honour, But like Nehemiah and Ezra, stout in the Cause of God, hold the Sword in the one hand, whilest they build the decayed Wlls of Jerusalem, with the other: Men that fear God, and honour the King. Not Papists, Anabaptists, nor A∣theists, as some falsly have called them; except any such have disguised, and treacherously intruded themselves, to rob the Kingdom of their Money, and betray their Army to the enemy; and would be a most ac∣ceptable service, of any that could discover any such: If any Brownist All of up∣right in∣tentions will ingage themselves for their just rights, against Arbitrary Govern∣ment, and the profest enemies of all Chri∣stendom, the Papists. be accepted in the Army (which is not by me denyed) they cannot be said to have been incendiaries in the State; nor are they disconsonant from us in any fundamentalls, onely they differ in Ceremonies; nor are their many of broken fortunes, nor deboyst Dam-mys; Though some such (too many) have intraded themselves into the Army: (none en∣gaged in the Warre, but) as Mercenaries; Such as love the warre for the pay, but pay nothing to the warre; and as backward to fight, as unwilling to be disbanded: These by their fearfull Oaths dishonour God, and cause the Land to mourn, and by deferring battle, and pro∣ferring plunder; preiudice their iust Warre, As Achon did in the Army of Gods people. There was one Judas, amongst Christs twelve Apo∣stles, and one Achon in the Camp of God: I pray God to purge such out of his, and Our Armies. Now having informed you of the Kingdoms danger, and the Just∣nesse of the Kingdoms defensive warre; For the Parliaments Army is the Kingdoms, for God, the King, and the Kingdom; The other is the Cavaliers Army, against God, the King, in future, (though hid by pre∣sent flatery;) and the Kingdom which they would destroy (as we by wofull experience see) whereever they come, or can prevail. Be there∣fore exhorted, to be couragious in this Cause, for God, the King, and your Posterity: Wisemen forewarned, will be forearmed; If through our credulity to deceivers, we suffer our selves to be destroyed; Or if we believe our danger, and do nothing to prevent it, Our misery will be the greater; And we most miserable under it. Consider what Modica in such a case said to Ester, and the same I say to thee: If thou help not at this time, according to thy ability, place, and degree, Deliverance shall arise some other way, but thou shalt perish. Destructive warre is now Est 4. 14. in the Land, Such a warre as is against God; Therefore sit not still, and say with thy self, let others fight, give, pray, &c. and think to be safe thy sell, like Gilead, Dan, and Ashe, all reproved, But Zebulon and Iudg 5
Nephtalie, are commended, who Jeoparded their lives in the fields against the enemy: In the mean time Meroz, a people able to help, and neer at hand; stood Newters: But Meroz is therefore cursed, and that bitterly, because the Inhabitants came not out to the help of the Lord, and his people. Therefore all that are Gods people, or tha look to have part in Christ, will now come forth, to the help of the Lord, against Baal: Halt not between two opinions; If thou be a Protestant, defend thy Religion, against them that say, they are Protestants, but are not: If thou be a Papist, why doest thou desemble. Professe to be what thou art, and be what thou professest: A profest Papist is in a better condition, and more to be trusted, then a lukewarm Newter. There is but one God, one Truth, and one Faith, in which men can b saved: The Parliament professe that one God, Truth, and true Faith of Jesus Christ; and that they, and all Gods Elect (except such as are yet ignorant) do defend: The other Army say the like, (but 'tis to deceive us,) and say they take Arms to defend that which none oppose, but themselves: They make protestation, and urge it upon men by force, wherein they call God to witnesse, and so do we. But they have now brought the controversie to a desired Issue; for surely, The Judge of all the world will do right, and though he now afflict his people, and for a time suspend sentence, it will not be alwayes so. But he will shew wonders in the world, and declare to the eyes of men, who speaks the Truth, and who desemble: A considerateman may see the Parliaments reality, and the others dissi∣mulation, by the mercies of the one, even to their professed enemies; and the barbarous cruelty of the other; not onely to us, but to their own friends, spoyling, and plundering all, one as well as another, wit∣nesse Banbury, Brainford, Reading, Newbury, and all Towns and places where by force, or fraud, they have entred; which the Parliament forces have not done, in any Town, or place, where they have entered, with the hazard of their lives. Thus men consider not, Nor compare their barbarous cruelty to our men, their prisoners, whom they beat, wound, and starve; with the good usage their Cavaliers have, which are the Parliaments prisoners, who are allowed good lodging, fire, food, of all sorts, Bear, Wine, and what not; They want nothing, but honesty, and liberty to act more mischief; but ours are denyed all things, but honesty; which they cannot take from them: All this God beholds, whose eyes run too and fro, through the earth, beholding the good and bad; and will recompence all according to their doings: God is the righ∣teous Judge of all men, he is unchangeable, his power is not weakned, his eye not shut, nor his ear heavy to hear his iustice, and his mercy is the same, as in former Ages; On him our eyes waite, to see his iudgements
upon out enemies; and his deliverance to his people. We know there 2 Thes. 12 7. Reve. 13. is a mistery in the working of Antichrist; and he a Monster, having many heads, and horns: But we are sure that Antichrist shall fall, and it is probable that this is the time, and warre, in which England shall cut off one of those heads. This Warre, is his warre, against Christ; And now Christ calls all that are his, to stand for him: If now you deny your help, you deny Christ; and therefore, give me leave to remembr you of Christs words, (spoken in this case to you) That if you deny him Matth. 10. 33. before men, he will deny you before his father: If you by Newtrality, think to save your lives, you will indanger to lose your souls for ever. But if Matth. 16. 25. in this case, for Christ, and his Gospels sake, we loose our lives, we shall surely save our souls, and procure a blessing to our posterities: Every man is willing to enjoy the propriety of his Goods, & his Liberty, and Peace, &c. But are unwilling to be at any pains, or cost to preserve, or procure it. But contrary, many at this day are so extreamly stupid, and grossely fordid, That they take more pains, run into greater dan∣ger, and bestow more cost, to betray their Rights, and Liberties, &c, Then is by the Parliament required of them, for their present and fu∣ture security: The twenty part is the most they require, And that but lent? Your charge for your wives evers, and Taffaty Gowas, and your own ex∣pence in Taverns, would quickly re∣cover that charge. What may we think of such men, But as men void of naturall affection, much more destitute, and empty of Religion, Love, or Cha∣rity; who disobey, or refuse such an order, seeing by lending a twenty part, the other ninteen, may be preserved: which else, without order, or parts, those Cavaliers will by force take altogether, and by it, strengthen themselves to continue a warre, to destroy our Laws, and posterities: That which the Parliament requires of you, and me, is but to defend you and me, &c. against their rage and rapine. But you will say (and think you hit the nail on the head) that it is against Law. Answ. If it be not against Law, to defend thy self against violence, or to preserve the Law it self from violation, Then it is not against Law to contribute mony as a means. But a man in case of necessity, in his just defence, may kill; Although the Law say he shall not kill; Much more a Parliament (who are pro∣viders, maintainers, and best Judges of the Law) may by their Order lawfully; in case of necessity, to defend the Law, cease the Subiect at their descretion: The whole Kingdom have trusted them with Religion, Laws, and Estates, which they are to maintain and defend, at the King∣domes charge. If the sword, in opposition against the Law, will force, and destroy
the Ordinance of the Law, the sword by the equality of the Law, may defend the Law. But you will say, You desire peace. Answ. So do all good men; cursed be the man that desires it not; so that it be such a peace as hath assurance of truth joyned with it: But to desire peace, or to accept a peace without truth, will prove a cursed bondage, a remedy worse then the disease: Although War be a great punishment, and the effects miserable, yet a just War is better then an unjust peace; a just War will establish a true peace, but an unjust peace will prove a more de∣structive War: our peace with Idolaters, hath caused this War; but to have a peace with their Idols too, will be our present ruine: Can we expect any good and happy peace, so long as the whoredoms of Jezebel are so many: when Israel chose new Gods, then War was in the 2 Kin. 19 22. Iudg 5. 8. Iudg. 2. 12, 13, 14 gates: when Israel followed the gods of the Nations, and worshipped Baalim, God brought upon them the sword of the Nations, and deli∣vered them into the hands of the spoylers that spoyled them. But England hath followed the Idols of the Papists, and worshipped Baalim; therefore God hath brought upon England the sword of the Papists, and may most justly deliver us up into their hands to be spoyl∣ed and ruined. Eighteen yeers ago, the Lord delivered them into our hands (as his, and our enemies) to be destroyed for their Idolatry, or at least to be ba∣nished for their Treason, but we spared and cherished them, to be as thorns in our sides, and their gods to be a snare unto us: We have spared them as Benhadad was spared by mercifull (though wicked) Acbab; and 1 Kin. 20. 42. 1 Kin. 22 37. as God punished Acbab and his people, by the hand of Benhadad and his people, so is the King and the people of England punish∣ed at this day by the hands and plots of bloody Jesuites and Papists: Their designe is great upon our King, upon us, and upon all his Ma∣jesties Kingdoms, God rebuke them, and deliver us: And that we may not fail of deliverance (in due time) let us all, of all sorts, sexes, and conditions, seek the Lord by hearty humiliation, and resolved Reforma∣tion; and in the first place, with zeal and detestation, set our selves a∣gainst that sin of Idolatry, as Phineba did against Zimri and Cozbi, that Numb. 25 11. so we may appease Gods anger; if we with all our hearts seek truth, it will bring us to true peace with God and men. We have sought to the Parliament for Peace; but they cannot give it us: We have sought by humble Petition to the King for Peace; and that procured our further prejudice: For while we sought for the peace of the whole Kingdom, we received (from some of that malignant bloo∣dy Counsell) an Answer altogether contrary to our expectation; and
after it a Letter to the former effect: both tending to stirre up Warre (where yet by Gods mercy none is) in the great and pupulous City (London) That because they cannot destroy us themselves, they would set us to destroy one another (which God forbid.) We know that while we hold the band of Unity, we are able (by Gods assistance) to defend our selves: But if we be once divided, we lay our selves open to every adversary without resistance, to be devoured. We will be warned by Jerusalems misery (that once famous City of the world) by See lose∣phus in War Ierus. such sedition brought to be a heap of stones: And by the experiences of the bloody cruelties, and mercilesse plundrings of all those Towns that have, or do (by such division) give them entrance. Banbury had as much securing as King could give them, and yet plundred; and the man (M. Vivors by name) who was the chiefest agent to bring them in, was most plundered. But we will honour our King, and hazard our lives and fortunes for His Person, Posterity, and Parliament, to rescue them from the bloody hands of that malignant Counsell, and Army of Cava∣liers; and will assure His Majesty of safety and security in this City, if His Majesty will be pleased to come to His Parliament, and to us peace∣ably, as our King; and to the Parliament, as his great and faithfull Many Pro∣cters, Pre∣bends, &c. and merci∣nary trades men, for profits and favour, care nei∣ther for the welfare of King nor King∣dom. If we lose this Parli∣ament, we must ex∣pect to have grea∣ter, with∣out all re∣medy. Exo. 7. 11 Exod. 14. 10, 11. Icr. 5. 25. Councell, and besides them we know no other; though some who seek honour from the King, rather then honour to the King, divide between his Majesty and them. We cannot forget how much we all groaned under the burdens of oppressions late layed upon us by the hard task-masters that were set over us; and then we all cryed fot a Parliament to ease us: Our Bon∣dage had some resemblance to that of the people of Israel in Aegypt (and so hath our ingratitude) For whilst their deliverance was work∣ing, their burdens grew greater, and then they murmured; and so have some of us: They cryed for deliverance, and God heard their cry; we cryed for a Parliament, and God graciously, yea miraculously gave us a Parliament. But because malignant Counsellors, as the Magicians of Aegypt, have hindered our present deliverance, we murmure against the Parliament, as they against Moses and Aaron; God led them thorow the Wildernesse to prove them, and they said, They bad rather have died in Aegypt, &c. Thus God proves us by some opposition: and some say, It was better with us, when we endured our former oppressions; but con∣sider not that our sins have provoked God, and therefore he suffers our King to be misled, for a great punishment to us; nor understand that our impenitency hinders good things from us, and stop the Parliaments proceedings. We are a foolish and sinfull people, that love our sins,
and lose our Liberty; we prefer the twentieth part of our money, be∣fore our Religion, as the Gadarens their swine before Christ: But let us not tempt God, as the Israelites did; nor with the multitude of Atheist∣icall Libertines, revile our Moses and Aarons, much lesse give assistance to destroy them and our selves, left we be found to fight against God. We know what became of those wicked men that east an evill report upon the Land of Promise, and discouraged the people, saying, Mighty men were in the Land, that could not be overcome: But thus some do, by reproachfull speeches, and spreading venomous Pamphlets, and ly∣ing Fictions, to the dishonour of this chrice honourable Parliament, as if the Parliament had brought these things to this passe, to make us die by the sword, and our children to be a prey, &c. Thus the Isra∣elites murmured, and were destroyed by the Plague, before the Lord, Numb. 14. 37. and all their Carkasses fell in the Wildernesse, but their children, whom they said should be a prey to their enemies (together with Caleb and Vers. 30. 31. Joshuab, who spake well of the Land) enjoyed the promised blessing, when all else were cut off. And we need not doubt (if once those Achans that are in our Armies Those Dam, my sovear∣ers, and theevish plunderers. were cast out) but God will do the like for our Calebs and Joshuab's, and all the rest of his people, that couragiously oppose the wickednesse and Idolatry of these times, and unfainedly seek unto God by fasting and prayer, as Esther did, in whose time the people of God were sold to be destroyed, under Aasuerus, as we are at this day: they by the counsell of wicked Haman; we by the wicked counsell of Jesuites, Pa∣pists, &c. They by the Kings misled Authority against the Queen and her people; we by the King misled in his Authority, by his Queen, and her people. Abasuerus was guided by his Counsell (and so are all Kings) he look∣ed wicked Counsellors, under pre∣tence of good service to Kings, de∣stroy Kings, and whole Kingdoms. Esth. 7. 4. Esth. 3 6. Vers. 8. upon the Counsell (in the pretence) as profitable, but considered not so far as the end and intent of Haman, which was destructive: Surely there was no thought in Abasuecus to destroy Esther nor her people; but Haman intended both; he thought it not revenge to destroy part, but all the people of the Jews (as they do this day in Ireland, and are about to do in England) He craftily accuseth them under a generall Notion, and tells the King, There was a certain People scattered and dis∣persed amongst his people, and their Laws divers from all people, neither keep tey the Kings Lawes, therefore not for the Kings profit to suffer them: And to put the fairer glosse upon the obscured Treason, he offers to give unto the Kings Treasure ten thousand Talents of Silver. Thus are we (all that are true Protestants) accused to the King, under the name Round heads, having Laws and opinions divers from other people, nor
keep the Kings Laws, &c. when indeed, and in truth, we are the  observers and keepers of the Kings Laws, and have no Laws divers from any, but Idolaters, and prophane riotous persons, who therefore (as the Apostle Saint Peter saith) speak evill of us, because we refuse to 1 Pet. 4 4 By the name Round∣head, they do not only meane Brownists and Ana∣baptists, but all that are godly men, and good Protestants Esth 8. 11 The many peeces of Gods pro∣vidence working for our de∣liverance, should strengthen our faith in all fu∣ture dan∣gers. partake with them: For this name Round-head, is new sprung from hell; and all those are so called, who refuse any of these particulars: (viz.) To drink drunk, To whore, To swear God-dam-my, To scorn at purity, To take Arms (or contribute) against the Parliament, To a∣buse, cut, or kill the Ministers of Christ, and other his Members, or in a word, He that doth not professe and do all things that these cursed Ca∣valiers do, is a Round-head: against these (by the counsell of Jesuires and Papists) is past the Edict of destruction: by which we had perish∣ed, had not the over-ruling, and ever-working providence of God cau∣sed a contrary Decree (by a better Counsell) enabling us to stand in the defence of our lives, as the Jews did in Shushan, and all the Provinces of the King, which is a pledge unto us of our future deliverance: for where God giveth the means, he intendeth the end; and they that now refuse to use the means, are guilty of their own blood, and of the Trea∣son intended against the King and his Kingdoms. God in mercy open the Kings eyes, that he may see the Treason and bloody designs of those Counsellors, and bring his Majesty again to consult with his Parliament, his great & faithfull Counsell, and besides which we know (at this time) no other. We know wise Kings have been misled, as Solomon, the wisest: holy Kings have erred, as David the holiest; the one by the seducement of out-landish wives, the other by some remissenesse in his duty: But God opened the eyes of Solomon, and shewed David his fin. But Rehobo was misled by the counsell of his young Counsellors, and repented not, therefore was punished without repair: And Achab misled by the flatte∣ries of 400 Court false Prophets, was slain at Ramoth-Gilead, in a Bas∣tell which they would have him undertake, contrary to that good Pro∣phet (though hated) Micaia. Now my prayer is, and ever shall be, to the great and Almighty Jebovab, (King of all King:) for my gratious Soveraign, King Charles: That God will shew him the errour of all his Malignant Counsellors, and as holy David, turn wholly to God by repentance. That so he, his, and their Posterities, may, to Gods glory, wear the Crowns of all his three Kingdoms, and defend the truely Christian and Apostolike Faith, against Popery, and all Superstition, untill the end of all time: And receive the Crown of glory, for his, and their reward, when time shall be no more: In the mean time, Let all true Protestants pray for the peace of Jerusalem, And for the prosperity of her, and of her King, and People. FINIS.
