T1643 E49_20 R1894 99860506 155127
To the Right Honorable, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Par∣liament assembled, THE HƲMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of the City of LONDON, in Common-Councel assembled: Delivered the 16th. of this instant MAY, into the Honorable House of COMMONS. Together with the ANSWER of the said House to the said PETITION. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Pe∣tition, and Answer, be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Edward Husbands, May 24. 1644.
To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the COMMONS-House in PARLIAMENT Assembled; The Humble PETITION of the Lord MAjOR, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON in Common-Councell Assembled. Sheweth, THAT the continued Indu∣stry, Courage and Constan∣cy which this Honourable House have manifested in all Affaires concerning the Publique; The Faithfull Endeavours of the LORDS and COMMONS of the Committee of both King∣doms, the speciall Care ta∣ken in putting the Tower of London, and Castle of Windsor into safe Hands, and Your favourable Re∣solutions not to dispose of them otherwise then as may stand with the Security and Satisfaction of this City, Have laid a great Obligation of Thankful∣nesse upon the Inhabitants thereof and their Posterity, and Encourage the Petitioners, Humbly to Represent their Apprehensions and Feares arising from the Dis∣continuance of that Honourable Committee, Especi∣ally at this time, when our Enemies are so Active, and all our Armies in Moton; From the want of Execu∣tion of Justice upon Delinquents, the not putting of Tilbury Fort in safe hands, and from the Endeavours of divers Members o Parliament to be Re-admitted into that great Councell, who have contrary to the
Trust in them reposed Deserted the same, kept Cor∣respondency with the Enemy, joyned in other Coun∣cell, and taken up Arms against the Parliament. For Removall of which Apprehensions and Feares, and prevention of the sad Consequences thereof, Your Petitioners make it their earnest and Humble suite to this Honourable House; That the Committee of both Kingdoms may be so spedily Re-established, as the present Exigents of Affaires require. That the Tower of London, and Castle of Wind∣sor may be continued in safe hands, and the Gar∣rison at Windsor timely and constantly supplyed with Money and other Necessaries; And the Fort of Tilbury well mann'd, and put into the hands of Persons of Trust, and that have Abillity to Dis∣charge the same. That a Course may be forthwith taken for the Triall and Punishment of Delinquents. That none of the said Members of Parliament may be Re-admitted without speciall Assurance and Satisfaction first given to both Houses of Par∣liament for their Fidelity to come. That this Honourable House will Persevere in Your Endeavours and Resolutions tending to the Publique good, notwithstanding all Discourage∣ments. And to rest Assured, that the Petitioners for the Promoting thereof, will cheerfully Obey Your Orders and Directions from time to time, and Ad∣here unto You, to the utmost expence of their Lives and Estates, according to their late Solemn Covenant. Michel.
18. May. 1644. THe House of Commons, having re∣ceived the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Coun∣cell assembled, delivered unto them up∣on Thursday, the 16. of this instant May, by the Sheriffes, Aldermen, and diverse others, appointed a Committee from the said Common Councell; Af∣ter serious consideration of the Contents, Do return this Answer:
THey do acknowledge it, an especi∣all blessing of Almighty God, that their endeavours, (wherein they have done but their duty) have beene so well understood and accepted, by this famous City; without whose constant affections and assistance they could not have brought this great Work to that hopefull condition, wherein (by the mercy of God) it now stands. To the particulars desired, they have estee∣med them so necessary for the publique good, that the setling of them hath already been resolved upon, in this House. For the continuance of the Committee of both Kingdomes, an Ordinance is depen∣ding for that purpose; the speedy perfecting whereof, they will endeavour. For the Tower of London, Castle of Wind∣sor, and Fort at Tilbury; They will take such further course as shall be for the security and satisfaction of the City. For the Tryall and punishment of Delin∣quents,
the House hath already resolved up∣on an Ordinance, for the setling of a constant Councell of War, within the Lines of Com∣munication. For the not re-admitting of such Members of Parliament, who contrary to the trust re∣posed in them, have deserted the same, and adheared to the Enemy, this House hath pas∣sed an Ordinance as is desired, and will en∣deavour the speedy perfecting thereof. For the Expressions of adhearing to the House of Commons in the indeavours of promoting the publique good, they have beene demonstrated by action in times of greatest difficulty; wherein the City hath spent their dearest blood, and vast summes of Treasure, omitting no possible supplies of persons and Purse. In their most seasonable desires, offer, and promise they now make, (never to be for∣gotten by the House of Commons) they manifest, their affections can admit of no decrease; which are great incouragements to this House, to persevere in the endeavours,
and resolutions desired, wherein (by the bles∣sing of Almighty God) they will persist, to the utmost hazard of their lives and for∣tunes, against the greatest discouragements; untill the affaires of the Church and Com∣mon-wealth, receive such a happy conclusion as all good men desire, and pray for. And in returne for their great affection, the House of Commons doth declare, They will in a most peculiar manner be mindfull of the merit of this City, which upon all occasions they shall acknowledge, and will endeavour to requite; And in the meane time, they give them most hearty Thanks. FJNJS.
