t36 e337_30 99861466 159703
The passage of the TREATIE For the Surrender of OXFORD TO SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX. And a LIST of the Names of the Commissioners on both sides, both upon the former and later Treaties, and how farre they have proceeded in the same for the de∣livering up of OXFORD. Also the Copie of a Summons sent into Hartlebury Castle by Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Sandys his Answer. These being examined by the originall Copies, are printed and published according to Order of Parliament. LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, May 20. 1646.
The Copie of a Letter from the Leaguer before OXFORD. SIR, ACcording as it was desired by Sir Tho∣mas Glemham, the Governour of Oxford, (as I certified in my last, and then sent you the Generals summons, and the An∣swer from Oxford) Passes were granted on Monday last, May the 11. instant, for Sir John Munson and Mr. Philip Warwick to come out of Ox∣ford, and to repaire unto us that day, and meet our Commissioners at the place agreed, to receive from Oxford what they should bring, to be communicated to the Generalls on our side; there were Colonell Rainsborough, Colonell Harlow, and Colonell Lam∣bert, who met with Sir Iohn Munson and Mr. Philip warwick at the time and place appointed, by whom we understood, that (at present) it was desired by the Governour (in the behalfe of himselfe, with the No∣bility, Gentry, and Inhabitants) that they might have liberty granted to send to the King, and to know his Majesties pleasure, and upon returne from his Majesty there should bee a speedy Answer given to the Ge∣neralls. Our Commissioners acquainted theirs, how vaine a thing it was to desire any such thing, neither would the Generall admit of any such delayes, and therefore they were desired to give some speedy answer, with
Arguments used to them to shew them the vanity of their standing out, and how much better it is to take the opportunity whilst it is offered, lest by their wil∣full stubbornnesse they bee forced to farre worser tearmes. But (it seemes) that Sir Iohn Mounson and Mr. War∣wick were so bound up and limited in their Commis∣sions, that they could not give that answer to ours which was expected, and therefore promised the next day to procure a fuller power, and more satisfactory Answer, and so they returned into Oxford, and tooke leave of us that night, and one of the Generals Trum∣peters was appointed to goe into Oxford with them that night, and to returne with an answer the next morning. On Tuesday, May the 12 instant, our Trumpeter, re∣turn'd (but not their Cmissioners) with a desire from Sir Thomas Glemham, that because there are many of eminencie, Lords, with the Duke of York, and the two Princes there, as also divers Knights, and Oxford. Par∣liament Juncto men, and other Gentry and Clergy, with the Inhabitants, and others that he meanes; hee desired that the Generall would grant them a longer time, because so many were concerned in it, that they could not possibly present things (in a formidable way) in so short a time. So we went on hasting the dispatch of the Line, and order was given for the drawing up of the Batteries, resolving to lose no time, but preparing all we can to assault them, and be in a condition to storme if they shall not surrender; the latter, to spare as much blood as may be, being most desired by us, yet confident they will not be advantaged within by delaying us, but
by thrusting themselves into harder straits, will bee forced to worser termes by standing out, if they shall be so wilfull. On that day Prince Rupert and some horse, all under an hundred, came out of Oxford to take the ayre, on Colonell Rainsboroughs side, Rupert himselfe being in his white hose, and rid without boots in his shooes and stockings, a partie of our men marched up very neere them, and had a short skirmish, in which it so hapned that a bullet from one of our men hit Prince Rupert, and wounded him on the right shoulder, but we heare that it hath not broke or hurt any bone, be∣ing only a fleshy wound, and we forced them to re∣treat into Oxford, where we heard they were very bu∣sie that day, and also Wednesday and Thursday, the Lords debating▪ the Councell of war consulting, the Iuncto plotting, the Clergy prating, the Townesmen meeting, and the Sovldiers enquiring what to do, each in their severall capacities labouring in what concer∣ned their own faculties. Yesterday we received farther from Oxford, that the Gover∣nour would treat by Commissioners, which was accepted of and a Councell of warre being called, it was concluded that Mr. Crooks house at Marston where the Generall quartered the last year, should be the place, and Monday next the time, and that in the mean time the said Commissioners to be nomina∣ted on both sides which will be done to morrow, concerning which I shall certifie you more at large by the next Messenger. They fallied out of Oxford againe this day, and wee had a small skirmish with them, and lost some two men. We have received the Copy of a Summons that was sent in∣to Hartlebury Castle by Colonell Morgan, with the Gover∣nours Answer thereunto, which I have sent you here inclosed, and rest Your humble servant, N. T. Dated at the Fort before Oxford, May 15.1646.
The Copie of the Summons sent in∣to Hartleburie Castle, by Colonel MORGAN. SIR, I Am commanded by the Committee of both King∣domes, to require you immediately to deliver un∣to me, for the use of King and Parliament, the Ca∣stle of Hartleburie, with all the Armes, Ammunition, Artillerie, and all manner of provisions therein, with∣out any spoyle or imbezlement being made thereof, which I conceive you have no reason to hold, being out of all hopes of reliefe, and farre stronger Garri∣sons then this Castle is, or can be made, are delivered up for the aforesaid use; (witnesse those two later Garrisons then I suppose you can know are, viz. Newarke and Banbury) which if you refuse to doe, the world will witnesse against you to be the cause of the effusion of all the blood which shall be spilt in the reducing of this place, and exclude your selfe from having such honourable tearmes as you may now re∣ceive from your servant, Tho. Morgan. Hartleburie, the 9. of May, 1646.
From the Governor of Hartlebury, these. The Copy of the Governor of Har∣tlebury Castle his Answer. SIR, I Have received your Summons, which I must pro∣fesse to be sent with all civill circumstances, and therefore have appplied my selfe to give you such an Answer, as (preserving my honour and trust reposed in me by his Majesty) may not be altogether unsatis∣fiable to you: I am inclined to beleeve with you, that in case Newarke be taken, we cannot probably expect reliefe from any place; But (Sir) though I must ac∣knowledge you a person of honour, yet in regard of the distance we now stand in, I cannot justifie my selfe to the world, in taking your report barely: My de∣sire therefore is, you would but allow me so much time as can be but imaginably sufficient to informe my selfe of the certainty thereof, and if I shall finde it accordingly, I will forthwith treat with you upon such conditions as may with honour and loyalty bee admitted of by, Sir, Hartlebury Castle the 9. of May, 1646. Your Servant, WIL. SANDI.
For Colonel Morgan. The Copie of a Letter from the Generals Head▪ Quarters, dated May 17, at Heddington. SIR, THis day the Governour of Oxford sent forth the names of those persons whom he hath appoynted to be Commissio∣ners to Treat for surrender of the Citie, desiring the like num∣ber of ours might be returned; They are to meet to morrow, or on Tuesday (at farthest) at Marston, so that I hope a few dayes will produce the surrender thereof, and that by Treaty; but if not in case they shall stand upon high tearms, I doubt not but the same omnipotent power of God, which hath led us in∣to the Gates of many strong places will assist us to possesse this too: After which, if the Northren cloud dispell, as I hope it will (God willing) I shall have opportunitie to see you. Sir, I remaine Heddington the 17 of May, 1646. Your assured servant W. C. The Commissioners for Ox∣ford are. Sir John Mounson. Sir John Heyden. Sir Thomas Gardner: Sir George Bynion. Sir Richard Willis. Sir Stephen Hawkins. Colonel Gosnold. Colonel Tyllier. Doctor Zouch. Thomas Chisley Esquire. M. John Dutton. M. Jeffrey Palmer. M. Philip Warwick. Capt. Robert Mead. Commissioners for the Par∣liament. Lieut. Generall Hammond. Colonel Ireton. Colonel Lambert. Colonel Rich. Colonel Harley. Scout-master Gen. Watson. Major Harison. M. Herbert. M. Waller. Foure more to be named af∣terwards. FINIS.
