W30 E151_18 99858901 156776
A most true RELATION OF The last weekes passages in YORKE, and HVLL, In two Letters from thence. Discovering the strange Behaviours and rude affronts of the Cavaliers and other malignant persons in those parts. With diverse other matters of extraordinary note, and very remarkable. Together with the Names of those Gentlemen which are entertained for the PRINCE his Guard since he was made Captaine of the Troopes, viz. Mr. Franck of Kneton. Mr. George Grant Brothers. Mr. Henry Blackston Mr. Peter Blackston Mr. Tho Hall of Hornby. Mr. Francis Tunstell of Wicliff. Mr. Bierlaies Sonne. Mr. Cane of Stocton. Mr. Tounge. London Printed for Iohn Wright, June 23d. 1642.
Sir, I Excuse my not writing since our great meeting at Yorke, for indeed we are cleare out of all hopes, and therefore but that you both desire, and well deserve the paine, s would not have writ at this time, for the great meeting at Yorke, it was onely a shew, and nothing was done on any side, the King came to the Moore with a mighty company of very brave men, when they came they did provoke a shoute first, and then those that were next them did joyne with them, and so marched up where the Trayned Bands stood, and they beat their Drums, and as they went the bookes were delivered, no Petitions could be de∣livered. This weeke I was at Yorke my selfe againe, and there I saw many brave men, and it was reported forty foure Lords, who had all made protestation against the Order of the Militia, not to obey the Par∣liament in it, and to that purpose their is Commis∣sions of Array to dispose the Militia to other men, as they report, it is also reported at Yorke, how they had 300 thousand pounds at Sea, and Ordnance also to be landed at Scarborrow, as one of the Captaines at Yorke tould me, truly I thinke there was 100 thou∣sand men at the great shout, a tenth part whereof I am confident, would not have beene against: he Par∣liament, though now I thinke men begin to waver much, for there is many strange aspertions cast on the Parliament by the Papists, as that Master Pym hath marryed two or three daughters with the mony of the
state, the Speaker they say is to have a great deale for his part, the Committie at Yorke for them a great deale, and Sir Iohn Hotham a good quantity, my Lord of Holland is very much spoken against at Yorke, as who should say, he hath gotten more then his part, with these rumours they make people unwilling to pay subsidies; many other strange inventions we have a foot, for which it is strange the Parliament doth not put out a Declaration to cleare themselves. The preaching of my Lords Butler, with another Lords Coachman for a wager, the taking away the Common Prayer Booke, all these are frequent among the Pa∣pists, whose Priests never did labour with that ear∣nestnesse they now do but it is but some money mat∣ter as I am informed. Yesterday Captaine Leg, and Sir William Carnaby rid post into the North, and this day my Lord of Newcastle is gone that way, I beleeve to garrison Newcastle, for so we have heard this fort∣night. It is doubtfull whether we shall have peace or warre, the Troopes of our Countrey Gentlemen for the Princes Guard are ordered, and have received their Colours, and have Captaines over them; the young Gentlemen receive no pay; in this note you have their names I know of. The King hath put out a very sharp Answer to the last Remonstrance, and about this day he will as is said, put forth one other in which the malignant party in the Parliament House wil be set out in their right colours. I pray you send us nothing that is Printed at York for we have enough of them. I did speake with your mother about the bu∣sinesse, and your friend in store will not faile, how the other will doe I know not, but all your friends
are very well. Our Clergie are all against the Parlia∣ment; if the Bil against pluralities had bin for 3 Bene∣fices a peece, it had been more like to have had their favour; wee had a Parson that sent about to his Par∣rishioners, to forbid them to signe any Petition, and now there is a Petition come from Yorke, and read in some Churches, and desired by the Kings servants to besigned to the Parliament, as also their hath been let∣ters of thanks to the Country for their pains in com∣ming to Yorke. All manner of things are cheap, nay even meat at Yorke is very cheap, though all that great company be there. One thing I forgot, and that was before we went to shovt, Doctor Bean. came to perswade all his friends about us to be for the King, and did protest solemnly, that if all would goe that way, the businesse would come to a happy end, and with him that stout Captaine Robinson came well pro∣vided to teare any Proclamation, or any thing else that came from the Parliament. The Recusants pay their Rents at Yorke very fast. There was some passage on Monday at Yorke with the Souldiers, and thus it was, Alderman Vaux by his warrant had caused a Souldier to be arrested, they did petition his Maje∣stie, and order was sent to release the party, but upon refusall Serjeant Major Duncome came with some soul∣diers, and tooke the prisoner, whereupon the Soul∣diers went to the Aldermans house, the Committee being then in it, and one of their servants came out with a Pistoll, and demanded their occasion therein, they tooke his Pistoll from him, and broke all the windowes, pulled up the blew stoupes that were at his dore, and if Commissarie wilmot had not beene in the
house by chance, it is thought they had done more ill, they trayled the stoups to their house of Guard, and cryed Roundheads. And when I was at York Cap∣taine Wharton bid one of his Souldiers to let me see two of Alderman Vaux Roundheads, and he did, which was his stoups, this was on Tuesday, I was there. It is also reported there is a generall pardon in drawing up, and onely twelve persons to be excepted out of it, you may shew this letter if you please to your good friend and mine, all his are very well, here was one of his house, just while I was writing this, his two good Schollers were here on Monday: And thus with my daily prayers for your happy returnes, I rest Yours in all G. W.
From Hull June 18. 1642. Sir, I Received yours on Friday last, and hope presently to receive another. On Saturday last we had 2 Mes∣sengers from the King; the first said he was to deliver his Message to the Committee, but while they were Assembling went his wayes, without delivering his er∣rand. Another 4 houres after with a Letter to the Ma∣ior from his Majesty, who it seemes had bin informed we were all in combustion, commanding him to see that in these tumults, his Armes should not be imbea∣sled away: the Relation of that bbble here, which was the originall of this rumor, I suppose you had last weeke, as likewise of Mr. Cob, and Mr. Constales Duel, about the senior Captaine-ship: the same mor∣ning came a letter from the Sheriffe, signifying of di∣verse complaints upon Oath, of outrages committed by the garrison upon the Countrey, so for his satis∣faction, there is a full examination of Mr. Aldreds go∣ing out with 6 Carabines for his guard, but without the least violence offered to any sent to Yorke: I heare there hath this weeke bin great stirring in Yorke, about an anti-Parliamentary petition, many refusing, and in the Countrey about the same businesse, to which Selby Towne hath generally subscribed, and some others, but it will be backed with a good Protestation: the Militia is now fully setled in Lincolnshire, none refu∣sing, notwithstanding three threatning Letters to the contrary, sent to the Committee: in Lincolne, the
voluntieres are equall to the trained Bands, a pursivant sent to apprehend the Maior of Lincolne, was sent for by the Commissioners to appeare before them. In South division two head Constables sent not out war∣rants, yet came the Countrey in to a man, and with the like cheerefulnesse was it received in all parts. Thursday was the last Session, Sir Edward Asbue, and Sir Christopher Wray will according to the Order bee here on Monday, there hath bin all this weeke, and is still, a speech of the Kings going to Lincolne: Cap∣taine Leg is gone to Newcastle, a regiment of foot and 200 Horse is to follow him, my Lord of Newcastle hath sent for all his Horse to Yorke, and 'tis said they must follow him, none of the Lords are yet gon from Yorke, but my Lord Strange, who is gone into Lanca∣shire, and not yet returned. Some at Yorke talke of a Petition from Cornewall with 10000 hands, as it was presented to the King by my Lord Moone, proffering their lives and fortunes in the anti-parliaments ser∣vice, but I believe nothing of it, they deale so much in that trade of false rumors, that little comming that way is to be credided: yesterday there was an affront offered to the Committee at Yorke. Alderman Vaux his house and chamber windowes broke with stones, by the souldiers, the Committee being there, com∣plaint was made, but no redresse obtained, there is much speech reported by some, and contradicted by others, comming thence lately of two troopes of Horse come to Yorke, we know not well what to be∣lieve, but certaine there is great and daily resort of all sorts of people thither. Your assured Friend to serve you, S. M. FINIS.
