W3393 R186836 47683575 173029
A Brief TREATISE OF Religious Womens MEETINGS Services & Testimonies. According to the Scriptures of Truth. Also, something concerning Womens Prophecying and Teaching, &c. With some other observable things, (distinguishing the Holy from the Ʋnholy) in the Scriptures cited. And an Obje∣ction answer'd, which is commonly rais'd from Paul's words, 1 Cor. 14. 34, &c. and 1 Tim. 2. 12. &c. Witten for the Satisfaction of all that desire to be informed, by one, who by the free Grace of God is become a Searcher of the Scriptures, and a lover of Truth in the inward parts, both in the Male and Female, and is made a Witness in his day that God is pouring out of his Spirit both upon Sons and Daughters, Servants and Hand-maids, according to his Promise, Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17, 18. Printed and Sold by Andrew Sowle, 1684.
Womens Meetings in the Practice there of, prov'd out of the Scriptures of Truth; and also something concerning Womens Prophecying and speaking in the Church, and who is permitted, and who not; with other observable things, as they fall in from the Scriptures cited. MAry and Elizabeth did meet in the Name of the Lord, in the house of Zacharias, as you may read, Luke 1. 39. And you may see what a blessed Meeting it was, Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost, and did prophesie; and Mary did magnifie the Name of the Lord, and her Spirit rejoyced in God her Saviour, and did likewise prophesie; so both of them had the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophesie, (Rev. 19. 10.) Here was the blessed Order, Ye may all prophesie one by one, that all may learn, and all be comforted, (1 Cor. 14. 31.) This was the Order of Christ's Church, who walked and lived in the comely Order, the Spirit of Truth dwelling and living in their
hearts, who led and guided them, and and brought them into this Order of the Gospel: But when Antichrist came to be set up in mans heart, he led them from this Order, and preacht against this Order, and forbad this Order, and persecuted, and doth persecute them who are found in this Order, calling Christ's comely Order Dis∣order. In Christ's blessed Order Women met together as well as Men, and preached and prayed together, and prophesied one by one as well as Men. In this Meeting there is no mention made that there was any man at it; and yet you may see they were filled with the holy Ghost, and did prophesie and speak blessed words one to another, as you may read at large in that first Chapter of Luke. And though Zacharias was a Priest, and righ∣teous before God, walking in all the Com∣mandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, yet we do not read that he re∣proved them, nor that he forbad them. But the Dragon and his Servants are wrath with the Woman, the true Church, and makes war with them which keep the Com∣mandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, (Rev. 12. 17.) And the testimony of Jesus Christ is the Spirit of Prophesie, as before is said, which the Lord
God hath promised to pour forth upon Daughters as well as Sons, upon Hand-maids as well as well as Men-servants (Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17, 18.) But the seed of the Wo∣man, Christ Jesus, will bruise the serpent's head, and is a bringing his sons and daugh∣ters, servants and hand-maidens into the order of his own Gospel again; Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I (said Christ) in the midst of them. Here was but two (that we read of) at this Meeting, Mary and Elizabeth, and we see he was in them; it is he in them that preacheth and prophesieth, it is he in them that speaks, or else the Serpent speaks; but it was Christ Jesus that spake in those holy women, for they were filled with his holy spirit of Truth, and prophesied sweetly in his Name. It was the serpent that instructed Eve when she taught her husband, Adam, to break God's command, and to eat of the fruit of the forbidden Tree; and you may see what was the end of such eating; O cursed Doctrine! for they were both dri∣ven out of the Garden of God, to the ground that brought for thorns & thistles; it is to be lamented that we have too many teachers, such as Eve was, in this our Age, Day and Generation, both of men and wo∣men,
as clearly appeareth by the fruits their inward ground bringeth forth, to wit, Bryars, Thorns and Thistles; but such Earth (said Paul, Heb. 6. 8.) is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Such Teaching as this, such Do∣ctrine as this is forbidden both by Law and Gospel, whether it proceed from men or women. The Women who live in Pride and in the Vanities of their Minds, cannot be teachers of good things: But Women who are turned to Christ Jesus, and by him redeem'd out of the vanities of this present evil World, out of the Lusts of the Flesh, out of the Lusts of the Eyes, and out of the Pride of Life, being fill'd with the spirit of Truth; such womens teaching, such womens praying and prophecying in the Church is not forbidden neither by Law nor Gospel; they being first taught themselves by the e∣ternal & free spirit of God, which is poured forth upon daughters as well as sons, upon hand-maids as well as upon men-servants, upon the female as well as upon the male; for the man and the woman is all one in the Lord, it was the serpent that at first made the difference, and it is the serpent and his instructed that keep up the difference. And you who are against Womens speak∣ing in the Church, what do you think of
Anna, the Prophetess, that good old Wid∣ow, who spake of Christ to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem: Do you think this good old Woman did right in so doing? This Woman knew him, and gave thanks to the Lord, even in the Temple, and spoke in the Temple of him, even publickly to them all, and yet we do not read that she was judged, and rebuked for so doing, neither was she hurried and put out of Doors, nor put in Prison, nor banished out of the Town; good old Si∣meon, who was inspired with the Spirit of God, reproved her not, neither did he forbid her; but they joyned in their Testi∣mony, being filled by the same Spirit, and gave thanks to the Lord together, and spake of Christ one by one, both being in the Temple together, the one spake after the other, as they were moved by the same Spirit of God, and as the holy Ghost re∣vealed unto them, so they brought it forth, they neither added nor diminished: And here was the good Order, the comely and lively Order, the Man and the Woman in the Restoration by Christ Jesus, made Meet-helps one to another in the work of the Gospel, joyning their Testimony to∣gether, speaking and prophecying of Christ in the Temple to all them who
looked for Redemption in Jerusalem; they are both recorded in holy Scripture, and their Testimony set down, as you may read, Luk. 2. from ver. 25. to 39. the Spirit of God seeing it meet so to do, that the Mouths of Gain-sayers may be stopt. But such teaching as Potiphars Wife taught Joseph (Gen. 39. 12.) is to be re∣sisted and denyed, for she inticed and taught him to commit Adultery, and so to defile the Temple of God; read 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. and chap. 6. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. But such teaching as King Lemuels Mo∣ther taught him, is to be obeyed; for she taught him, not to give his strength unto Women, nor his wayes to that which de∣stroyeth Kings: It is not for Kings, O Le∣muel! it is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for Princes strong Drink, lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the Judgment of any of the Afflicted, &c. Such Doctrine as this, such Teaching as this, such a Pro∣phesie as this is to be believed, and obey∣ed, and not slighted nor quenched; such a Woman as this might be permitted to speak and prophesie in the Church, though even before Kings and Princes. And O that our King and Rulers would follow her Advice, it would be better with them then it is! read Prov. 31. from ver. 1. to 10.
Such teaching as Jezebel taught the El∣ders and Nobles (so called) but they pro∣ved ignoble in their proceedings, in the receiving the Testimony of false Wit∣nesses against Naboth, and in murdering of him: I say, the counsel and advice she gave these Elders and Nobles that lived in outward Jezrel with Naboth, is to be de∣nyed and resisted, and will be denyed and resisted by all them who live and dwell in inward Jezreel (to wit, in the Seed of God) for she taught them to set up false Witnesses, and to murder Naboth, to ful∣fil the the covetous desire of her Husband, King Ahab; And also she taught Ahab to take possession of Naboth's Vineyard, when she had caused him to be murdered. This Jezebel slew the Prophets of the Lord, and maintained many false Prophets, the Pro∣phets of Baal, and of the Groves, at her own Table, they fed upon the fatest of things at the Queen's Table, while the Prophets of the Lord, even those of them that had escaped her murdering Arm, had nothing but Bread and Water, fed by Obadiah se∣cretly in Caves. Such teaching as this, that teaches People to slay and murder, and shed Blood for covetous ends and practices, and to maintain their Pride and Galantry,
or for any other Selfish-ends, is to be de∣nyed and testified against. It is to be lamented, that we have too many Jezebelians in this our Age, who teach People to slay and murder, and shed Blood, maintaining her Prophets with large allowances at her Table, while the Media∣tor of the New-Testament, Christ Jesus, the heavenly Prophet, hath nothing a∣mongst them, but the fruitless Fig-tree, and hath not whereon to lay his Head in all the Earth of their Hearts: And his Ser∣vants, both Men and Women, who follow him the heavenly Light, are accounted by those Jezebelians, not worthy to live in the Earth. But Jezebel's day is near an end, and her Night is fast approaching, wherein she will be cast into a Bed, and them that commit Adultry with her, into great Tribulation, except they Repent of their Deeds, the Sword is drawn against her Children, and hath drunk some of their Blood already. O that they may repent, and prevent a further and heavier stroke. But such teaching, and such an advice as Abigail gave to David, is to be received and obeyed; for she counselled him not to shed Blood, neither to avenge himself
with his own Hand. And David when he came to the coolness of his mind, knew that she was sent of God, and said to Abi∣gail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy Advice; and blessed be thou which hast kept me this day from coming to shed Blood, and from avenging my self with my own Hand. O that all men and women would take no∣tice of this blessed Advice and Counsel, given by a Woman! Here the Lord sent the Woman to advise and counsel the Man, and David hearkened to her Voice, and obeyed her Counsel, and took her Advice, and he never had reason to repent it; the Seed of the Woman at this time trod upon the Head of the murdering Serpent. O that our Nation were filled with many such Women like Abigail, to give good coun∣sel unto Men, and that our men would re∣ceive their counsel, and not avenge them∣selves with their own Hand, but leave all Vengeance to him with whom it is to take Vengeance on his Adversaries, and Re∣compence the wrong done unto his Ser∣vants. And you may see how quickly the Lord pleaded David's Cause and his Re∣proach with churlish Nabal. But such teaching as Job's Wife taught him, and such an advice as she gave him,
is to be resisted and denyed, as righteous Job did, for she taught and advised him to curse God and dye; But Job told her, that she spoke like one of the foolish Women; Should we, said he, receive good at the Hands of God, and not receive evil also? And Solomon when he was old, his Wives turned away his Heart from the Lord, to follow after the Abominations of the Na∣tions, so that his Heart was not perfect with the Lord: Such Womens teachings, snares and inticements are to be denyed and resisted. And also such teaching and instruction as Herodias, Philip's Wife, gave unto her dancing Daughter, is not of God, the Ser∣pent is Head in such, the bloody Dragon rules in such; read Matth. 14. And such are to be testified against, for it is the Ser∣pent's Voice, the Antichristian Voice that sounds through such, and not the Voice of Christ. Abraham was commanded of God to hearken unto the Voice of Sarah, and cast out the Bond-women Hagar, with her mocking Son Ishmael; and although the thing was very grievous in his sight, yet he resisted not, but obeyed the Voice of his Wife: Here was no Usurpation (as is vainly supposed) the thing was right be∣fore
the Lord; Sarah was to be hearkned unto in this thing, the Bond-woman was not to rule in the house with her, she was the Free Woman, neither was her Son Ishmael the mocker, to be Heir with the Child of Promise, Isaac the righteous Seed: And yet Sarah was in subjection to her own Husband, and called him, Lord; and so is every Woman that is truly leavened with the Spirit of God. And Christ is greater than Abraham, who is the Head and Hus∣band of all the Daughters of Zion; and these Women who have Christ to their heavenly Husband and Head, they will never be found out of their Duty and law∣ful Subjection to their natural Husbands, if they have any. And it is only those Women (be they outwardly joyned to a Husband, or free) who are marryed to Christ, and he Lord in them, and Head in them, that are permitted and allowed to speak in the Church, and by him they are strengthened and assisted to be teachers of good things. The King's Daughter is all glorious within, and it is from this Glory within, Christ Jesus in them, that they do prophesie and speak in the Church, or else their Doctrine is not received, but rejected by the Children of Light, be they Male or Female. The Lord hath given a
good measure of discerning to many in this day, and hath opened that Ear in many, that can try and taste Words, as the Mouth doth Meat, and know from what Fountain every Word cometh. Such teaching as the Woman of Samaria taught the Men of Samaria, John 4. 29. is not to be slighted and neglected, she said unto them, Come, see a man that told me all things that ever I did, is not this the Christ? And many of the Samaritans of the City believed on him for the saying of the Woman, and came unto Christ, and were confirmed in their Faith: Here was an effectual Preacher, and here was an open hearted People; she was made Instrumen∣tal to them, in that she prevailed with the People; and they were a noble minded People, because they received her Testi∣mony, and came unto Christ, and so was confirmed in the truth of her Testimony. O! how may the Professors of this Age be ashamed and confounded in themselves when they read this; the Samaritans be∣lieved, but they will not believe. The Lord hath sent out his Servants and faith∣ful Messengers, both Male and Female, to invite you all to come unto Christ, and to turn unto Christ's Light in you. And our Testimony is, and hath been all along
since God raised us up to be a People, that this is he, and not another, that tells us all things whatsoever we have done: It is he, and not another, that searches the Heart of every man and woman, and tryeth their Reigns, and sheweth unto them their Thoughts; but oh, alas! who among you believes our Report? or who among you believes the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, concerning this first and only Principle of the Doctrine of Christ Jesus? see Jer. 17. 10. see also Psal. 7. 9. and 1 Chron. 28. 9. and Rev. 2. 23. and Amos 4. 13. See and read these Scriptures; for if you will not believe Moses and the Pro∣phets, neither will you believe though one were raised from the Dead and sent to you: And my Testimony is one and the same with the holy men of God, That he that formeth the Mountains and createth the Wind, and declareth unto Man what is his Thought, and maketh the Morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the Earth, the Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name. And Paul, the faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, saith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examin your selves whe∣ther you be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. Oh! who among you receives this, that
Christ Jesus the Son of God is in you? Have you yet turned your Minds, with your whole Affections and Desires to him in you? You say you believe the Scrip∣tures, and that Paul was a true and faith∣ful Minister of Jesus Christ; if you do, than take his Counsel, and obey the Scrip∣tures, and turn to him in you, and you will find that a day in his Courts, is better than a thousand elsewhere. O turn you, turn you, speedily and in haste to Christ Jesus, the true Light in you, which search∣eth your Hearts and tries your Reins; I say, turn while your Day lasteth, and while the precious Light is in you, & while his Spirit striveth with you, lest his Spirit cease striving with you any more, and your Day pass over, and the Door be shut, and you without, left in a Night of utter Darkness: O dreadful Darkness! &c. But now to our purpose in hand. Exod. 15. 20. And Miriam the Prophe∣tess, the Sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Women went out after her with Timbrels and with Dances, and Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously, the Horse and his Rider hath he thrown into the Sea. Here were Women assembled to Praise the Lord, in the day when God de∣livered his People out of Aegypt; and
here was Songs of Deliverance sung unto the Lord by holy Women, in the day when God had thrown the Horse and his Rider into the Sea. Here was Women met, and here was Women Prophetesses, a part from the Men, and yet we read not that Moses reproved them, nor that Aaron re∣proved them. And now in this Day, wherein God is delivering his spiritual Israel out of Egypt, from under the Bondage of spiritual Pha∣raoh, and bringing them through the Red Sea, and by his mighty Power and out∣stretched Arm casting the Horse and his Rider, to wit, the Beast and the Whore, into the bottom of the Sea. I say, in this day, our Women in their travel being made Witnesses of the Work of God, and of the wonderful Deliverances wrought by his outstretched Arm of Power, cannot but meet together, and praise God toge∣ther without outward Symbals, and speak often one to another, and stir up one ano∣ther in the Grace of God that brings their Salvation, and hath called them, and brought them out of Darkness, to be par∣takers with his Saints in Light. And they who are against them in this Practice of meeting together, and of prophecying one by one when met together, and Pray∣ing
and Praising together; I say, they who are against them in this holy and comely Order, are not of Moses's Spirit, nor of Aaron's Spirit, but in a contrary Spirit, Numb. 11. 29. Wuld God that all the Lords People were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them And the Lords People are Women as well as Men, Daughters as well as Sons, Hand-maidens as well as Men-Servants, as before is said. Zach. 12. 12. And the Land shall mourn every Family apart; the Family of the House of David apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of the House of Nathan apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of the House of Levi apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of Shimei apart, and their Wives apart; All the Families that remain, [Mark, that remain] every Family apart, and their Wives apart. Here the Prophet of the Lord Zachariah tells us, that there shall be Men and Wo∣mens Meetings, both apart the one from the other. Object. But some may say, This is in the dayes of Mourning, &c. Answ. Yea, it is in the day of Mourning; for the day of Mourning goeth before the day of Joy and Rejoycing: Blessed are they (said Christ, Matth. 5. 4.) that Mourn,
for they shall be Comforted. And the rea∣son of their Mourning is given in the 10th Verse of Zach. 12. They shall look upon me whom they have Pierced, and they shall Mourn for him, &c. And so you may see that the gathering is to him, whom they have pierced. [And if they were to Mourn a∣part, then who shall hinder their Rejoy∣cing and Praising God apart, when the time is come?] Rev. 1. 7. Behold, he cometh with Clouds, (mark) and every Eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; and all Kindreds of the Earth shall Wail because of him; even so, Amen. And the gathering is, and must be to him whom they have pierced, when the Lord opens the Eyes both of the Male and Fe∣male, to see him whom they have pierced: they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born. They that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy (Psal. 126. 5.) Those Women who were gathered together, to mourn for him who was crucified and pierced, it was not long that they had waited at the Sepulchre Mourning, till they were made Witnesses of his Resurrection, and then joy and glad∣ness filled their Hearts; yea, these holy Women were made Witnesses before the
Men, the Lord seeing it meet in his Wis∣dom to reveal himself to, and in the weak∣er Vessels, that he may stain the Pride of all Flesh, and bring into contempt all the honourable of the Earth. Matth. 27. 55, 56. And many Women were there (beholding afar off) which follow∣ed Jesus from Galilee, ministring unto him. Here was Women Ministers, ministring unto Christ, among which was Mary Mag∣dalen, and Mary the Mother of James and Joses, and the Mother of Zebedee's Chil∣dren. Here was a Meeting of Women following Jesus from Galilee. And who can forbid a gathering of Women, follow∣ing the Light of Christ, out of the World, from all its Affections and Lusts, even through the Cross to the Death, that they may witness through him the Resurrection unto Life eternal, and so rejoyce and praise him together? Mark 16. 9. Now when Jesus was risen early, the first day of the Week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven Devils, and she went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept. Here was Mourners and Weepers in the men's Meeting, as well as among the Women. And who can forbid the Women to
come to the Men, and declare it to the men, when they are made Witnesses of the Resurrection of the Life of Jesus Christ in their own Hearts, as Mary Magdalen did to the Apostles. Acts 16. 13. And on the Sabbath we went out of the City by a River-side, where Prayer was wont to be made, and we sate down, and spake unto the Women which resorted thither. Here was a Womans meeting by a River∣side: And here Paul and those that were with him, came and sate down with them, and Paul spake to them, and the Lord opened Lydia's Heart. So as men feel a freedom from the Lord, and a true desire raised up in them, they may go to the wo∣mens meetings, and visit the womens mee∣tings, and sit down with them, and wait upon the Lord together, and Pray and Prophecy together, and Praise the Lord together. Deborah was a Prophetess, and judged Israel, and was a Mother in Israel; and what a Prophecy she prophesied in the Name of the Lord, and what gracious Words proceeded from the Spirit of God through her, you may read at large in the fourth and fifth Chapter of Judges. Hannah was a good Woman, and she prayed in her Heart, and spoke in her
Heart unto the Lord, and the Lord heard her, and gave her her Request; he gave her Samuel, and Samuel was one of the Lords Prophets; and after she had brought forth her first-born, she rendred Thanks unto the Lord: and what gracious Words came from Gods own Spirit in this Wo∣man, you may read, 1 Sam. 2. And there was a wise Woman in Abel of Beth-maacah, who gave good Counsel unto Joab, and to the men of the City, and de∣livered the City from Destruction; she was one that was peaceable and faithful, and a Mother in Israel, as you may read, 2 Sam. 20. Such women as these may be permitted to speak in the Church, and will not be hindred nor stopt by the Righ∣teous: But the covetous proud Priesthood of this Generation is of another mind, warring against the appearance of God, both in the Male and Female, forbidding all either to Preach or Prophesie, except those who are approved and licensed by themselves, and has received-their Mark; but their Building is shaken, and their Foundation discovered, and their Power is broken and scattered, and the Consump∣tion determined, is come and coming upon them; read Zach. 14. 12, 13. And you may read 2 King. 22. How
Hilkiah the Priest found the Book of the Law in the House of the Lord, and gave it to Shaphan the Scribe, and he read it, and also he read it to the King; and we see how tender the Heart of good Josiah the King was, and how he rent his Clothes and humbled himself, and how he sent Hilkiah the Priest, and others of his Coun∣sellors, to enquire of the Lord for him and the People, and for all Judah, con∣cerning the words of the Book of the Law, that had been lost, and was found in the House of God; for the King perceived that the Wrath of the Lord was great against them, because they and their Fathers had not hearkened unto the words of the Book of the Law, to do accordingly to what there was written; and they went unto Huldah the Prophetess, and enquired at her. What! was there not a Prophet in all Jerusalem nor in Judea to enquire at, that they went to the Prophetess? Was there not a man that knew the Word of the Lord, that they went to a Woman? Yea, there was; howbeit they went to a woman, and the Lord spake to them by a woman; They read the Words in the Book of the Law without them, Jer. 1. 2. But this woman read in the Book of Life.
Come, hear all you who despise Womens Teaching and Prophecying in the Church, answer me plainly, What do you think of this Woman? If she were in your dayes, would you not forbid her, and tell her, that women are not permitted to teach or pro∣phesie, and that Paul permits not a Woman to speak in the Church? Oh! that the Lord God may open your Eyes to see and know what Women those are that Paul speaks of there, and then I know, that the best of you who are against holy Womens speaking in the Church, would be quiet your selves, and forbear speaking in the Church till ye come to dwell in that holy Spirit wherein this holy Woman Huldah dwelt; for I here declare, that all men, as well as women, that is, in their first fallen estate, in their first birth, in old Adam's nature, let them be never so gloriously a∣dorn'd with knowledge, learning and wis∣dom, arts, parts and sciences, I say, they are nothing then but Women not per∣mitted to speak in Christs Church. But in the new and second Birth, the man and the woman is all one in the Lord; and the man and the woman that comes through the Cross of Christ to have the first man cruci∣fied and slain in them, and the second birth brought forth in them, and they being born
again, not of corruptible seed, but of in∣corruptible, by the Word of God which liveth and abideth sorever; I say, be it either man or woman that comes to this state, may preach and prophesie in the Church, and speak, and pray, and praise God in the Church; for it is not they that speak, but it is Christ Jesus that speaketh in them, they being nothing but the empty Pitcher, until the heavenly Light and Life appear, and Christ doth utter his Voice through their earthly Tabernacles; for we preach not our selves, (said Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6, 7.) but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake; for God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, (see also Mat. 17. 2.) But we have this Trea∣sure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the Power may be of GOD, and not of ƲS. There is a great Mystery lieth hidden in all the Scriptures of Truth, which the first man seeth not, and knoweth not; but it is opened in the Light of the Lord, in the glo∣rious face of Jesus Christ, to the truly sin∣cere and seeking Soul, who loves the Light and hates Darkness; I say, in this 14 vers. of the 22 chap. of 2 King. there lieth open a
clear Manifestation of the place & dwelling of a true Prophet or Prophetess; the en∣lightn'd Mind doth see it in the openings of the Springs of Life, in the face of Jesus Christ they see it) whose face doth shine as the Sun in his strength, and his Rayment is white as the Light: O that the vail were taken off all hearts, & that the eyes of all might be open'd and anointed with Christ's Eye-salve, that they may see & believe in him, and turn to him who rends the vail & breaks down the middle wall of partition; it is the true Light and Life (in man and in woman) of Christ Jesus in them, that opens all the My∣steries of his Father's Kingdom. The King and his Nobles, and Hilkiah the Priest had a knowledge of God and his Law by holy History, and by Report and Hear-say, and they were zealously affected & real so far as they did know; but Huldah, that godly Woman was come to the holy Spirit of Prophesie, where she knew and heard the Voice of God immediately, and saw him by the seeing of the Eye of her Soul, as Job did. The King, and the Priest, and the Scribe, and the rest of the King's Counsellors had the outward Book of the Law, which was found in the outward Temple, open'd unto them: But Huldah, this godly Women and
Prophetess of the Lord had the inward Book of the Law, which she had found in he inward Temple, opened unto her by im, who openeth the Seals in all Ages, even Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, the Root and Off-spring of David, the bright and morn∣ing Star, the Light and Life of men; I say, e had open'd the Book of Life unto Hul∣dah, and doth open it to all who believe in and follow him, both Men and Women. They read in the Law and believed it, and were humbled before the Lord, and their hearts were tendred, and they wept; and this was and is acceptable with God in its time and place; Oh! that this were the case with Kings, Nobles and People this day, wherein there is as great a Cloud of Wrath hanging over our heads, and ready to be poured forth because of our Trans∣gressions, Iniquities and Rebellions, as ever hung over the heads of Israel in the days of old, we are guilty of the like Transgres∣sions, and may expect the same Punishments, if speedy and unfeigned Repentance pre∣vent it not; and it would have been poured out long e'er now, but that the Lord waits to be gracious, and is calling and hastening People out of Sodom, that they be not con∣sumed in the Flames of eternal Vengeance.
Oh! this Land is guilty, guilty, let great and small, and Persons of all ranks and degrees lay it to heart. But to return to our purpose in hand. The King, and the Priest, and the Scribe, and the rest, read and heard read the Book of the Law written by Moses and others of the Lords Prophets, and belie∣ved what was written, and was humbled before the Lord, when they heard of the Wrath denounced because of their Iniqui∣ties and Rebellions; and this (as I said be∣fore) was acceptable with God in its time and place: But men and women are not to stay here, nor set up their standard here, but they are to travel on, till they come to witness deliverance from the Evil, against which the Wrath is denoun∣ced; and till they come to travel beyond the Historical knowledge and hear-say, and be made partakers of the Life it self, even the Life of the Son of God, mani∣fested in their earthen Vessels, and they being born again, without which they can neither see, nor enter the Kingdom of God, nor hear the Voice of God in his own Kingdom. Huldah was come here, and had her dwelling here, to wit, into the new Birth, and here she read in the Book of Life, and heard the Word of the
Lord; And the King, and the Priest, and he rest knew this, and therefore was not atisfied with what they could learn from he Letter of the Law, till they went and nquired at her, who knew the Word of he Lord; and what effect the Word of he Lord, through this good Woman, had pon good King Josiah, and the rest, you may read, 2 King. 23. There is one thing more, which comes before me, which I may not let pass, and that is, the grievous mistake of the Letter-learned, who prosess themselves to be the only men; and I verily think, believe themselves to be the only men that are en∣dued with Wisdom, and Gifts to govern the People, and to teach the People the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, which Kingdom of Heaven signifieth in Scripture-Language, Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost; (Rom. 14. 17, 18.) For he, (saith Paul) that in these things serveth Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men. But what Righteousness we have had, and how much Peace we have en∣joyed under these Letter-learned men's government and teaching, let the present Broils and Contentions that are found amongst their Followers and Scholars bear witness: You may see in this 14th
Verse of 2 Kings Chap. 22. The Transla∣tors of the Scriptures call it the Colledge where Huldah that holy Prophetess dwelt; they (to wit, the Letter-learned men) imagining that none can be a Prophet but those who have dwelt in their Colledges, and are trained up there; this Colledge they account their second part; their Eng∣lish and Grammer Schools they account their first part. First, they put their Sons to the English and Grammer-Schools, being their first part; and when learned there, then they put them to the Colledge, which is their second part, and when learned there, then commonly comes forth three sorts, to wit, Lawyers, Physitians, and those they call Divines, Ministers, &c. But to let pass the first two, I intend to speak something concerning the third, to wit, these men called Ministers thus prepared in their Grammar-Schools and Colledges. Now being passed through these two parts, and learned there, and have served their Apprenticeships there, and approved by their Teachers there, and made Master John and Master James, &c. there; (contrary to Christ's command, Mat. 23. 8.) then they come forth as Journey∣men, and take what employment they can have amongst their Kindred, Acquaint∣ance
and Relations, and amongst the men of their own Trade; some of them go home to their Friends and Relations, and are maintained by them till they be pre∣fered to some place or other; and others go among the men of their own Trade, and Preach here and there where they are employed, crouching to them (as it is said concerning those, 1 Sam. 2. 36.) for a piece of Silver and a morsel of Bread, saying, Put me (I pray thee) into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a piece of Bread. Others of them go and seek out a place where they may sojourn, and are hired many of them for so much a Year, by the great Men and great Women of the Nation, to be their Chaplains; and there they stay till they be prefered to some Pa∣rish or other, where they get a larger allow∣ance of Wages and Hire; just as the Young Man the Levite did, (Judg. 17.) where he hired himself with Micah for ten Shekels of Silver by the Year, and a suit of Apparel, and there he stayed till he found a better place, and greater prefer∣ment with the Danites, as you may read, Judg. 18. And so they having read and studied Letter-Authors and Histories, come forth Ministers of the Letter and History, not of the Spirit. But in this our Age these
Letter-learned men bring not the People to know the History of the holy Scriptures truly as it is, but corrupts their Under∣standings, darkening their Minds with their dark and doubtful Expositions and Meanings, deceiving the Hearts of the simple with their fair Words and eloquent Speeches. Let none mistake me here, for I have nothing of enmity or hatred in my heart a∣gainst any Bishop, Priest or Minister (so cal∣led) in all the World, but love & good will to them, as they are Men, and the Crea∣tures of God; only that which I feel that the Spirit of God in me is pressing after, is that Deceit may be discovered, and Truth manifested unto all, and that all may come to see and imbrace that Truth that sets free from Sin, Deceit and Falshood. And there was a little Maid that waited on Naaman's Wife (as you may read, 2 King. 5.) and she gave good Counsel unto her Mistriss, and wished that her Lord were with the Prophet in Samaria, for he would recover him of his Leprosie. Here was good Counsel given by a little Maid; a good Advice indeed, for it had a good effect, Naaman obeyed her Coun∣sel, and went to the man of God Elisha, and he directed him what to do, and after
he had obeyed the Prophet, he was made  witness of the cleansing vertue of Jor∣dan. And now in this our day, Wisdom hath sent forth her faithful and chaste Am∣assadors, [which the wise Man is ot ashamed to entitule by the Name of er Maidens] intreating all, and inviting ll, and wishing that all, both great men and great women, Poor and Rich would come unto the Prophet, whom God hath appointed and ordained for Salvation to the ends of the Earth, that he might direct them how to be cleansed and washed from the Leprosie of Sin. The little Maid di∣rected Naaman to the Prophet in Samaria: And these in this day, whom the Lord sends forth (both Male and Female) direct them to the true Light in themselves, the Witness of God, Christ Jesus in them, that he may direct every one of them what to do to have the Leprosie of Sin done away, and Iniquity purged out. And as the Prophet in Samaria directed Naaman to wash seven times in outward Jordan, to have his out∣ward Leprosie washed away; so this inward Prophet, Christ Jesus in us, hath directed all who are truly come unto him, to walk in the Light, with which he hath lighted them, till they witness his precious Blood
to cleanse them from all Sin; and all who have obeyed him, and continued walking and abiding in his Light, have witnessed that Jordan in themselves to have a pre∣cious vertue to cleanse from the Leprosie of Sin; and this we feel, that the oftner we wash in this heavenly Jordan, the cleaner we are, and the more tender we are, that even some have their inward Flesh, or heart of Flesh, made as tender as the flesh of a new born Babe. But who hath believed our Report, and turned at the Reproofs of Wisdom? to them is the Arm and Power of the Lord revealed: But to them who are disobedient, the Stone which the Builders refused in all Ages, and the Babylonish Buil∣ders refuse in this Age, is become a Stone of Stumbling and Rock of Offence; but to us who believe he is precious, and we have felt his cleansing and healing Virtue, glory to his Name forever. In this History con∣cerning Naaman I take notice of several clear things, opened to me by the Light of the Lord. First, we see that after Naaman had given car to the Advice and Counsel of the little Maid; he went to the King of Syria, his Ma∣ster, who was so far from hindering him, that he writ a Letter with him, & directed it to the King of Israel; but herein he was
mistaken, for he should have directed Naa∣man to the Prophet, according to the little Maids Advice. And we see likewise how the King of Israel thought that the King of Syria was seeking a Quarrel against him, as you may read at large in 2 Kings 5. Now the little Maid had not directed him to the King, but to go to the Prophet, for the King could not do it: And so there Jea∣lousies arose from a Mistake, as too to many do this day: Many are the Quarrel∣lings, Contendings, Warrings and Fight∣ings, that arise from Mistakes; one Party crying, Lo here, and another Party crying, Lo there is Christ: And to tell the truth, neither of them knowing where is Christ. And when Wisdom's little Maidens direct them both, and all of them to the true Light in themselves, to Christ, the true Prophet in themselves, they reject their Advice and Counsel, and say, it is not he; calling his Light in them but natural and insufficient for them, and many of them give it very bad Names, and so reject it, and turn from it, and fall a quarrelling and fighting among themselves again, contending for the true Christ, when neither of them has him re∣vealed, as appears by their Fruits. Now when Elisha, the man of God, heard that the King had rent his Clothes, that he
sent to the King, saying, Wherefore hast thou rent thy Clothes? let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a Prophet in Israel. O that all Kings and Rulers were turned to the true Prophet Christ Jesus, to the true Light in themselves, and would direct all their People to him, then their Rents and Divisions would quickly come to an end; for he is the Healer of the Breaches, and he is the Prince of Peace, all his subjects are peaceable, their Song is, Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace and good Will towards men. Now when Naaman was come to the Prophet, he directed him to wash in Jordan seven times, and be clean; but Naaman was wroth, because the manner of his Cure came not according to what he had imagined to himself, as you may read in the 11 & 12 verses of that chapter; but his Servants gave him good counsel. So you may see that it is good for great Men to have good Servants, that may give good counsel in the time of need, and pacifie wrath in time of Anger; and it is good for Masters to take Advice from honest faithful Servants; for if Na∣aman hd gone away in his wrath, and not taken his Servants counsel to obey the Pro∣phet, his Lprosie had remained with him, and he had not been cured.
There one thing more that I cannot let pass, before I proceed to another place, and that is concerning the Covetousness of Gehazi: We see that the Prophet of the Lord Elisha would receive none of Naa∣man's gifts, and although he urged him, yet he refused: Here is a true mark of a Pro∣phet of the Lord, and of a Disciple of Jesus Christ; freely they receive from the Lord, and freely they give to the Peo∣ple; they covet no man's Gold, Silver nor Apparel. Honest Paul, who was a faithful Minister and Apostle of Jesus Christ, was such an one, as is witnessed, Matth. 10. 7, 8. As ye go, Preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils; freely ye have received, freely give. Also read Acts 20. 34, 35. 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12. 2 Thes. 3. 8. But Gehazi received them, and run af∣ter Naaman with a Lye in his Mouth, to get the Silver, and to get the Garments; as too to many this day run after the great Men and great Women of the Nations, with a Lye in their Mouth, coveting the Gold, and the Silver, and the Apparel. But what should I say more? the Leprosie of Naaman did cleave unto Gehazi, and the Leprosie of Gehazi doth cleave to his
Seed forever, according to the Prophets words. And now the Gehazians have lost the knowledge of the true Prophet, and they have lost the knowledge of spiritual Jor∣dan, and therefore their Leprosie remains, their Sin remains, their Defilements re∣main, and they have now lost hope of ever being cleansed on this side of the Grave, and preach this for Doctrine to the Peo∣ple: And they are very angry with any that speak of a possibility of being made clean; For a Body of Death and Sin (say they) will remain, and Imperfection will re∣main while we are on this side of the Grave. But what have I to do with them? or what should I say more of them? for the Day breaketh, and the Light ariseth, wherein they shall be made manifest to all, that will but open their Eyes to see them; and they that will not, must continue in blindness; and at present I will leave them with that saying of Christ, Matth. 15. 14. Let them alone, they be blind Leaders of the Blind, &c. And now to our purpose in hand. Phlip, the Evangelist had four Daugh∣ters, Virgins, which did Prophesie, as you may read, Acts 21. 8, 9. And Paul and others of the Disciples tarried many dayes in Philip's House; and yet we do not
read that Paul reproved them for prophe∣cying. So here you may see that in those dayes there was Daughters that had the Spirit of Prophesie, and did Prophesie. And also we read Acts 18. 26. That not only Aquila, but also Priscilla his Wife, were Expounders of the Way of God; and Aquila was a Trades-man and Tent∣maker, and Paul was of the same Craft. And we read in Phil 4. 3. That there were Women which laboured with Paul in the Gospel. And so you may see that there were Women-labourers in the Go∣spel, as well as Men; and yet we read not that Paul rejected their labour, because they were Women. And so you see there were Women-Prophetesses, Women-Expounders, and Women-Labourers; and yet not rejected nor reproved by any of the Apostles, that I read of. And Paul desires Titus, to speak the things which become sound Doctrine; that the aged Men be sober, &c. and that the aged Women likewise be in Behaviour as becometh Holiness (or holy Women) not false Ac∣cusers, not given to much Wine, teachers of good things, that they may teach the younger Women to be sober, &c. read Tit. 2. through∣out, and there you will see that Paul al∣loweth Women to be teachers of good
things as well as Men; and that Spirit is judged that would hinder what God alow∣eth, or stop that mouth which God opens. And if Women did not meet together, how could the Elder teach the Younger? [Or it may be queried, If their teaching the younger Women be not most proper, comly and effectual in a Meeting, apart from the Men?] But it clearly may be seen, that God alloweth Women to labour in the Gospel, and to teach good things; and he hath promised to pour out his Spi∣rit upon the Women as well as the Men; and they are to meet often together, and to speak often one to another, and to wait upon God together, and think upon his Name together, and praise his Power to∣gether, and call upon his Name together, as well as the Men; and the elder in the Truth to teach the younger in the Truth. Obj. But some may say, Seeing it is so clear from the Scriptures of Truth, that there hath been Women labourers in the Work of the Gospel, and Women-Prophetesses, and Women-Expounders of the Way of God; and that it is commanded, the Elder Women to teach the Younger, &c. How shall I know what Women those are that Paul forbids to speak in the Church?
Answ. All Women that are apt to usurp Authority over their Husbands; all Wo∣men that are under the Law, and that have not learned true subjection; and every Woman that hearkens to the Voice of the Serpent, and is deceived by him, as Eve was; while they continue in that state, cannot, nor may not be permitted to speak in the Church of God: And all the Jeze∣belians, who paint their Faces, and tire their Heads, and persecute the Prophets of the Lord, and maintain the false Pro∣phets at their Table, or otherwise; and all them who run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward; and all them who speak evil of the things they know not; & all the Gehazians who covet Silver, Gold, and Apparel, and continue to be covered with the Leprosie of Sin to the day of their Death: These who were Lepers were shut out under the Law, and now they are shut out by the Spirit of God, none of these can be permitted to speak in Christ's Church: and all them who deny the new Law of Christ and Covenant of God to be written in the Hearts of Men and Women; and all them who deny the Unction of the holy One, and the leadings and guidings of the Spirit of Truth, that leads into all Truth, to be alone all-sufficient; and all
such Ministers as break Christ's Command, and justifie themselves in so do doing, as in calling one another Master James, and Master John, &c. None of these, while in that state, may or can be permitted to speak in the Church of God, but if they do, they are to be testified against; and all them that look for Gain, and seeks for Gain from their Quarters, and teach for Hire, and divine for Money; and all them who exercise Lordship over God's Heri∣tage; and all them who beat their fellow-Servants, and eat and drink with the Drunkards; and all them who steal the Words one from another, and say, Thus saith the Lord, when the Lord never spake to them; and all them who use unsound Words, and slattering Titles to please Men, and keep not the form of sound words; and all them that have a form of Godliness, denying the Power; I say none of these may or can be permitted to speak in the Church of God; and all those who deny Scripture-Testimony concerning Christ, and undervalue his divine Precepts and Commands; None of these may, or can be permitted to speak in Christ's Church. But I had almost forgot to tell you, and did forget, till the Spirit of Truth brought it to my remembrance,
that it is impossible that either Male or Fe∣ale can speak in Christ's Church, till hey be redeemed out of all these; for the ue Church is in God, and God is in his wn Kingdom, where the rebellious, and nd disobedient, and unclean cannot en∣er, nor any Man nor Woman can enter Gods Kingdom till they be born again, nd made new in Christ Jesus. To be short, all who deny the Prophets Doctrine, or Christ's Doctrine, his di∣ine Precepts recorded in holy Scripture, r deny the Apostles Doctrine; I say, ch are not to be permitted to speak in he solemn Assemblies of the Saints; and lthough they confess all to be true, yet if hey walk contrary in Life and Practice, hey are to be silent in the solemn Assem∣lies of the Righteous. And all the Wo∣men that live in Pride and in Covetousness, and in the vain Adornings of their outward Bodies; and all that are drunken with the Cares and carnal Pleasures of this present evil World; and all who useth Usurpa∣tion over the Man, outward or inward, are to be silent, and not to speak in the Congregations of the Righteous. Who∣ever they be, Man or Woman, that are found in the first Adam's nature in the fall, they not witnessing a Death to that first
Birth in them, and a Resurrection throug Jesus Christ unto Life, in some measure I say, be they man or woman, the Spirit o God forbids them speaking in the Church And as the Man and the Woman are a one in the Lord (being filled by the sam Spirit of God) may speak in the Churc as the Spirit of God gives them utterance it being not they that speak, but Christ i them, the Spirit of Truth in them. So the Man and the Woman are all one in old Adam, in the fall, and such old Creatures may not, nor can be permitted to speak in the Church. Isa. 49. 22, 23. Thus saith the Lord God▪ Behold I will lift up mine Hand to the Gen∣tiles, and set up my Standard to the People and they shall bring thy Sons in their Bosom and thy Daughters shall be carried upon their Shoulders; and Kings shall be thy Nursing-Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing-Mothers, &c. Was it not here foretold, that Women also should be nourishers or Nurses in Christ's Church? And if they be Nurses, they must have something to give to the Children, and Milk in their Breasts to the Babes: And if a Woman have the Milk of the Word of God in her Breast, to wit, in her Heart, let her not hide nor
keep it back, but she must give it forth to e hungry Babes; for if she do not her reasts will grow dry. O! my Soul and Life hath travelled with he Lord that I might see this day fulfilled, hat this barren VVilderness might become  fruitful Field, that Kings and Queens, rinces and their Princesses, Dukes and heir Dutchesses, and all other great Men nd great Women, of all Ranks and De∣rees whatsoever, (among whom I have welt in the outward from my birth) might ome to receive the Word of Life in them∣elves, and partake of the Promise in Christ Jesus in his Church, and that they may ome to witness that noble Birth brought forth in them, that partakes of the Milk of he Word of God, and would cause it to issue abundantly to nourish the hungry Babes and Children of Christ. O Lord God! I wait for thy Salvation, to see thee perform that word that sprung in my heart concerning them, even that the Wilderness should become a fruitful Field, and that the fruitful Field shall become a Wilderness; It is with thee, O Lord! to do that which no other can do, even to bring down the high Mountains, and to level the high Hills, and to make thy Way thorow them, and to exalt thy Glory in the whole Earth; for thou art God, and there
is none else; with thee all things are possible glory to thy great Name forever and evermore saith my Soul. Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17, 18. And it shal come to pass that in the last days (saith God I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh; and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy and your Young Men shall see Visions, and your Old Men shall dream Dreams; and on my Ser∣vants, and on my Hand-maidens, I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall Prophecy. And now in this Age, and in our Day, the Lord is fulfilling his Pro¦mise, and his Spirit is poured forth upon many Sons and Daughters, Servants and Hand-maidens. The Earnest Penny is al∣ready received, and many of them are run∣ing to and fro, and trading with their hea∣venly Penny, their heavenly Gift, that the may bring the Increase and Gain to their Lord and Master Christ Jesus. And W will be to them who hide their Lords Mo¦ney in the Earth, and put their Candl under a Bushel of Earth; and Wo also will be to them who stop, forbid and disturb th Sons and Daughters, Servants and Hand¦maidens of the Lord, in their going to and fro, and improving their Lords money, (to wit, their heavenly Gift) that knowledg may be encreased; I say, wo and misery
will be the portion of such who distrub and stop them in their Travel, if they Repent not. Psal. 2. 10, 11, 12. Be Wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with Trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Way: When his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him: If you rebel against him till his Wrath be kindled against you, he will break you & dash you to pieces, one against another, like a Potters Vessel. And now you may see, that the Promise is to Daughters as well as to Sons, to Hand∣maidens as well as to Men-servants; and that the one shall prophesie as truly as the other. Hugh Wood. THE END.
