W3534 E329_12 99861374 159614
Die Mercurii 25 Martii. 1646. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, That Mr. Hollis, and Sir Peter Went∣worth, do from this House give Thanks to Mr. Bolton, and Mr. Cheynell, for the great Pains they took in the Sermons they Preached this day at the intreatie of this House at St. Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of Publick Humiliation) And to desire them to Print their Sermons. And it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print their Sermons without License under their hand∣writing. H. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com. I Appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print this Sermon. Francis Cheynell.
THREE LETTERS Intercepted by Sir Tho: Fairfax IN CORNVVAL. The first, from The E: of Glamorgan to His Majesty; The second, from The Lord George Digby to his Lady, The third. To his Servant Walsingham; Concerning Their Proceedings in IRELAND. Sent by Mr. PETERS to the Honorable House of Commons, and read in the said House. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. March 26. 1646.
For His Sacred Majestie. May it please Your Majestie, I Am now at Waterford, providing shiping immediatly to transport 6000. Foot, and 4000 more are by May to follow them: I hope these will yet come opportunely to the relief of Chester; what hath been the occasions of so long delayes, and yet suffers not Your Majesties service herein to proceed with that advantage it might do, I conceive not so fit to commit to Paper; but I shortly send my Brother, who shall shortly inform Your Majestie with all parti∣culars, and thereby rectifie Your Opinion, and give you true knowledge who are Your faithful Servants. I hope long ere this Captain Bacon hath arrived with You since my enlargement, and therefore I need onely tell Your Majestie, That my further services intended for You, will I hope now without further crosses be suffer∣ed to go on, though strange is the Industry used by ma∣ny seeming Friends to hinder me therein, but I am con∣fident it shall not lye in their power, Your Majestie re∣maining still constant (as I doubt not but You will) to Your favourable Opinion and right Interpretation of my poor Endeavours; which, if they may take place, will procure You to be a glorious and happy Prince, I having no other ends, then to approve my self, Sir, Your Sacred Majesties most dutiful obedient Subject, and passionately devoted Servant, GLAMORGAN. Waterford, Febr. 23. 1645.
The Lord Digby's Letter to his Lady. My dear heart, YOur Letter by Mr. Moor hath eased me of a great deal of care that I have been in ever since I left the King, since I never heard from you, nor of you till now: And knowing you to be at the time of my coming away in such condition, wherein misappre∣hensions of grief might be of much danger to you; you will easily imagine my disquiet. God be praised for your safe delivery, and my Blessing upon my new Baby and the rest; onely I take it very ill that you write nothing of them. I sent you formerly directions (if it were possible) to get my Son safe over hither, whence I will send him over into France; and I persist in the same desire, if either you can pro∣cure him a Pass, or that he may otherwise be sent with any safety. As for my return to the King, which you and all my Friends presse so earnestly, That shall be whenever I think I may be useful to His Service there then else∣where. As for my own interest, I have recei∣ved from the King even now by Mr. Moor, too great testimonies of His constancy for me to
distrust the power of my malicious Enemies should by my absence prevail to my prejudice with Him. And I cannot but very much won∣der, how it is possible to be so blinded with kindnesse to me, as not to see, how destructive it must be to me and to His Majesties Service, for me to return at this time without an Army to make me useful there 450. Is he in such a condition, as that you can hope my councels should rescue Him from the misery that threatens Him, without any matter to work upon? Were it not a madnesse in me to presse through those disgraces in my way, and disgraces when I come there, to take upon me the blame and im∣putation of those misfortunes, which the weaknesse and treachery of others is likely to bring upon Him? Surely, whilest His condi∣tion is such, you ought to think it the greatest blessing that ever befell me, That I have so fair a pretence to absent my self. If the King should fail in firmnesse towards me, the losse would be His in His Honour, and not mine in way of interest: for is it not evident, that in the condition he now tends unto, His favour is likely to be most fatal to them that are neer∣est Him, unlesse they comply with indirect ends, which I can never do? And lastly, Sweet∣heart,
whilest the Princes and Glemham 286. are with the King, it is impossible for me to come there, without making such combustion as must o∣ver whelm all His Majesties affairs by the dis∣order of it: And over and above all, the fore∣mentioned disgraces make my unseasonable impatience, to suffer my Enemies near Him, appear the cause of all His misery; besides that, although I am most assured, that the Kings Justice and kindnesse will never fail me upon the private score; who, if His Nephews should make the quarrel personal (as doubtlesse they will, if I come thither whilest they are there) I could not expect, nor would it profit the King to take my party against them: Where∣fore, my dear Soul, have patience a while; if God have decreed His Majesties ruine, I will ruine with Him too; but not hasten His ru∣ine by my unseasonable intrusion upon His business there. If it please God to preserve Him, I make no question but he will keep Him just to me, and you will see my Enemies ruine one another faster then I could effect it if I were there: And if not, I make no question but by Gods blessing I shall ere long appear in England with so considerable a power to serve Him, as shall make my Enemies strike sail. I make no
question but these reasons will convince both yours and the rest of my Friends judgements. However, if you persist in the opinion for my return, in case you send me word that the Princes are gone away, with whom, believe it, there is no personal contending, I shall obey the importunity of my friends, rather then my own reason. In the mean while, if the Princes be received and remain with the King, it will not be amisse to give out some good while af∣ter this Dispatch, That I am already in England in disguise, and will be such a day at Oxford, to try how it will work: But in case you re∣solve to do so, be sure to acquaint no body li∣ving, but him that discifers this Letter, with the dissimulation: But let my neerest Friends believe that I will most certainly be there such a day; and by that you will clearly discover what effect my real coming would have: But if the Princes be gone, then try no tricks I conjure you. Dublin, 19 Jan. 1645.6. Continue your kinde applications to the Treasurer; for however he may play the Vul∣pone with my Enemies, &c. &c. Digby.
The Lord Digby's Letter to his Servant Walsingham. Walsingham, DEliver the inclosed unsuperscribed unto the Noble person to whom I have former∣ly addrest them. I must not conclude without telling you, That I believe the accident here of my Lord Glamorgan and my party in his pro∣secution, will at first have allayed me much with your friends 83. 76. 29. 41. 310. 10.the Babylonians 24. 14. 22. 39. 55. 40. 20. 16. 22. 50. 10. 23. But when matters shall be rightly understood, you may assure them, That if His Majesties service had not obliged me to it, yet in relation to their preservation, I ought to have done it, and with∣out it, it would have been impossible either for the King to favour them, or me to serve them, so far as a good and firm Protestant may do, within which bounds, they contributing roundly & heartily to my Masters service, shal very boldly appear in the procuring them all just favours, both here and in England. As for the Peace of this Kingdom, I make no questi∣on but shall suddenly be brought to a happy conclusion; and my Lord Glamorgan not dis∣abled by any thing, that is done, to serve the King in what he hath means to do. Dublin, 17 Jan. Digby. FINIS.
