W3707 E200_2 99860188 112302
A SPEECH Spoken in the HOUSE of COMMONS, BY The Reverend Father in God, ROBERT, L. Bishop of COVENTRY and LICHFIELD. Being brought to the Barre to answer for himselfe. printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Richard Lownds, and are to be sold at his Shop without Ludgate. 1641.
Master SPEAKER, AS it hath beene ever my fashion (and in truth, it is my disposition) to indeavour, at the least, to give satisfaction to every man, even to the menest, that hath had any sinister conceptions of me, be it scandalum datum, or acceptum, so hath it been my ambition, and I have sought it with affecti∣on, (as to all men) so much more to this honourable Assembly, especially concerning the late Petition and Protestation exhibi∣ted unto his sacred Majestie, and the Lords and Peeres in Parlia∣ment, But in the first place Master Speaker, I am, as it becomes me, to give most heartie and condign thanks to the noble Knights, Citizens, and Burgeses, of this honourable House of Commons, for that they have beene pleased by a generall vote, and I hope, u∣nanimous, to give me leave to speake for my selfe, and to lay open the truth of my cause, concerning the said Petition and Protest∣tion before them. And now M. Speaker, to addresse my selfe to the businesse, whereof I shall not speake as a Lawyer, for I have no head for Law, neither shall I need to touch upon any point thereof, nor as a flourishing Orator, as desirous to heare himselfe speake, I have long since laid aside my bookes of Rhethorick: my desire is, Ma∣ster Speaker, to tread in the steps of an old Divine, of whom So∣zomen writes in his Ecclesiasticall Historie, who groaning under the like heavie burthen and accusation as I doe, chose rather to vent his owne sense, and expresse the truth of his cause in plaine lan∣guage, than to colour or cloak falshood, and to extenuate his of∣fence,
by forced, trapped, and new varnished eloquence: And to that purpose my conceptions and narration shall stand only up∣on two feet, Negation, and Affirmation. There are some things that I must deny, and yet justly, somewhat I must affirme, and that I shall doe ingenuously and fully. First for the Negative, I never framed, made, nor contrived, compiled, or preferred any such Petition or Protestation, I never was at any meeting, con∣sultation, or conference, about any such businesse; nay, I never heard of any intention, much lesse execution of any such thing, untill it was the Wednesday in Christmas, being the 29. of De∣cember, at which time it was brought unto my house in Coven∣garden, being betwixt 6. or 7. at night (subscribed by eleven of my Brethren) with a request, that I would subscribe suddenly al∣so. And for the affirmation, presuming that so many learned, grave, and wise men, well verst in matters of that nature, would not have attempted any such thing, without good counsell to the endangering of themselves, and their Brethren, and to the distaste of the Lords, and that all the rest of the Bishops in or about the Citie of London, Westminster, should subscribe thereunto, and that it should not be preferred, without the approbation, and ma∣ture deliberation of good counsell, and of us all: I made the twelfth and set to my hand, which I doe now acknowledge▪ and never denyed; nay, the first time that I came to the Barre in the Lords House, I acknowledged that my hand was to it, and divers of this honourable Presence heard it so read unto them, out of the jornall of the Lords house: Now Master Speaker, if these my deceived and deceiving thoughts (to use S. Bernards phrase) have led mee into an errour, the errour is either Ex ignorantia juris, an unskilfulnesse in the Law, or Debilitate judicii, a weaknesse of my apprehension, or else, Ex nimia credulitate, out of the to much confidence in o∣thers, not of any prepensed malice, or out of a spirit of contradi∣ction, as the Lord knoweth. The Schoolemen tell me, that Duo sunt in omni peccato, there is actio, & malitia actionis, I owne the action, the subscription is mine; but, that there was any ma∣lice in the action (to crosse any Vote, at which I was not present, nor never heard of) I utterly disavow. And therefore, Master Speaker, I shall become an humble Sutor, that I may recommend three most humble Requests,
or motions to this Honourable House. The first Motion is, That you would be pleased to tread in the steps of Constantine the Christian Emperour, who had ever this resolution, that if he should see Sacerdotem peccantem, an of∣fending Divine, hee would rather cast his purple garment upon him, than to reveale the offence, for the Gospels sake of Christ. My second Motion is, That if my subscription shall make mee a delinquent, and worthy of any censure, that then the censure may not exceed (but at the highest) bee proportionable to the offence. The third and last motion is, That, that of Plautus (after my fifty eight yeares painefull, constant, and successefull preaching of the Gospell of Christ, in the kingdome of England, and in forraigne parts, may not be verrified of me, Si quid bene feceris levior pluma gratia est; si quid mali feceris plumbeas iras gerunt. And now (Master Speaker) I might here tender divers motions to the consideration of this honourable House, for favourable con∣struction of my rash subscription, I may say commiseration, but all without ostentation, that is farre from me, but rather for the consolation of my perplexed soule, for the great affliction, restraint and disgrace, which I have long sustained (which is farre greater than ever I endured before, and transcends the dangers and jeo∣pardies of the seas,, and the miseries of the warres, whereof I have had my share) and partly for the vindication of my former re∣putation, calling, and profession, which is now so clouded, ecli∣psed, and blackt in the eyes of the world, and scandalized in the mouths of the vulgar multitude, that without reparation, and restauration to my former esteeme, I shall never have heart to shew my face in Pulpit any more, wherein I have wished to end my dayes. But I wave them all, because I will not detaine you from other occasions of greater importance, and desire my wayes may be made knowne unto you, rather by inquisition, than my owne Relation, only I shall appeale to the Noble Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Diocesse where I now live, and of the other wherein formerly I did live, as namely the honoura∣ble City of Bristow, which I can never name without that title, not only in respect of their pietie, unitie, and conformity, but also in respect of their love, kindnesse, and extraordinarie bountie un∣to me, I appeale to them for their testimonies, and knowledge of
my courses amongst them, nay I appeale to the records of the honourable house, where I am confident after sixteene moneths sitting, there is nothing found that can trench upon me, neither I hope will, or may bee. And therefore my humble suite is for expedition (if you in∣tend accusation, or rather for your meditation, that I may spee∣dily returne to my owne home and Cure, to redeeme the time because the dayes are evill, as the Apostle speakes, and to regaine the esteem and reputation which I was long in getting, and long injoyed, but lost in a moment, for if I should out-live (I say not my Bishoprick,) but my credit, my gray haires, and many yeares, would soone be brought with sorrow to the grave. I have done Master Speaker, and there remaines nothing now but that I become a petitioner unto almighty God, that he will be pleased to bestow upon you all the Patriarkes blessing, even the dew of Heaven, and fatnesse of the earth: and I end with that of S. Iude, Mercy, peace, and love be multiplyed unto you; I say againe with a religious and affectionate heart, Mercy, peace, and love, be multi-plyed unto you. {inverted ⁂} FINIS.
