L1767A 51571978 175279
A LETTER Written to a Christian Friend, and one of the Parliament Men. PROPOSING The groundlesness of the Plea for TYTHS, impropriat TYTHS, or TYTH as a Re∣venue due to the Magistrat. Psalm 119. verse 128. Therefore I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way. FOR THOV SHALT LABOR PEAC PLENTIE LONDON, Printed the sixth day of the Tenth Month, in the year of our Lord 1653.
Christian Reader, THere are Reasons not expressed, why this Letter was printed: and did you know what muzing thoughts (in the solitary night) I had, and what pray∣ers and sighes went from my heart, desiring God to speak me silent; because being no party that pay or receive Tyth: and how I have objected, that I am no man of power in the Nation, and that I minde things too high for me, and am unprofitable to Church or State, and a Vessell but for mean use, and that needs must I erre, being no Master-builder: Yet consider∣ing again, the Great Potter of the Earth hath made me for some End, I dare not but move as I am move∣ed: the dumb Ass was not to be smitten when not faul∣ty. Thus praying you, that what you finde rude and weak in these ensuing Lines, that charge on mee as mine, but what you finde of Truth and Justice there, that is my God's, and thy God's, to whom I commit thee and all the Flock of Christ. And that you may reade without prejudice, I shall conceal my Name, not fearing who can blot it if written in the Lamb's Book of Life.
Honorable Sir, THe Salutacion of him that is unworthy greets you, and presuming on your unfeigned love to the Lord Iesus Christ, and all his Saints, I do write these; and that you should not want encouragement in this Work of the Lord now called to, I shall tell you, the prayers and breathings of the hearts of Gods Saints are, that you may do worthily, and much for Gods honor; & first be as zealous for the Sons honor as the Son was for his Fathers. See you not the pollutions of the Land? how base and wicked men make merchandise of the Word of the Lord, and preach in the Name of the Lord, when the Lord never sent them! that know nothing of the operation of the Spirit by which the Word should be published! these dumb Souls, I hope you will finde somewhat like the Rods of small Coards to drive them out, for they have no part nor fellowship in this business, well you may call them your Servants and Hierlings, but Christ owns them not, they never came in by the Door, wherefore their work, and your care, and wages for them, shall be all set down for nothing in the last Account; why hear you not the bleatings of of the flocks, that cry, Take away these Wolves, that rob us at your pleasure! You tell us dear Friend, the Knot of Tyth you cannot undo, now the Lord God and Father of Iesus be with you, and teach you to work in your work: I presume you are not left to serve alone, for the Father of Spirits is with you. Sir, I believe the foolish things of this World shall stand and confound the wise, and I do here presume you will suffer a Fool gladly, because you are wise. In∣deed I cannot believe Tyths are now to be practised, for it was the Iews Law, proper to them onely, because no where commanded but in the Ceremonial Law, and there was for divers uses, whereof God provides for himself a Sacrifice, the first born: the Levites had no other Portion nor Inheritance amongst their Brethren but Tyths; the Priests were to have some certain Flesh, the first fruits, and for Purification; also the Poor, the Strangers, Wid∣dows,
and fatherless, were fed of the Tyths, and these with other Ceremonial worship were Types and Shadows of glorious things to come, and to be fulfilled by our great High Priest Christ Iesus, and therefore 'tis clear, Hebr. 7.12. the Priesthood being changed, there is a necessity of changing that Law, it was not Moral; God never commanded Abraham to give the Tenth, nor Melchisedeck did not demand it, but the Text sayth, He gave the Tenth; a∣mongst the Israelites when they prospered by the Sword, they shared the Spoil to those which remained at home, as well as to those that went to war. Now we finde it cast out of the New Te∣stament, and disused among the Chrstian Churches in the Primitive time, and of a truth it will and must follow, they were brought in by Antichrist, or some tyrannical Prince for him, and was diverted from Monks and Friers to Bishops and Deans, and then to the Na∣tional Ministry, and now some would have it for a Gospel-Mi∣nistry; but shall that which was for the most part, yea I may say altogether raised by the Pope the Antichrist, and imposed and con∣firmed by Popish Laws, Councils, and Parliaments, and was an In∣novation of Antichrist for his worship, and is this day one of the Crutches he leaneth on in England: shall this poor Inheritance crept out of Babel, be divided amongst them all? Must all share of it? No, let every one have his right, let the Antichristian Magi∣strate, Minister, and Worshipers take what pertains to them; and the Christian Magistrate, Minister, and Worshipers, take what per∣tains to them: we are not of the entailed Heirs of Antichrist, we drink not all of one Rock, we have sworn and covenanted with and before the high God to resist in our Places all Popery and Po∣pish Innovations, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline. Now some say they were of free Gift, but prove that: perhaps some were, but most was imposed, and that was to an idolatrous use, and therefore it was ill done to give, and worse to force it from men, for who required it at their hands? also it is an unjust Main∣tenance, there is no Calling pays like the Farmer, although there are rich moneyed men, great Merchants and Tradesmen in the Land far-way abler, yet pay little or nothing; also some Land pays nothing at ll, and other Lands which pay Tenths, which many times amounts to three parts of the Rents, are cozened, and pay the Tenth of all their stock every year, not laying by his Seed eve∣ry year, which he payd the Tenth of the year before; the Law gave but the Tenth of the Increase; also you have the Tenth of
the Sheep, and the Tenth of the Wool of the nine that remained; therefore this will bear the name of a cruel curst Law: by this means they bear dominion over us, and the Yoak is heavier upon that Calling than all others, contrary to the Apostles Rule, 2 Cor. 8.13. neither is it that others should be eased, and you grieved; how like Iews do we look, with our Oblations, Tyths, and Offer∣ings! Are we in carnal Ierusalem still, or coming toward Mount Sion that new Ierusalem? Surely we are on our way, then stand by you Tithes, you are not of Christ. Men fear, and care, and conclude no Ministery, nor worship of God can be maintained without them. We never reade nor finde any of these used in Christs and his Apostles times, and yet Gods worship purely main∣tained, and therefore carnal fears, and it being Iewish, Popish, and unjust, undenyably I shall beg, that as you gave it not its birth, so let it have neither breath nor being. But you will say, It is unjust, Impropriators should lose their Purchase. Indeed it is a very proper name, and suits their Title well, it is fitly so called, and were his Holiness the Pope now keep∣ing house here in England, he would soon curse all such Children, as have committed such Sacriledg, as thus to rob his Church. It is unjust for any man to pay any, therefore unjust for him to force to pay or receive any▪ it was never raised at the first to put in his Purse, he doth nothing at all for it, therefore no shadow of truth in it why he should enjoy it; it was first unjustly raised, then di∣verted from the use given, and still is unjustly payd, and never will be just till it go back to the Landlord, who is the tru Owner there∣of, for he bought the Land, and if any Commodity be found in the Land, and Purchase, more than the Seller and Purchaser were aware of, whose is it but the Purchasers? as in all other Con∣tracts and Bargains we take them at all adventures, somtimes they prove better, somtimes worse than expected. Again it will be sayd, then you will wrong, and perhaps undo many, who have bought such Impropriat Tithes, and payd largely for them. Indeed we fear many are wronged, but who hath de∣ceived them? Not you, the Keepers of our Libertyes, and Mini∣sters of Justice: your duty is to defend the good and clear Title, and not else: neither hath the Seller, for the Title was well known to be what it is, a Badg of Tyranny, for so Samuel perswades Israel,  Sam. 8. to avoyd that tyranny, and have no King, [for he will have the Tyth of all, and it shall be for a Judgment, ye shall
cry out in that day because of your King. In Henry the third's time there was granted to him two shillings out of every Plough-land, and in another Kings Reign there was granted the Eights of eve∣ry City and Burrough, and Twelfths out of the Countrey; and is any grieved, because this being established by a Law, is layd aside? Whether did King Henry the sixth alienate Tyth, or take it away by Law or not? We affirm Kings at their Coronation are sworn to govern according to Law; why were not Monopolyes and Ship-money willingly received under our late King? No, we cry∣ed out he was a Tyrant, ruling by a Prerogative Power. Was not King Henry's Act the same? he was in a rage, and had a lust to do what he did, and ever since Custom and the gain thereof hath caused that unlawfull Act to stand in force, and therefore why should not all the Patentee-men be satisfied? King Charls had as much Law on his side as King Henry; it is the duty of a Subject of a Nation to know the Laws thereof, that they may be sure to have Law on their sides, for want of the knowledg hereof many have lost thousands of Pounds, and for redress have thrown hundreds after, and what recompence should these men have? Surely none, unless they can summon their Deceivers to keep a Court of Con∣science. And for Impropriators, I am not against their having some satisfaction, it is but Equity and Justice, they should have some recompence, but not from them which have not hurt them, unless they will; I wish they may finde good mercifull men: and if it were a forced Salary at the first, it being unequal for pro∣portion with other mens Estates, and unjust, because ye received the Tenth of the Increase, and the Tenth of the Stock, as was made appear, and because it was gathered to uphold a Popish wor∣ship, it ought to fall with the worship: again, grant it were a free Gift at the first, and suppose all to be in the Donors power to be∣stow, (which I do question, how he could give any other than his own, viz: the Tenth of his Land,) yet being taken away from the use for which it was given, and converted to no such end, but sold away for gain, & imployd to particular mens benefit; this implyes the Donor had no Power, yea, was not capable of a Gift, if he were capable to give a Gift, & such a Gift, then that Gift was lawful, and then who had power to sell such a Gift, and divert it from that use? but if the Magistrat say, the use was unlawfull, then I say the Gift was an unlawfull Gift, and the Boons return from whence it came. Indeed it is unavoidable, some late Purchasers will be Losers by it,
unless the Charity of the men of the place, or the Seller, or the State, will as an Act of their Grace and Mercy give some Gratuity to such as have little else, which they are to acknowledg to be a free Gift if they receive any thing, but some have kept it long, and bought it for a small matter, and have so employd it, that when they give it back again; it will not ow them a Penny: also this sort of men or the greatest number of them will be Gainers in their other Land more than this comes to if Tyths fall, and indeed they must & will fall ere long, and I perswade my self if the Parlia∣ment will not honor themselves so far as to throw them down, the People will dishonor themselves so much as to pay them with great unwillingness. We are declared to be a free Nation, and the Magi∣strat professing to take off all burdensom Yoaks, whereof Samuel the Prophet cals this one in the place before named; and these are they that eat the fat and best fruit, in many places, they have the chief Tyth, and perhaps the Minister hath left him some Tyth Egs, and the rest of all the small Tyth, not enough to maintain many of them in a mean sort. And for encouragement to all Impropriators, consider I pray you what Amaziah did, 2 Chron: 25. he made but a bad Bargain to lose his money, and have nothing for it, because willing to take counsel of the Lord; so do ye, restore back again, openly, rather than wrong thy self and neighbour by a Law; I would have them con∣sider what that Traitor Judas did, read you never, after he was convicted of sin, taking unlawfull wages for unlawfull work, sayth he, Take the thirty Pieces of Silver again: But it is affirmed by some the national Ministers have an equitable and unquestionable right to Tyths as any man hath to his Free-hold, (but I think they are deceived) see Fox Acts and Monuments, Volume 1. pag. 604, 632, 669. and he that robs them in Tyths and Offerings may as well take away any mans Free-hold. I take it a man holds his Free-hold either by Pur∣chase or Gift, or is Heir by descent, but they cannot claim Tyths as that they bought them, nor yet of Gift, (Antichrist was no such Benefactor to raise them, and give it to any other than the Brats of his own breed) and a strange thing it is, how it should come to them by descent, for sure they are not all of one stock; but haply the Magistrat having long accustomed himself with old Idolaters and Tyrants, and living with them, might observe their manners, and at last divide the Prey as well as others before, as it is sayd of the two sons of Josias, Ezek. 19. being nourished among the Lions whelps they became as Lion:.
Indeed I may say, though there be much Rubbish of the Romish Kirk cast out, yet all the High places are not quite taken away, and though Tyths have been confirmed by Popish Parliaments, and the Kirk (so called) who have been Lords Paramount in England, for many years, and so would not let their glory fall: also by others who have shared the Spoyl with them, whose Interest hath been as sweet to them as their Perogative: I say, what if these have kept up the old Custom, yet this lets not, but a Christian Magistrate may and ought to take down all the high Places that remain. O foolish Generacion, why count ye it an hard thing to cast out Tyths! have you a∣ny thing to say more why this should not cease, but only your Co∣vetousness and Custom? I presume you will not in other Cases plead, that Custom gives a clear Right and Intrest, for then those that have accustomed themselves to steal, may plead Custom to be a Law for them; and he that hath received a guift, may plead it is a duty for the Donor to give another guift: indeed you make such a Smoak with your Arguments, as have put out and blinded the eyes of many, and made many look as it were a-squint. The Prophets are bid to cry aloud against the Abominacions of the Times, Iam no Pro∣phet, nor prophets Son, yet I am bold to perswade you to do what you can to cast out Baal, and all the Idols thereof, and Cursed is he that doth the work of the Lord negligently. If any shall maintain Tyths to be a lost Inheritance, and would make use of Num. 5.8. for a recovery, and to be dedicated to the Mi∣nistry for the Service of the Lord: Ishall answer, this instance is im∣proper; first because the Text speaks of a wrong done, a sin or tres∣pass against any man, for that is implied; some man must be wrong∣ed, but who is wrong'd here, or what Minister of Christ can chalenge Tyth to be his, and if none be wronged, none ought to be offend∣ed if taken away, and then there is no Sin or Trespass committed: but if you say they are the Magistrates, then what need you strain so far to bring a lost Law, to make it a lost Inheritance? for the Law was Ceremoniall in every branch of it: first there is required Resti∣tucion with the Principal, a recompence of the Trespass, and a fifth Part added; now what Law of God that is Morall requires any o∣ther then Restitucion, according to the nature of the offence, som∣times bare Restitucion, somtimes four-fold, somtimes seven, but Re∣stitucion of principal Dammage, and a fifth Part added is Ceremo∣niall, if not why do not all Offenders add the fifth Part. Secondly to be payd to the use of the Preists for the Service of the Lord, but
now there is no such Subject or Object, the Preist-hood is fallen, and we look for one to come. Thirdly, Restitucion was not, nor could not be made without the Ram for Atonement, for the Text sayth, besides the Ram for Atonement: I know it was practised by the mother Church of Rome, when any man dyed Intestat, the Pope possessed himselfe of all the Estate. Tythes are not so Civll as some men account; they were set a∣part from common uses, and conferred upon the Church, because the Tenth was counted holy; and whether it was done by the Pope or some towardly Son of his, and their ingenious Councill, yet it was their vain Supersticion to divert this holy Tenth to the Church, because now no express Stipend or constant Salary is allotted since the Jewes Law for the Service of the Lord, and to keep up worship, what God required in one Generacion he required not in ano∣ther for worship: how differently was God well pleased in the severall Ages of the world! in Abels time before the Floud, and Abrahams time, it was different from Moses and Solomons time, and that different from the Apostles and Primitive time; the first Fruits of Sheep that would serve in one Age, was not enough in a∣nother Age, with the Tenth and Redempcion of the first-born, and daily Sacrifice, but abundance must be added for the Tabernacle, and Temple work, in its time, and for the Church in the New Te∣stament, you know all these chargable Sacrifices were too little: Christ tels the young man he must sell all: Zaccheus gave halfe of his goods, and Scripture sayth, many that had Lands and Possessions, coun∣ed the Price of them, and layd it at the Apostles Feet, because of the need: we proporcion our Contribucion by our Civll Law, accord∣ing to the estate and condicion of the Object, and we should lay out towards the Worship of God, that that Worship might be maintained in honour, by all that count it their honour to have a right worship; and this is to be observed, every one to minister ac∣cording to what a man hath, keeping this in your Eye, the flourish∣ing state of the Church, and those that minister there: sometimes the condicion of the Church may be such, that the hundredth part of a mans Estate layd out in Gods Cause and Worship, may be an acceptable Sacrifice, and again at other times 3 parts of 4 will not be sufficient; from whence you may conclude, that Tyths, Tenths, or a certain Stipend, enjoyned every man toward the Service or VVorship of the Lord, is not the way of Christ, and if you would not count me proud, I would challenge you for an Instance from
the Sciptures, where the Magistrate was to use his Coërcive Power, for the VVorship of God; but the Prophets did acconut them ac∣cursed if they observed not all the Commands of God to do them: Yet are Christian Magistrats an unspeakable Blessing in a Land, and the age past would have found it so, could the Flock of Christ but have escaped with their Lives out of the hands of those Wolves; we enjoy more; they are a Refuge to keep off the Storms, they cast out and abhor Idolatry, and false worship, and are Tender of all that fear our God, yea the Church may say, behold the Magistrate is one with us, he hands along with her; therfore my prayer is, that as he hath companied with her in the wilderness, and hath lent her his help in an untrodden way, amongst vast and terrible Eni∣mies, that he will travell with her till they both come to their Rest, and certain it is, there is a Rest for the People of God, and then I dare say, I know who will pay them for all: the truth is, Antichrist put into England to advance his Throne and worship, and to that end must have this maintenance; now we renounce Antichrist, & his way, and resolve, that Jesus Christ being upon his Throne, shall rule us in his way: then Judg the case, while we lived under Anti∣christn Magistrates, we could expect no other Laws, but such as ead, therefore must suffer his manners; and whether be forced y hs w, or became a Lying-Spirit, to seduce for Pollitick ends, and so raised his maintenance, by threatning damnacion to the ig∣norant world, if they dedicated not their holy Tenths to such a use: yet must this stand as the Lawes of the Medes and Persians, faster than all other Lawes that hath been found, not according to the word of God, and so repealed by the Reformers of these Times: Statutes of Princes were no excuse to Israel, to follow, but they were reproved for observing them, Micah 6.16. Methinks I hear some of the Consciencious Ministers say, I wish the first fruits were down, that is a little too supersticious; and I dare say, if they knew how to signifie so much to you without weakning the whole Foun∣dacion, you should quickly hear of some humble Peticioners: but if I might be the Judge, I should condemn none, if they pass by all such kinde of Devocion: some counted it a great Loss when Mono∣polizers and their patents were cast out, but the Voyce of them that rejoyced, was greater than the Cry of those that mourned: why halt ye between God and Baal; let us chuse him that is God, and follow him: doth any particular man lose a Just and Lawfull Inheritance, if taken away? why then I Oppress no man if I with∣hold
my Tything, and then what command of God is broken? If Tythes fall, the Nacion in general wil gain it, the Landlord and Tenant wil share it, and of these two sorts the whol Land al∣most consists; and these are they, with the Souldiery, that under God have redeemed the Nacion from Antichrists yoak, for who goeth to warfare on his own cost? Moneys and Treasures are accoun∣ted the sinews of War, by it they have redeemed our Government and Laws, and if there come any right of gayn therby, let them share in it: But I wonder some of our enemies have gone but an equal share with us that have born the brunt, and heat of the day! This Act of Oblivion hath bin like Agags sparing many of the fat cattel; me thinks Subsidies on some men would do well, Christ and Peter in Math. 17. conclude from whom the Princes of the Earth take Tribute or Pole-money. But to our Question, Every family, person, subject, high or low, must lay out for the worship of God, as God commands; but if we give away our Tythes, which is the Commonwealths and Nacions in general, hereby, and then the Commonwealth especially, the poor Land∣lords and poor Tenants, wil be the more disabled, and out of ca∣pacity to lay out for the worship of God, which he requires of them. You wil say, the Magistrat should dispose of it. I say, God requires every man that he discharge his duty in the worship of God: and I say, how can many people do any thing when the Magistrat hath robd us of so much of our substance? I wil appeal to Christians, if they have faith enough to beleeve, in every age that the Magistrat wil employ the Commonwealths substance al∣way to the glory of God, his worship, and the relief of the Saints; perhaps this Magistrat may, but haply the next may be as ano∣ther Pharaoh, that knew not Ioseph, that wil not know the afflicti∣ons of Ioseph: and shal we now put our necks under their feet, and desire them to boar us thorough the Ear for ever! No, if this be a Christian Magistracy, let them take of us what the state and condicion of affaires cals for, and what God requires of them. If this be not a time, under a Christian Magistrat, to proclaym Liberty from Antichrist, when then! The Jews had a Law, if a man sould his Inheritance, and were not able to redeem it,By Scripture account Se∣ven is a nu¦ber of per∣fection. he should stay but untill the year of Jubile, the fiftieth year, and then it should return to the same Family again for nothing: we have had a generacion that have taken away our substance, good and pleasant things, for 7 hundred years together, and we re∣deemed
it again with our Blood and Treasure; and shall not we keep our Iubile yet! then be ye boared thorough till the End of all things. But to pursu all your benighted Questions; Suppose Tythes were given, the tenth of a mans Land to the Popish Priest, and all the holy Order created Officers by a Papal power,, Antichrist be∣ing Supream in that Throne: I say, admit they were given to their Use, and the Use of the poor, as Writers make it appear they were. Now the poor have been dis-inherited wrongfully, for our Saviour sayth, the poor yee have alwayes with you, but that Order of Officers (created as aforesayd) ought to have no room nor standing in the Church, as subjects fit to receive the same: And as it is with an Annuity, payable out of a mans Land, it is payable no longer than such persons to whom it was given, live to receive it; the Land may be often sould, and the Annuity payd still, but at last it fals into some of their hands for want of heyrs: I say, the Officers aforesaid are, & ought to be cast out, & no other by the Laws of the Land can chalenge Tyth, but such as have bin sealed with the Mark of the Beast, aforesayd: So that to me it ap∣pears, if the State charge this Land with the paying of Tyth, it must be by a new Impost: It is not the wages the Gospel Ministers can chalenge, it may be insufficient, or too much for Gospelers to offer in Faith. And as for the poor, the Laws of the Land have provided that they be maintayned according to their need: And as for a Stock to maintayn Wars, and Negotiations with other Nacions, as a Treasury for the Magistrate, for State Affaires; this should be raysed according to occasion: therfore if Tyth still re∣main payable, and the use be ceased, then the little finger of our Magistrat will be heavier than our fathers loyns, our fathers bore the woodden yoak, and we the yron. And now I beseech you (dear friend) in the bowels of the Lord Iesus, mistake me not, as if by this I would overthrow the Mini∣stry, a thing my soul abhors, but my prayers are that God would purify the House of Levi, and that all the Prophets of the Lord may be holy. Oh, shall I deny that which is of God! God forbid: I know the Ministry to be an Ordinance of God, Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. and I hope I shall never live to deny the least Ordinance of God; I had rather pass to the Grave and there rest in silence, than to have my Name stand among that proud Generacion: I know it was the fruit of Christs Intercession, to store the Church with
guifts for the edifying of the body of Christ, that is, the Church: and the faithfull Ministers of the Gospel have a precious lustie & comliness in my ey, especially those that love the work for their Masters sake, I mean the conversion of souls; I say their employ∣ment is the most honourable, they serve the Lord Christ: They that convert soules to God shall shine as the Starres in the Firma∣ment: they are fathers in the Church; and it may serve to hum∣ble men, that God hath appointed this way, to teach men by men. And my prayer to God is, that he would send out? more faithfull Labourers, for the harvest is great. Also Maintenance for them is as clear an Ordinance as the other; I could instance in many Scriptures, Gal. 6.6. and the best of outward things befits the best Calling, and not nigardly porcions; for they must use Hospi∣tality, and so be Ensamples for their flock, and for a Christian Na∣cion so professing to be; tis not our glory but our shame to let them live beggerly, and in disgrace; as we flourish, they should be partakers: he that gives freely and of a chearfull minde, he offers the acceptable Sacrifice to God, and none is accepted for Sacrifice but such. Our Saviour sayth, the time shall come, that he that worshipeth, shall worship in spirit and in truth: but you wil say, who shal take care for the worship of God, Ministers, and Maintenance, in the mean time? That I suppose is your work to be studying how to be nursing fathers to the Church, and to see that those that preach and publish the Gospel under your Dominion, may have du encouragement and supply; I think none wil deny but that they should participate with us in our good and pleasant temporall things, and I judg it better by guift than force: in the Old Testament they gave all things as they had them for building the Temple and Sacrifice: the Apostle tels Ana∣nias, was it not in thy power? Acts 5.4. The portion God ap∣pointed the Levites as it was typicall, so to encourage them in the work, so that being about the work of the Lord, they might not be hindered: and the mayntenance Ministers should receive besides as duty from the Donor, it should be for encouragement to him whose work is enough for the whole body and minde: is it any encouragement to a servant to continu his service, that must su for his wages after earned by painfull sweatings and hard labor? is it any encouragment to the Merchant and Tradesman, after they have made use of their utmost skill in buying, and wait∣ed to take the best season for Winde and Tide to bring home their
Goods, and after all must impose them on such as will never pay till haled to Prison, this speaks the Commodityes to have no worth in them; so for the Ministers of Christ to have their Wages by force, and to be a man of strife when his Message is Peace, and precious work, it is I say for him to force, and become a Ruff-man: Can he do this and be encouraged in his work? the Word sayth alluding to them, The Labourer is worthy of his hier; so that the Gospel is of some worth; and O that the Gospel might dissolve hard hearts more; many times it proves but souer Food to eat the Bread of him that hath an evil eye, yet many have their teeth fet on edg. I wish these faults were amended, the covetousness of the Mini∣sters less, and the Charity of the People more. I know no Rule in the Word of God, that the Magistrat should study wholly to de∣liver the Minister from living somwhat by Faith: now how far a Christian Magistrat may force worship, and for worship in every Punctilio I will not dispute, but this I know, Gospel Principles bears, that every man do what he do in Faith: and this I know is according to the Law of Nations, if the Magistrat command any thing against my conscience, I ought to obey or suffer; I will not undertake to say what the Magistrate may not do as a Magistrat, but I conceive this he may do without oppressing any, give to the Ministers the Glebe Land in all places, also all those Lands wrested out of the Bishops hands, for whatsoever we won by conquering our late Enemy, and not sold in the three Nations, is in your power to give or sell, and much more: were I a Statesman (pardon the supposal) I should bend my minde to finde out to serve the Church, and bring my glory to her; and if there were fewer fixed Ministers in most parts of the Downs, and those places and Pa∣rishes where there are few Inhabitants joyned, and an itinerat, godly, and able Ministry to journey from place to place, it may probably awake the deaf and dead sinners more; and O that they might hear the voyce of the Son of God and live; but if they will not hear nor receive them, to turn away. But Sir, want I Bowels or Expressions, the dearest Lord knoweth I speak the truth in Christ, I ly not, for it pierceth my heart as sharp arrows, to think that Gods Labourers (for so they are called) should toyl all the day of their Pilgrimage, praying, and woing men in Christs stead that they would be reconciled to God, and while they are telling them the good tidings of the Gospel, and counselling and
pointing out to the foolish world Jesus Christ, which is the tru Bread come down from Heaven, and for all this men have no bowels moved, to count them worthy of common Bread; my heart pityes all hard hearts, and all hearts bound up, whom their own ey does not pity. Let them know, Mercy is but Mercy in its time, and then Justice seals what Mercy leaves: O you precious hearts! consider your labor shall not be lost in the Lord; Can you spend and be spent for the Lord Christ? Remember who sayth it, I will never leave you, nor forsake you: Do not think you serve an hard Master: Can you believe the Children of the Earth will ho∣nor you with what is theirs? Christ sayth, The world loves its own, and if ye were not the Children of the Light, the world would not hate you; I know no Rule they have to match the world so well as this, ye stand by Faith in the greatest Peace and Prosperity that can be, you are at uncertaintyes with the world, how long you shall stand, or when you shall fall; Remember Christs Kingdom is not of this world, therefore possess all you have or would have by Faith, and it is not long but he that shall come will come, and bring his re∣ward with him; but wo to those whose Gold and Silver is cankered through ignoble imployment, for the Rust of it shall witness against them. Dives hath his place. I have nothing more with you for the present, for I know not how you can bear this: In the mean time you may be sure, I honor your Authority, your Coun∣sel, your Person, and so commit you to the Eternal God, and stil remain Your Honors in all humble and du observance. FINIS
