r55a 53299224 179962
News from the FLEET, Being a Full and Impartial ACCOUNT, OF A Most Signal Victory, Obtained by Admiral Killegrew, OVER THE French Thoulon Fleet. Commanded by Monsieur Chasten Regnaut. In a Letter to a Person of Quality. Printed, According to Order. Worthy Sir, GOOD News, at all Times, I know is very acceptable to You from Credible Strangers; and if so, doubtless much more grateful from a Friend; and such a Friend too, that would neither Deceive You, nor the Publick, for the high∣est Temporal Advantage: I know the Dignity of Truth is lost by many Asseverations; I shall therefore say little more than this, (seeing you through∣ly know me,) That the fol∣lowing Account of the late Sea-Fight with the French Thoulon Fleet, I here send you, is nothing but what I my self was both an Eye and Ear-Witness to the Truth of; and you shall (God willing) have a farther Account of it, in my next Letter: But for the present, take what follows:
We having receiv'd an Ex∣press that advised us of the Departure of the French Squa∣dron out of Thoulon, under the Command of Monsieur Chasten Regnaut, which con∣sisted of four First Rates, and Five Second Rate Men of War, and two Fire-ships; who said, the Wind being contrary, they were forced to come to an Anchor in Gibral∣ter, within four Miles of Ceuta, not being able to get out of the Narrow of the Straits: Upon which the Vice-Admi∣rals Killigrew and Allemond, with Rear-Admiral Evertson, weighed Anchor, with Ten English and Dutch Men of War, and two Fire-ships to join the other Six Men of War that lay at Gibralter per∣due for them, and so attack them: They having a fair Wind, happily came up with the Six Men of War afore∣said, just as they got sight of the French Eleet: The French steered away at the sight of our Fleet, as fast as could be; but perceiving our Fleet was resolved to pursue and fight them, they at last made up to us with a seeming Gallantry; upon which, Admiral Killi∣grew gave the Signal of Bat∣tel, and followed it himself with an undaunted Courage and Resolution: And after a long and sharp dispute on both Sides, we took Three French Men of War, which we have sent up to Gibralter: We have also sunk two of their best Ships, and are still in pur∣suit of the rest: Admiral Killegrew was Engaged, in this great Action in the Duke, against Monsieur Chasten Reg∣naut, four Hours or more. Sir, I hope to give you a farther Account of the remai∣ning shattered French Fleet, in a short time, our Fleet being well Manned, Admiral Kille∣grew having got on Board the Fleet Six Hundred Volunteer Sea-men, out of the Mer∣chant-Men in Cales Road. This in haste is all at present, from Your Cordial Friend, N. R. There is lately publish'd, A New Discovery of the Horrid Association and Conspiracy of the Papists in Lancashire, to raise War and Rebellion in the King∣dom of England, during the Absence of King William in Ireland. In a Letter of Instructions from a Roman Catholick of great Quality, in London, to a Papist Mutineer in Lancashire. Printed for Jonathan Greenwood. Lond. Printed for J. Dunton, at the Black Raven, in the Poultrey. 1690.
