S1842A 52612326 179630
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENS A PROCLAMATION, For bringing in HORSES out of some VVestern Shires. Edinburgh, the 25. of March, 1667. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith. To Our Lovits,  Messengers, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and sev∣erally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as it is more then high time, to prevent the rising of disaffected persons, who, during the continuance of the War with Our Forraign Enemies, are ready to break out in open Rebellion, and rise in Arms against Us, and Our Authority, by disabling them from putting themselves in a military posture, and in a condition to make any sudden marches, or attempts upon Our well affected Subjects, or any part of Our stand∣ing Forces, or to joyn with these, who are of there own pernitiousand disloyal Principles, who live at a distance from them. Therefore, We with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, command and charge all persons within the Shires of Lanerk, Air, Renfrew, Wigton, and Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, of whatsoever quality, who have refused to accept of any pub∣lick trust, or have deserted the same, being in place: As also, all those who withdraw from publick Ordinances, and do not keep their own Paroch Churches, or do not submit to the present Government of Church and State. As likewise all those who being warned to rise, and joyn with Our Forces, for suppressing the late Rebellion, did not give obedience, unlesse the saids persons will take the Oath of Allegiance, and subscribe the Declaration appointed by the late Act of Parliament. That after the fifteenth day of May next, they, by themselves, nor no persons to their use and behove, do not keep any serviceable Horses, above the rate of one hun∣dred merks Scots, under any pretext whatsoever: with certification, if the failzie, that upon information of any person well affected, the Sheriff, or any two of the Justices of Peace within the Shire, shall cause value such horses, and finding them above the rate foresaid, shall cause deliver them to the informer, and that without any payment, or satisfaction to be made therefore. And requires all Sheriffs and Justices of Peace, within their respective bounds, to issue orders, for conveening the Contraveeners of this Act before them, and causing Apprize any such horses, by indifferent persons, that it may be known, if they be above the rate fore∣said. And, in case that the persons who compear, shall offer to purge themselves of any suspition of disaffection to our Government, upon the accounts foresaids; That they ad∣minister to them the Oath of Allegiance, and offer the Declaration to be subscribed by them, which being taken, and subscribed by them as said is, then we enjoyn them, to dismisse the saids persons, with their horses, to be kept by them, without any farther trouble or molestation: Otherwise, that they proceed as said is. And ordains the Sheriffs of the said Shires, to cause intimat these presents by publick Proclamation, at the Mercat Crosses of the Head Burghs of the saids respective Shires and Stewartry: And cause read the same at all the Paroch Churches of the saids bounds, upon a Sunday before noon, after Divine Service, with all Diligence. And that these presents be printed, that none pretend ignorance. EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1667.
