s3524 99884758 183543
The Shoomakers delight. Or. A New Dialogue betwixt a West Country Shooemakers & his Love. Who after five years Travel for her sake He back return'd and she amends did make, For after he to her ha told his mind She seemed not at all to him unkind, Young men & maids then read these lines and see How they in love did lovingly agree. To the Tune of, When Soll will cast no light. ON Midsummer day as I abroad was walking, A young man and a maid I heard a talking. Near to a shady Grove flowers were springing, And the brave Nighting-gale sweetly was singing. The youngman brisk and bold thus fell to woeing, And with his fair maid fain would be doing, With speeches meek and mild and kind entreating, Saying his heart would break if she forsake him. My joy and only dear pray thee believe me, If thou wilt be my wife ile never deceive thee No store of means I have I tell thee plainly. But i'le work day and night for to maintain thee. What I do promise thee shall be performed, By no one in the world thou shalt be wronged. Ile venture life or Limbs for thee my Iewell, Then be not thou unkind nor prove not cruel. I am not one of those that keeps a bragging, And of their house and land their tongues are wagging. My love is faithful bent then he contented, If thou wilt be my wife thou't ne'r repent it.
My trade it still will hold this I am certain, A good Husband I will be my dearest darling, I am of Crispins trade a brave Shooemaker, He loved a princess dear and ne'r forsak't her, Nor I'le not thee forsake my dearest Betty, Thy smiling countenance shineth so pretty, If I five thousand pound had in my keeping, Thou shouldst it all command my dearest sweeting. So if thou canst but find in heart to love me, Speak freely now thy mind as it behooves thee, Speak freely from thy heart if thou wilt have me, And to thee I'le prove true as God shall save me. The Maids loving reply My love and only dear, I joy to see thee. For when you absent were oh! how it did grieve me, Both day and night i'le swear I thought upon thee, I wondered in my heart what was come on thee. The Young man. These five long years my dear thou know'st I wander In City and in Town like any stranger, And am return'd again once more to try thee, How can'st find in thy heart for to deny me. The Maid. Well seeing thou art return'd thou art welcome to me, By all the powers above, i'le not forgoe thee, Though Father frown at me and mother murmour, All the friends that I have shall not part's in sunder. Because I find thee plain in words and speeches, You tell me that you have no store of riches, Me to maintain my dear be not thou fearful, I have five hundred pound if thou will be careful. Therefore be not dismaid but be contened, All the friends that I have shall not prevent it, But I will be thy wife and will endeavour To lead a quiet life with thee for ever, The young man. Oh! how my heart with joy. my dear hath filled. Because to my request kindly she yielded, Now we will live in peace and love together, As the old Proverb goeth, like birds of a Feather. Thus you may plainly see that time and leisure, Many things brings to pass therefore Endeavour. Young men prove constant still maids do not dissemble, And then you need not fear for to live single. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in VVest Smithfield.
