T1202 52529019 179135
A LETTER Written to my LORD RUSSEL IN NEWGATE, The Twentieth of July, 1683. MY LORD, I Was heartily glad to see your Lordship this Morning in that calm and devout temper at the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament; but Peace of minde unless it be well-grounded will avail little: And because transient Discourse many times hath little effect for want of time to weigh and consider it, therefore in tender compassion of your Lordships Case, and from all the good will that one man can bear to another, I do humbly offer to your Lordships deliberate thoughts these following Conside∣rations concerning the points of Resistance. If our Re∣ligion and Rights should be invaded, as your Lordship puts the Case, concerning which I understand by Dr. B. that your Lordiship had once received Satisfaction, and am sorry to find a change. First, That the Christian Religion doth plainly forbid the Resistance of Au∣thority. Secondly, That though our Religion be Established by Law, (which your Lord∣ship urges as a difference between our Case, and that of the Primitive Christians) yet in the same Law which Establishes our Religion it is declared, That it is not Lawful upon any pretence whatsoever to take up Arms, &c. Besides that, there is a particular Law declaring the power of the Militia to be solely in the King. And that ties the hands of Subjects, though the Law of Nature and the General Rules of Scripture had left us at liberty; which I believe they do not, because the Govern∣ment and Peace of Humane Society could not well subsist upon these Terms. Thirdly, Your Lordships opinion is contrary to the declared Doctrine of all Pro∣testant Churches; and though some particular Persons have taught otherwise, yet they have been contradicted herein and condemned for it by the Generality of Pro∣testants. And I beg your Lordship to consider how it will agree with an avowed as∣serting of the Protestant Religion, to go contrary to the General Doctrine of Prote∣stants. My end in this is to convince your Lordship that you are in a very Great and Dangerous Mistake, and being so convinced, that which before was a Sin of Ignorance, will appear of much more heynous Nature, as in Truth it is, and call for a very particular and deep Repentance; which if your Lordship sincerely exercise upon the sight of your Error, by a Penitent Acknowledgment of it to God and Men, you will not only obtain Forgiveness of God, but prevent a mighty Scandal to the Reformed Religion. I am very loath to give your Lordship any disquiet in the Distress you are in, which I commiserate from my heart, but am much more concerned, that you do not leave the World in a Delusion and false Peace, to the hinderance ot your Eternal Happiness. I heartily Pray for you, and beseech your Lordship to believe that I am with the greatest Sincerity and Compassion in the World, My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Afflicted Servant, J. Tillotson. Edinburgh, Re-printed by DAVID LINDSAY, Anno 1683.
