18259.3 [ocm]72799725 184108
blazon of the Earl of Pembroke
Wm. Herbert. April, 1773
Ex Libris Bibliothecae Facultatis Iuridicae Edinburgi 1812
The Araignement, and Execution, of a wilfull and obstinate Traitour, named Eueralde Ducket, alias Hauns: Condemned at the Sessions house, for high Treason, on Friday, beeing the 28. of Iuly, and executed at Ti∣borne, on Monday after, being the 31. day of the same Moneth. 1581. Gathered by M. S. printer's or publisher's device Imprinted at London by Iohn Charlewood, and Edward VVhite,
¶ The Araignement of an obstinate Traitour, na∣med Euerald Ducket, alias Hauns, at the Sessions house, on Fryday, the xxviii. of Iuly. 1581. VPon Friday, be∣ing the eight and twentie day of Iuly, there was brought to the Sessions house, to be a∣raigned before the Queenes Maiesties Iustices, one Euerald Ducket, alias Hauns, Englishman, beeing a Preest, and not long since, come from beyond the Seas. This wicked fellow, con∣trary bothe to the feare of God, and dutie, which he should by right beare, to our moste grati∣ous Queene Elizabeth: erred from the true & perfect doctrine of the word of God, and liued in
obscure and Sathanicall deter∣mination of life, as his owne protestations hath sufficientlye made apparant, and the obsti∣nate liues of the rest of like sect, giueth daily example. He hauing receiued the orders of Preest∣hood at Rheimes in Fraunce, a place, where (the more is the pit∣tie) diuers and many younge youthes of England, are some∣what fed vpon the Popes penti∣on, who maintaineth there a Seminarie, to allure and entise the hartes of sundry her Maie∣sties obedient Subiects Chil∣dren, to come vnto that place, where in steede of learning, they are instructed to dishonor God, to disobey their Prince, and to sell their soules wilfully, into the detestable slauery, of that blas∣phemous Antechristian Pre∣late
From this aforesayd place came this obstinate fellow, and beeing brought before the Iusti∣ces to his aunswer, of certaine absurd and diuelish Articles by himselfe mainetayned, which are these ensuing. 1. That no Prince in all Europe, ought to haue any suprema∣cie, but the Pope onely. 2. That the Pope was indued with the holy Spirit, and ther∣fore he could not sinne. Albeit a terror to any Christian hart to heare it, and a diuelish obstinacie in himselfe to pro∣noūce it, yet he traiterously said. 3. That our moste gratious So∣ueraigne Lady, Queene Eli∣zabeth, was an Heretique, and therefore not woorthy of any gouernment.
4. And that the Pope hath as great sway and authoritie in this Realme of England, at this day, as he had a hundred yeeres agoe. With other such like wicked and abhominable arguments that he maintayned, and beeing there examined of them: he be∣gan with this protestation. The Popes holynesse. At which, not onely the Honorable Bench, but also all that stood by, entred into a great laughter: which caused him to breake of the graue discourse, that els they should haue heard. Then was he demaūded of the former Arti∣cles, to which he aunswered. What I haue sayd, I haue sayd, and will stand to, vsing himselfe very fond and full of derision, e∣uen
like all of that sort, whom God hath giuen ouer into a re∣probate sence. After diuers questions by the Benche, and aunswers of him∣selfe, not heere to be spoken of: The Quest of twelue men was panneled vpon him, whom he was willed to see, if he would challenge any of thē. No (quoth he) there is some indifferent men among them, or els it goes hard. So he still troubling the Benche with ouer many words, as concerning how many soules he had saued synce his comming ouer, and what good hee had doone in his commaunded la∣bour: That the Benche com∣maunded him to silence, vntill the Quest were come to giue vp theyr verdict. Who beeing come, and finding him guiltie, for that
before he had put himselfe to God and the Countrey: he was demaunded what he could say for himselfe, that iudgement should not proceede vpon him? He frumpingly aunswered, you haue put me to silence, and now I will say nothing. Then the Benche commaunded him to holde vp his hand, and he held vp his left hand. Why quoth the Iustices, is this your Roomish order? then he held vp the other, and scoffingly sayd. Now Sir, I pray you, is not one hand as good as ye other for you? At lēgth ere iudgement was pronounced, the Benche rehearsed vnto him, how B. Stephan Gardener recāted. He aunswered, the greater was his sinne. Then they sayd, how Cardinall Poole recanted, the greater was his sinne (quoth he
againe) Iohn Nichols (quoth the Bench) the other day recan∣ted from his great impietie of life: he aunswered, the more his synne, and greater his paines in the world to come. At last they told him, how the Papists great God Bishop Bonner, recanted at his death. That is not so (quoth he) for he neuer recanted. After many horrible speeches by him passed, and by the Honorable Benche aunswered: Iudgement of high Treason proceeded vp∣on him, to be drawne, hanged and quartered. He aunswered them againe, though you haue condemned me of Treason, yet doo I know that I am voyde of sinne in this. So was he cary∣ed from thence to Newgate, where Maister Crowley a god∣ly Father, remained all the after∣noone
with him in conference of the Scriptures, and found him altogether vnlearned, not able to answer any thing directly, but meruaylous obstinate and very impious. ON Monday being the 31. of Iuly, he was brought to Ti∣borne the appointed place of Ex∣ecution, being drawen from the prison of Newgate, vpon a hur∣dle, and godly Preachers all the way exhorting him, but no signe or motion of repentaunce might be perceiued in him. Beeing come to Tiborne, there was a Prisoner executed before him, who had otherwise trespassed, and he very mildely and peni∣tently tooke his death, praying zealously that God would turne the hart of this peruerse wretch, and so with sundry godly pray∣ers,
ended his life. Then was this Ducket brought vp into the Cart, where were with him, Maister Shakelton, Maister Fi∣dens, & other godly Preachers, still exhorting him: who after ye noyse of people was some what appeased (which was no small company) he began in this man∣ner. I am brought hether this day to confesse my fault, belee∣uing and assuring my selfe in the death of Christe, who shed his blood for the Catholique church, whereof I am a member, and hope therein to be saued: for the Catholique Church, is and hath beene, from the beginning of the worlde vnto this day, the true prefiguration of Christe: And whereas these Ministers (spea∣king in derision) haue protested that I sayd, Treason is no sinne:
I beseech you all yt are heere, be witnesses with me (for these are the last woords, yt I shall speake) that I sayd not so. These were my woords, that this which you call treason, & that for which I here die to day, is no sin before God, though you please to terme it so. And I beseech all Catholi∣ques that are present heere to pray for me. The godly Prea∣cher aunswered, if there be any heere, I trust the number is very small, or none at all, quoth he, in time I trust the number will be increased. For through ye Catho∣lique Church is the way to sal∣uation, and the Popes holines is the head of that Church. Then he keeping close his eyes, as though he were in his prayers, the Preachers rehearsed vnto him the Lords praier, quoth he,
vayne woords, away with the rauening wolues. Maister Sherife Woodcoke, then bad him aske the Queene forgiue∣nes, whom he had offended, and all the present company. Quoth he, it is needles, I am a Subiect, and I graunt my selfe to be a Subiect. Why (quoth Maister Sherife) she is supreme head of ye Church, therfore yu oughtest to submit thy selfe to her. Not so ({que} he) she is a woman, and she may not, neither can not speake in the Church, and therfore ought not to bear any authority in it. With that, their godly eares not abi∣ding to hear these blasphemous wordes: drew away the Cart, & let him hang scāt two turnes, but cut him downe, to abide the farder paynes, appointed for him, FINIS.
To the Christian Rea∣der, true obedient dutie, bothe to God and Prince, continually wished. IF our hartes were not har∣dened, & our sences dul∣led, with ouer much care of the world, and no re∣spect to our obedient dutie: wee might perceiue the great mercy & looue of our God, and the too little regard that we make of it. For let vs but argue vpon the dayly & pre∣sēt examples, as the care he hath to his Church, the milde fauour he beareth to his people that put their trust in him, that although Satan seeke to builde a banke about it: yet ariseth the Lord and sayth, Iustice is mine. How hath God looued vs, in sending vs such a gratious Prin∣cesse, such a peaceable tranquillitie,
such a happy light of his Gospell? And when Antichriste hath spread abroad his Champions, and euen throwne out his fiery Dartes of his diuellish inuentions: yet hath the Lord stept betwene them & home, and caused their shame to redound in their owne faces, that when they haue gon so far foorth, as they haue boastingly sayd: VVe will preuaile, the Lord hath stood vp in the mid∣dest of his Congregation, & sayd: I will defend my chosen. And yet to beholde, how smal accoūt we make of it, how slenderly we regarde it, & how vnnaturally we run frō him: might mooue vs, if we had any grace or feare in our selues, to re∣turne with pierced harts, & sobbing consciences, and euen out of the bowels of our soules to crie: O Lord haue mercy vpon vs, miserable offen∣ders. That we faithfully and vnfai∣nedly
may do this: let vs euery one heaue our harts and handes to the Lord, & be inwardly intirely sory, for our so manifolde offences, and praye that long may his Gospell shine among vs, long maye our moste Gratious Queene gouerne vs, & long may we faithfully serue him, truely and obediently honour and looue her. And all that doo re∣pine at her gratious continuance: may eyther chaunge their mindes, or be speedily cut off. Amen. GOd preserue and blesse our moste gratious Queene Elizabeth, and encrease the number of true and faith∣full Subiects. Amen. FINIS.
