f2556 [ocm]64551284 184584
THE further Depositions AND PROCEEDINGS IN THE House of Lords In the AFFAIR of the DUKE & DUTCHESS OF NORFOLKE. WITH THE BILL of DIVORCE. LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1692.
The Oath Administred to the Duke of Norfolk's Witnesses, before the Lords in Parliament. YOU shall true Answer make to all such Questi∣ons as shall be askt you by this Honourable House, in Relation to the Charge of Adultery, brought in by the Duke of Norfolk, against the Dutchess of Norfolk, with John Germaine: You shall declare your whole knowledge of this Matter, and shall speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, as well
upon the Matter as you shall be Examined on behalf of his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, as upon such Interrogatories as shall be Exhibited on behalf of the Dutchess of Norfolk, with∣out Favour or Affection to ei∣ther Party. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.
REASONS Offer'd to the Lords in Parliament For Receiving the following Bill of Divorce On the Behalf of his Grace the DUKE of NORFOLKE. THE not having a Sentence for a Separation from the Eccle∣siastical Court, is thought to be no Objection against the Receiving or Passing the Duke of Norfolke's Bill, for these Reasons; viz. I. The House proceeds, in this Case, in their Legislative, and
in their Judicial Capacity; and in their Legislative, all Things must proceed Originally, by Bill. II. That a Sentence in the Ec∣clesiastical Curt, can give the Duke no Relief, as to what he seeks by his Bill () To Dis∣solve his Marriage, and Enable him to Marry again; but that Relief must spring originally from the Parliament, witht re∣lation to the Ecclesiastical Court. III. That in Case there was such a Sentence, yet it would afford no Assistance in this Case: For
the Parliament, in Cases of this Nature, do not rely upon any such Sentence, for a satisfacto∣ry Proof of the Fact; but hear Witnesses viva voce, and there∣upon proceed. IV. That there  Witnesses now living, to prove the Fact, which may be Examined viva voce; whereas, if they die during the tedious Proceeding in any In∣feriour Court, then there can be no other Proof, but Depositi∣ons taken in Writing. V. That Mrs. Wharton's Case was receiv'd Originally in Parliament.
The BILL brought into the House of Lords, by his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, for Dissolving the Marriage with the Dutchess, and to Enable him to Marry again; which was Read once, and after∣wards Thrown out. FORASMƲCH as Henry Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, having been Married to the Lady Mary Mordant, hath made full Proof, that his said Wife, is Guilty of, and hath commit∣ted Adultery on her part: And forasmuch as the said Henry Duke of Norfolk, hath no Issue, nor can have any probable Ex∣pectation of Posterity to Succeed him in his Honours, Dignities, and Estate, unless the said Marriage be de∣clared void by Autho∣rity of Parliament, and the said Duke be enabled to Marry any other Woman. The King & Queens, most Excellent Majesties, upon the Humble Pe∣tition of the said
Henry Duke of Nor∣folke, having taken the Premises into their Royal Consideration, for divers weighty Reasons, are pleased, That it be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent Maje∣sties, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament As∣sembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said Marri∣age between the said Henry Duke of Nor∣folke, and the said Lady Mary his Wife, shall from henceforth be null and avoid; and is, by Authority of the Present Parliament, Declared, Adjudged, and Enacted to be null & void, to all Intents, Constructions, & Pur∣poses whatsoever. And that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Henry Duke of Norfolke, at any time or times hereafter to contract Matrimony, and to Marry (as well in the Life-time of the said Lady Mary, as if she were Naturally dead) with any other woman or women, with whom he might law∣fully marry, in case the said Lady Mary was not living. And that
such Matrimony when had, and celebrated, shall be a good, just & lawful Marriage; and so shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken, to all intents, constructi∣ons, and purposes. And that all & every Chil∣dren, and Child, born in such Matrimony, shall be deemed, ad∣judged, and taken to be born in lawful Wed∣lock, and to be legiti∣mate and inheritable; and shall inherit the said Dukedom of Nor∣folke, Office of Earl-Marshal of England, & all other Earldoms, Dignities, Baronies, Honours, and Titles of Honour, Lands, Tene∣ments, and other He∣reditaments, from and by their Fathers, Mo∣thers, and other Ance∣stors, in like manner and form, as any other Child, or Children, born in lawful Matrimony, shall or may inherit, or be inheritable, accord∣ing to the course of In∣heritances us'd in the Realm: And to have and enjoy all privile∣ges, preheminences, be∣nefits, Advantages, Claimes, and demands, as any other Child, or Children, born in law∣ful Wedlock, may have or claim by the Laws or Customes of this Kingdom. And be it further enacted, That
the said Henry Duke if Norfolke, shall be entituled to be Tenant by Courtesie, of the lands and Inheritances of such Wife, whom be shall hereafter marry: And such Wife as he shall so marry, shall be entitled to Dower of the lands and Tene∣ments, whereof the said Henry Duke of Norfolke shall be sei∣zed of such estate, whereof she shall be dowable, as any other Husband or Wife may or might claim, have or enjoy; and the Child or Children born in such marriage, shall and may derive, and make Title, by descent or otherwise, to and from any of their An∣cestors, as any other Child or Children may do, any Law, Statute, Restraint, Prohibition, Ordinance, Canon, Con∣stitution, Prescription or Custom, had, made, exercised, or used to the contrary of the Pre∣mises, or any of them in any wise, notwith∣standing. And be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Lady Mary shall be, and is hereby barred and ex∣cluded of and from all Power and Thirds, and of and from all Right and Title of Power and Thirds
unto, or out of any of the honours, mannours, lands, or hereditaments of the said Duke; and that all Conveyances, Joyntures, Settlements Limitations and Crea∣tions of uses, and trusts of, into, or out of any honours, mannours, lands or hereditaments at any time heretofore made by the said Duke or any of his Ancestors or Trustees unto or up∣on, or for the use or benefit of the said La∣dy Mary, or any issue of her Body, or for ea∣sing, discharging, or counter-securing any the mannours, lands, or hereditaments of the said Lady Mary, or a∣ny of her Ancestours, shall be from hence∣forth utterly void, and of none effect: And all and every the said honours, mannours, lands or hereditaments of the said Duke, or any of his Ancestors or Trustees, shall from henceforth remain and be to and for the use and benefit of the said Duke, and such other person or persons, and for such estates and interests, and in such manner and form, as if the said Lady Mary was now naturally dead, without any Is∣sue of her Body: And also, that all Limita∣tions and Creations of
any use, estate, power or trust made by any the ancestors of the said Lady Mary unto or for the use or benefit of the said Duke, his Heirs, or Assignes, out of any the mannours, lands or hereditaments of any the Ancestors of the said Lady Mary, shall be from hence∣forth void, and of none effect.
Depositions. RObert Welbourne saith, That about the middle of No∣vember last, the Duke of Norfolk sent for him by Mr. Scott, to meet his Grace in his Room by the Lords House, which accordingly he did; his Grace told him, there had been some Messages and Proposals by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir Robert Howard, but he look'd on them both, to be Men of great Business, and could not attend upon such Matters, and there∣fore he sent for him, the Witness, knowing him to be capable to understand, and willing to do any Ser∣vice between Us: The first thing his Grace de∣sired, was to acquaint his Wife, and the Lady Peter∣borough, and I think he named the Lord Peter∣borough, that he expected to be indemnified from the Dutchesses Equipage; for, says he, I hear She is setting up a great Equi∣page, and I desire to be free from being obliged to pay for any of that; he, the Witness, told his Grace, That he thought he was mis-inform'd, for all the Equipage, he the Witness saw, was a Coach, a Coachman, two Foot∣men, a pair of Horses, and two or three more Ser∣vants: But says his Grace, I formerly paid Money for Her to one Mourton, and should be unwilling to do so again; I presume my Lord Duke, said the Witness, that was a Debt contracted while your Grace and the Dutchess liv'd together: But says his Grace, My Wife has some pretentions to Castle Rising, which I could sell without her consent, by loosing 2000, or 2500 l. and besides, I very lately
find, she hath also a pre∣tention upon Billing, which I never knew till very lately, when I was upon Selling of that Re∣version; but I should have been an ill Man to pretend to do that, if I had known of any such Incumbrance: Therefore I would have you tell my Wife, that if she will con∣sent to the Sale of those Estates, and make me easie in that particular, let her consider wherein I may make her easie, and I shall do it: I know she was a great Lover of Drayton, and I suppose is so still, and She once of∣fer me a considerable Sum of Money for my Life in it: Therefore, let her consider of this Matter, and if she can propose any thing for her ease and quiet on these Terms, I shall comply with her; I do not say it to Threaten her; but I am told, that for the reason of there being either Twenty one, or Twenty two Catholick Heirs of my Family, be∣fore one Protestant one; If I would—(here his Grace stopt) Says his Grace, You understand me: But he, the Witness, making no Answer, his Grace was pleased to say again, If I would bring a Bill of Di∣vorce, I should obtain it on that Account: He the Witness, told his Grace, I should be sorry to hear of any such thing; but in Obedience to his Graces Commands, his would acquaint the Dut∣chess with it, and accor∣dingly he did the same day, and Lady Peterbo∣rough both: Her Grace was very Angry at the Message, especially with that part that mentioned; and he the Witness was sent the next Morning to
Mr. Scott to desire him to acquaint the Duke, That as he was my Lord Peter∣borough's Serv, it was not fit for him to receive nor bring such Messages; but if his Grace had any thing to say, it was most proper by a Servant of his own, or to send for one of her's: I carryed the Message next Morn∣ing to Mr. Scott, and at my return Home, the Dutchess shewed me a Letter she had writ to the Duke to the same pur∣pose, and which was se to his Grace, but not  him the Witness: Th Dutchess did declare when the Witness propo¦sed the Sale of Castle-Ri¦sing and Billing, as the Duke had desired, That she would never Consent. By any of this Discourse, it did not appear to him, the Witness, that the Duke shewed any Inclina∣nations to live with the Dutchess; nor did he the Witness understand it so. POSTCRIPT. THE Witnesses to prove several Matters of Fact in 1690. and 1691. were not Examin'd, the for∣mer being thought sufficient; only Mary Elliot being Interrogated by the Council, declared farther, That she saw Mr. Germain's Y—d come from the Dutchess Reeking, slimy, and limber, casting his Sp—m about the Room. FINIS.
