H3809b R224431 [ocm]64551319 184610
The Husbands Instructions to his Family: OR, HOUSHOLD OBSERVATIONS, Fit to be observed by VVife, Children, and Servants. A Family well Govern'd, is like a Kingdom well Rui'd. The Father's Love and Care of his Children, is like that of the KING's over his People. Good Servants generally prove Good Masters, & Good Subjects. I. To the WIFE. SInce You're my Wife by Holy Nuptial State, Such You shou'd be, as these few Lines relate: By Nature mild, Your Conversation free, Keeping the Bounds of charming Modesty. Averse to all the gaudy Pomp of Pride; Yet Neat, a Wife, as first when dress'd a Bride. Your Face neglected, (such as Heav'n design'd) Advancing only Beauties of the Mind. Saving, though not Penurious, of what Heav'n, With Bounteous Hands, has for our Portion giv'n. Nor boast too much in Wealth, if Heaven's Hand Has bless'd and fixt you in a Fruitful Land: Those Worldly Comforts most inconstant are, Whose Rise and Fall depends on Heaven's Care. Nor yet repine, tho' Poverty molest. And carking Cares disturb your Nightly Rest: GOD still his Favours most in Sorrow proves, As the kind Father whips the Child he loves. Let all your Admonitions mild appear, Not loudly talk'd, but whisper'd in the Ear, For noisy Clamours of a Woman's Tongue, Upbraiding Husband, that he's in the Wrong, Prove like rough Winds, that do the Seas engage, Which 'stead of calming, make them higher rage. Nor let the Viper (Jealousie) find Rest, For his tormenting Sting, within your Breast: VVhere That bears sway, Distractions still abound, No Antidote is for This Poyson found: For if within You once This takes a Root, No Way, or Art, is found to pluck it out. To these soft Measures but your Life confine, 'Twill make wild Batchellors think Wives Divine. And since, (Dear Wife!) You do a Mother prove, You must Correct Your Child, as well as Love. For as the Steed, unrein'd, takes his Career, And Gallops, Trots, and Runs he knows not where; So, by Indulgence, (Solomon does say) The Child to Rule, is apter than Obey: Then take the Counsel, which the Wife has giv'n, And then, May I (the Husband) lead a Life, Deserving such a Mother, such a Wife. II. To the CHILDREN. INstructed now my Wife: Then next ensues Advice for you, dear Babes, the Wedlock's dues; Who are (though by Indulgent Heaven sent) Of Parent's Joys, or Woes, the Instrument. Since then my Root, you blooming Branches bears, Strive not to be Estate's, but Vertue's Heirs. Enamel not your selves with outward Meen, But mind whose inward Graces best are seen: For Riches fade, and wing themselves away; But Vertue stands, and faces the Last Day, For ever Beauteous, knowing no Decay. Commanded; let obliging Willingness, As Children's Duty, Children's Love express. And as to Me, you Love and Duty owe; So, 'mongst your selves, let mutual Kindness flow, And twine in Love, as Oak and Ivy grow. Soft as the tender Paps each suck't, when Young, Be ev'ry Word that drops from each ones Tongue: For stubborn Grumblings in a Corner, show The ready Paths, which to Destruction go; Ending in Soul and Body's Overthrow. And from whose Lips come profane Oaths & Lies, They fall the Fall'n Angel's Sacrifice. All Brutal Lusts and Passions must you fly, If you'll Entail your selves my Progeny. Shun all the wild Companions of the Age; Nor in their Luxuries with them engage; Who, 'stead of Moderation, use Excess In every Diet, and in every Dress; Consuming Credit, Time, Estate, and All, That we may Happy, Good, or Precious call; And so to Ruine, wretched Creatures, fall. Nor must you quaff too much the juicy Grape, Which on your Reason acts a general Rape, Making your Senses ugly as your Shape: For VVine too freely entertain'd within, Though smooth above, below has Sinks of Sin, VVhere Vertue drowns, & Vice comes floating in. But Wife and Children, if you Goodness mind, You the Reward, as well as I, shall find: And if you Vice abhor, and Grace pursue, I am happy Husband, happy Father too. III. To the SERVANTS. LAstly, My Servants, if you would me please, You must observe, & keep such Rules as these: Be true and trusty; let your Hands be clear, And to Purloyn your Master's Goods, forbear. I hate a Slut, I hate a sawcy Knave; And in a Lyar I no Pleasure have. I hate all those that have a vaunting Vein, And those that Other's Credits love to stain. I hate the Swearer, and the Drunken Sot, Who vow Obedience only to the Pot; By which Love, Fear, and Duty are forgot. I like not such, who would by fawning please, Nor those that love their Belly, and their Ease. Sly Sneaks, that would my Secrets over-look; Proud Fools, or Talking Ones, I cannot brook. I like not those, that are unapt to learn; Nor those, that grudgingly their VVages earn. Those I detest, who Cards and Dice do use, Quarrel with Fellow-Servants, and abuse. The Loyterer too, who does of Errands stay, By false Occasions making long his way. Those too I hate, who only serve the Eye; Nor longer labour, than whil'st I am by. And such, by Night, who revel out of Doors, Are only fit to serve the Galley-Oars. The false, deceitful Soul, I hate as Hell; Only with me the Honest Heart shall dwell, That's Humble, Painful, willing to Obey, And well deserves to Rule another Day. DIstinctly thus the PATHS to You I've Read, In which I sev'rally would have you tread. But something, sure, remains for me to do; For I'm but Man, and frail as well as you. Oh then, Kind Heav'n, propit'ous to me prove! Let all my serious Thoughts be fixt Above, Contemplating on my Creator's Love. Praise then with me, that Great, that Glorious Name, By which to wretched Man Salvation came. FINIS. This may be Printed, R.L.S. Aug. 25th. 1685. And Entred according to Order. LONDON, Printed by William Downing, in Great St. Bartholomew's-Close, 1685.
