I783 R178791 [ocm]62369329 187956
IRE- depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp LAND. ❧ By the Lord Deputy and Council. WHEREAS great complaint is made of much waste and destruction that is done and committed in most parts of this Nation, in Meadows Pastures and arable Lands, belonging to the Common-Wealth and to other Proprietors; by the multitude of Hogs and Swine, that are permitted to go abroad unringed; whereby great dammage is like to ensue for that such persons as receive injury thereby (by reason of the present Destractions of the Times) cannot have that speedy relief, as in Times of Settlement & peace was used according to Law: It is therefore Ordered & Declared, That all Owners of Hogs or Swine, that do permit their Hogs and Swine to Feed and range abroad, shall within Ten days after Publication of this Declaration, within the respective Precincts of Ireland, Ring or cause to be Ringed with wire or nails, or other Rings of Iron, all such Hogs or Swine as shall Feed or Range abroad as a∣foresaid, or otherwise cause them to be so cut in the Snout, as that they may not be able to rout the ground. And if after Fourteen days after Publication of this present Order in the respective Counties of this Nation, any Hogs or Swine do Feed and Range abroad, unringed or uncut as abovesaid; That it shall and may be lawful for such persns that have the Possession, Title, or Interest in any Lands, Pastures, or Meadows where such Hogs or Swine shall come, and be unringed or uncut as abovesaid, or any other person lawfully thereto authorized by wriing, under the hands of any two or more Iustices of the Peace of such Precincts respectively, where such Hogs and Swine shall so go and be found, unringed or uncut, to seize and take such Hogs and Swine; and thereof to give due notice to the Owner  eeper of such Hogs or Swine, and after seizure to detain the same until due satisfaction be made for the dammage  such Hogs or Swine unringed or uncut as abovesai, to the person that is or shall be, the Owner or Owners of,  ave any Interest or Title in the Lands where such Hogs and Swine have come and been; and also one Shilling for every Hog or Swine so seized, unringed or uncut, to the use of the Poor. And all Iustices of the Peace, Commanders in chief within every Precinct, Shierifs in every County, Commissioners of Assesment, Commissioners for Administration of Iustice within the respective Provinces, Counties and Iurisictions, or any one or more of them, shall and may have cognizance of the trespasses and offences in this Declaration mentioned; and are hereby authorized and required, upon complaint to them or any one or more of them made, to hear and determin the same, and to send for Parties and Witnes∣ses, and to give Oaths to Witnesses as they shall see cause. And if any Person that is Owner of such Hogs and Swine as go unringed or uncut as abovesaid shall offend the second time, after such conviction as is abovesaid: That for such second offence, he shall render double dammages to the person that is or shall have any Possession, Title or Interest, in or to any Lands where such Hogs and Swine have come as abovesaid; and also pay two Shillings for every Hog and Swine, so found and taken unringed or uncut as abovesaid: And after such two convictions as abovesaid, that if the Owner or Proprietor of such Hogs and Swine as abovesaid, shall wilfully permit his Swine and Hogs to go abroad unringed or uncut as abovesaid; then to forfeit such Hogs and Swine so taken, unringed or uncut as abovesaid or the value of them. And whereas many parts of the Countrey may be remote from the place where any person hereby authorized to have Iurisdiction, doth reside; That the Iustices of the Peace, and Commissioners for the Administration of Iustice within that Province, or any two or more of them, shall and may nominate and appoint two or more Persons, of best abilitie and known integrity in the respective Baronies within their Precincts, as they shall judg necessary; authorizing such persons to have cognizance of the trespasses and matters abovesaid; with special direction that they make due Certificates at the next Sessions or Assizes, of all complaints and matters coming before them, and of the several Penalties by them levied, and other their doings concerning the trespasses and offences in this Declaration mentioned; and if any party be wrong∣ed and unjustly molested, that due reparation and satisfaction be given, as the matter shall appear at the said Assizes and Sessions. Provided, That this Declaration shall not extend to any Hogs or Swine, feeding or going in the Owners or Proprietors own Woods or Lands. And it is further Ordered, That this Declaration shall continue and be in force, until the first day of November 1655. Vnless the said Lord Deputy and Council shall give further Order. Dated at Dublin the 25 of November, 1654. Thomas Herbert Clerk of the COUNCIL. ORdered by the Lord Deputy and Council, that this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published, Thomas Hertbert Clerk of the COUNCIL. ¶ DVBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, Anno. Dom. 1654.
