23532 S100224 [ocm]48446100 177963
S. MARY MAGDALENS PILGRIMAGE TO PARADISE. Wherein are liuely imprinted the foote∣steps of her excellent Vertues, for Sinners to follow, who desire to accompany her thither. By I. S. of the Society of IESVS. ornament IHS ermissu Superiorum, M. DC. XVII.
Anagramma. MARIA MAGDALENA. Grandia mala mea. VEL, A me mala grandia. Christe potens, fater, MEA sunt MALA GRANDIA: sed tu Quae meruere A ME GRANDIA ver MALA.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. TO THE RARE PATTERNE OF PENNANCE, And most worthy Myrrour of Repentance, the euer-blessed Saint, S. MARY MAGDALEN. MANY, and diuers Reasons I find which are wont to moue and induce men to dedicate their Labours vnto others. ometymes the great Excellency and orth of the person is such, that thrice∣ppy doth he thinke himselfe, and most cky doth he deeme his worke, if it may
be but graced with the fauour of so great a Patron. Otherwhiles as well the great∣nes, as the multitude of fauours receiued, heapeth such obligation vpon a man, that without the perpetuall blemish of shame∣full ingratitude, he cannot auoyd the im∣ployment of his best endeauours; partly to signify his gratefull mynd, for the be∣nefits receiued, and partly to acknow∣ledge the full requitall beyond his reach confessing withall his owne vnworthi∣nes of what he hath allready reaped. Againe men are wont to be allured with this Hope, that vnder the safe pro∣tectiō of so Noble a Patron or Patronesse their worke, otherwise subiect vnto ma∣ny sharpe Censures, may escape the dan∣gerous stormes of carping tongues. Be∣sides, some are intised, not so much with any fauour allready done, or benefit re∣ceiued, or any friend-ship as yet obtay∣ned; but with a longing desire, an strong hope by this meanes to creep in fauour of those, to whome they think
their seruice may be gratefull. Lastly many are drawne to offer vp their Workes at the feet of Great Men and potent Per∣sonages, because it handleth some matter touching them, their House, or Family, whereby it seemeth iniurious vnto them, that any other should protect or patro∣nize the same besides themselues whome it toucheth so neere. These and such like are wont to be motiues of their dedicato∣ry Epistles. For all these, and many other rea∣sons (O Blessed Saint) I find a very strict obligation, wherby I am many wayes bound to present these my first Labours vnto thy Worthy Selfe. For if the Excel∣lency and Worth of thy Person be respe∣cted, the Greatnes of thy Sanctity is a cleare argument therof. If Benefits re∣ceiued might induce me, myne owne Conscience is a faithfull witnes of thy many and singular fauours towards me. And who dare be so impious as to carpe t my rude lines, when they be honoured
with the Name of BLESSED MAG∣DALEN? Besides, if Hope of future Fauours may allure me, the Benefits al∣ready receiued, giue me not only a steed∣fast Hope, but ful Assurāce also of greater Fauours. Finally the whole subiect of my Labours being thy Selfe, thy admirable Conuersion, thy rare Pennance, thy sin∣gular Loue, and the rest of thy excellent Vertues; where should my willing La∣bours better be kept, where more safely lodged & laid vp, then vnder the golden Key of thy Protection; who not only as a strong Citty or Castle of Refuge heere on Earth, but as an impregnable For∣tresse and inuincible Tower from Hea∣uen, wilt protect and defend me? Take therfore (Glorious Saint) this little Mite into the rich Treasure-house of thy great Aboundance, not conside∣ring so much what the Giuers hand can performe, as what his willing Hart doth aspire vnto, and what in his best desires he wisheth to accomplish. Remember (o
Myrrour of the World) thy louing Mai∣sters words in thy defence, when the ve∣nemous tongue of Iudas did lay open the inward poyson of his hart, deeming that pretious oyntment to be losse, that was bestowed vpon sweet IESVS: but he seeing the inward deuotion of thy infla∣med Hart, answered for thee, Quod habuit hoc fecit: She did what she could; as who should say, this oyntment, although in it selfe pretious and of great esteeme, yet in her hart it seemes little, in respect of her great deuotion, and the person of whom it is bestowed, and therfore Quod habuit hoc fecit; she did the best she could. If therfore (deare Mother) my gift be neither in it selfe of worth, not yet pro∣ceed from such an Hart as may grace and set it forth; at the least, Quod habui hoc feci: What with the best of my endeauours I can accomplish, I shall most willingly af∣foard thee; and then how can it offend, if it be fauoured by thee? How can it but please, if it haue but an only lustre from
thee? How can it be worthlesse, if it be graced by thee? And finally how can it but be beloued hauing relation vnto thee? Besides, with this little gift of myne I hope to prouoke some richer Wit, and deuou∣ter Hart to offer vp themselues at thy shrine, and consecrate their better talents to thy prayse and imitation. Grant therfore (O Blessed Saint) that I may not only with my vnderstanding find out the way of this thy happy Pilgri∣mage of Pennance, and discouer the foot∣steps of thy excellent Vertues, but that with my Hart I may so loue and affect them, and with all my endeauours so fol∣low them, that I may one day ariue at that quiet port, where there is no feare of shipp-wracke; and so be admitted into that Celestiall Citty, and Heauenly Pa∣radise, where thou dost inioy that Best Part, which most happily thou hast cho∣sen, and (as our Sauiour promised) shall neuer be taken from thee.
THE PREFACE to the Reader. CONSIDERING with my selfe (Gentle Reader) all men to be wandring Pilgrims in this world, and their liues to be nothing else but a weary, and tedious Pilgrimage heare on Earth, their home being Heauen from whence they are banished by reason of their Pride and Disobedience; I throughly persuaded my selfe, that it would be very gratefull and pleasing vnto many, if vnder the title of a Pylgrimage to Paradise, I should write the life of this Blessed Saint: by the which, I shall not only shew my selfe gratefull for the manifold benefits I haue receiued from her bounteous Liberality, whereby I am obliged to imploy the best of my endeauours to her honour and prayse: but also (as I hope) stir vp the hartes of some to follow her happy steppes, to their greater profit, her more glory, and no small comfort vnto my selfe. For what wandring Pylgrime would not be glad of so safe a Guide? VVhat sinner would not reioyce
at so happy a Light? what VVretch would not fly to so sweet a Patronesse? or what true Christian would not be moued with so rare example? Cuius enim vel saxeum pectus illae huius peccatricis lacrymae ad exemplum poenitendi non emolliant (saith S. Gregory?) For whose brest euen of stone, would not the teares of this sinnefull woman moue, and soften to the like example of repentance? I haue therfore deuided her life into diuers dayes Iourneys, according as the grace of the Holy Ghost gui∣ded this Blessed Penitent, that we may the better see the rare handy-worke of the diuine Spirit, and more cleerly discerne the admirable Vertues of this happy Pil∣grime, and be the more forcibly moued to the imitation therof; and so learne how to ascend from this vale of teares and misery, vnto the toppe of all comfort and fe∣licity, which from my hart I wish to all who shall reade this happy Pilgrimage. Read therfore without curiosi∣ty, carpe not at the meanesse of the style, but seeke to imitate the Vertues of the Saint. I. S.
S. MARY MAGDALENS PILGRIMAGE TO PARADISE. THE FIRST DAYES IOVRNEY from Sinne to Grace. How Blessed Magdalen perceiueth her selfe in the gulfe of Sinne. CHAP. I. LONG had the darke and cloudy night of flattering and deceitful Sinne, eclypsed from our poore Pilgrims sight the gladsome beames of Grace, wherby it came to passe, that the night being shrouded in
vtter darknes, the weather tempestious, and the way dangerous, she hauing myst her ayme was led aside, and ranne headlong vnto her endlesse ruine and destruction. For such is the crafty dealing of our ancient enemy, and such the subtile inchaunting of the winding Serpent, that vnder the shaddow of the swee∣test baytes, we deuoure the hidden hooke of deadly sinne; and he being inded the Prince of Darknes, transformeth himselfe into an Angell of Light, thereby to wreke his teene vpon the Image of God, and be reuenged of those to whome the inheritance of the King∣dome of Heauen doth belong. Into the iawes of this foule Fiend was our poore Pylgrim fallen, who seduced with this false light, and true darknes, saw not the dangerous pit of her owne perill and perdition. 2. About which tyme the Orient Sunne of Iustice began to disperse these mysty Cloudes, and spread his gladsome beames ouer the Land of Iury, wherby our wandring halfe-lost Pylgrim did perceiue a most cheer∣full dawing of a happy day to be at hand: by whose neere approching light she might easi∣ly discerne the certayne perill and iminent danger she was in. And therfore seeing no other remedy, in the middest of the ocean of
her miscarried Fortune, she cast the strong anker of her Hope, not in the sand, but vpon the immoueable Rocke CHRIST IESVS, with vndoubted fayth; that so she might escape the danger of this swallowing gulfe of sinne. 3. Seeing now the perillous estate she was drawne into, & the infinit good which she had almost lost; she needed no further in∣stigation to driue her forward, and make her striue to get forth of the myseries she had so long, and (alas) too long imbraced. And ther∣fore making vse of the light already recei∣ued, I imagin she brake forth into these or the like speaches. Almighty & euer-liuing God, grant, that from my hart I may desire thee, desiring to seeke thee, seeking to find thee, finding to loue thee, louing to obtayne for∣giuenes of my sinnes, and being forgiuen ne∣uer more to offend thee. 4. But yet the better to vnderstand the pittifull estate of this our stragling Pylgrim, let vs imagine with our selues a forlorne and desolate Traueller, in a strang and vnknowne Countrey, in a darke, rainy, and tempestious night, hauing vtterly lost his way, to fall into some deep and hideous pit, not so much filled with water, as replinished with all kind of venimous and poysoning Serpents, Ad∣ders,
Snakes, Toades, and the like, amongst which this poore wretch should remayne all night, not knowing which way to turne himselfe to get forth, by reason of the depth; or little dreaming what danger he was in, by reason of the darknes of the night, not giuing him leaue to behold these hideous Monsters. But if the cheerfull light of the Sunne should but begin to discouer vnto him the manifest danger he were in, and lay open to his view the venemous ranke wherwith he was be∣set, doubtlesse with all his powers he would striue, and with all his forces struggle, neuer ceasing with his loudest voyce to cry and call for help, that he might be freed from this se∣cond Hell. 5. Into a far more dangerous gulfe, and swallowing whirl-pit was poore MAGDA∣LEN drawne, and caried downe; little mar∣king the danger she was in, or once thinking of the thicke muster of such Hellish Furies who wayted to deuoure her; vntill the shi∣ning beames of the diuine Spirit sent from the Sunne of Iustice CHRIST IESVS, dis∣persed the mysty cloudes of darke ignorance, quickned her dimme sight, and opened her drowsy eyes to behold her owne misery, that she might cry with the Kingly Prophet, In∣fixus
sum in limo profundi: I sticke in the sly my mudde of the bottome of the deep. Ad nihi∣lum redactus sum, & nesciui: I am brought to no∣thing before I was aware: therfore de profun∣dis clamaui ad te Domine, Domine exaudi vocem meā, from these deepes I cry vnto thee, o Lord, Lord harken vnto my voyce. Abyssus abyssum inuocat, one depth calleth vpon another: the depth of my misery, o Lord, cryeth and cal∣leth vpon the depth of thy mercy; therfore let me tast the sweetnes of thy mercifull par∣don, Et misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo: and I will sing thy mercyes for euermore. 6. O sorrowfull MAGDALEN let me bring this comfort vnto thee. God himselfe made man is come downe to seeke thee, ther∣fore make no delay to come vnto him. The Doue being let fly from the Arke, not finding where to rest her foot, came backe againe to saue her selfe. Come backe, come backe, o dolefull Doue vnto thy true Noë: For what doth Noë signify, but Rest. Come backe then vnto thy true Rest: bring the Oliue branch of peace in thy mouth, for now he is come into the world who bringeth peace vnto men, pardon vnto sinners, ioy vnto all. Say not, thou art a Sinner, for such he calleth; say not thou hast offended him, for such he inuites,
say not, thou hast erred and gone astray, for such he seeketh, and bringeth home, as a true sheepheard. 7. But (alas) what needeth counsell where the disease suffereth no delay? or who will be deafe when CHRIST calleth? who so discourteous as not to come when IESVS inuiteth? who will not sell and forsake all, to buy the field, and find out the infinit trea∣sure of the Sonne of God wrapped in hu∣mane flesh? Runne then MAGDALEN, to the fountayne of liuing water, and like the wounded Hart neuer cease vntill thou hast quenched thy lingring thirst. Hasten vnto the Treasure-house of Mercy, neuer rest vntill thou hearest thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Fly vnto the sure Castle of defēce, wher thou shalt sit secure from all thyne enemies, and be protected from all thy foes. Aske, and thou shalt haue carefull guides to direct thee to him; seeke, and thou shalt find his bountifull hand ready to receiue thee: knocke, and he will open the broad gates of his in sin it mercy vnto thee.
How this happy Pilgrime sought for Christ. CHAP. II. NOVV had the dart of diuine loue woun∣ded so deep the panting hart of Blessed MAGDALEN, that her eyes abandoning all messengers of sleep; her thoughts still vrging her will; her will againe inploying her thoughts to inuent some meanes how to find the remedy for her bleeding hart; her watch∣full eyes neuer wearyed with looking, if she could espy her desired IESVS; her cares still harkening if she could but heare him named, whome now aboue all things else she loued; her tongue though interrupted with sighs and teares, yet louingly demaunded newes of her Phisitian; her feet neuer weary with wandring after him; finally her only rest was to be restlesse in the search of him, in whose only hand lay the care of her deadly woundes. 2. Many tymes me thinkes I heare her blame her selfe with the spouse, that she could not find whome she so much loued. In lect ulo meo per noctem quaestui quem diligit anima mea; quaestui & non inueni. In my bed in the night I haue sought whome my soule loueth, I haue sought and haue not found. No, no
Christ is not to be found by darknesse, but by light, for he is Light it selfe, neither can darknes comprehend him; nor is he to be found amongst pleasures and delights, signi∣fied by the loft bed, in lectulo meo. He is wee∣ping in pouerty, preaching with humility, curing diseases with charity, suffering with Patience, dying for Obedience. Therfore sweet MAGDALEN tell me, what was thy resolution? what didst thou say vnto thy self, when thou couldst not find him? Surgam, cir∣cuibo Ciuitatem, per vicos & plateas quaeram quem diligit anima mea. I will arise, I will com∣passe about the Citty, through all the wayes and streets I will seeke whome my soule loueth. 3. I will arise from the base conuersa∣tion of a sinnefull life, I will leaue the wic∣ked Babylon, I will enter into the holy Citty of Hierusalem, I will seeke euery nooke and corner, vntill I find him. I will arise with my vnderstanding to the consideration of so manifold benefits bestowed vpon me, with so great liberality; I will weigh myne owne ingratitude, in being forgetfull of them. I will arise to the contemplation of my intol∣lerable malice in offending his diuine Maie∣sty, to whome by so many titles I owe my
selfe ten thousand tymes. I will compasse my selfe about with workes of pennance: I will seeke to attayne vnto his fauour by true contrition and sorrow for my sinnes; and I will acknowledge them vnto him, with a strong & firme purpose neuer more to offend him. I will arise from all base affections, and desires of the world; my imployment shall be the contemplation of the Celestiall Para∣dise; this shall be my portion, this my part; by this way I hope to find out my beloued Spouse, my Lord, my Maister, the Sauiour of my soule. Therfore sweet IESVS hide thy selfe no longer from me, but let me know, vbi pascas, vbi cubas in meridie: where thou dost feed, where thou dost rest at midday. No labours shall daunt me, so I may find thee, no shame confound me, so I may see thee; no words af∣fright me, so I may heare thee; no multitude be terrible vnto me, so I may inioy thee; Finally nothing trouble me, so I may loue thee. 4. Thou didst send an Angell to manifest thy Natiuity to the poore deuout Sheep∣herds; thou gauest a glitternig starre to bring the three Kinges from the East to adore thee. O what Blessed Angell will tell me, what fortunate starre direct me, sweet IESVS, that
I may find thee! I do not seeke thee as cruell Herode did to kill thee, but with all loue, and reuerence to adore thee. I do not come as a proude Pharisie to intrappe thee, but as a poore wounded soule to be cured by thee. I am the lost sheep thou seekest, and yet I seeke thee. Thou knowest where I am lost, and how much I desire to find thee. Thou sayst thou camest to call sinners, O then lett me heare thy voyce; sonet vox tua in auribus meis; let thy voyce sound in my eares, for it is sweet: let me heare it, for I desire it: hide not thy selfe any longer from me, the only reme∣dy of my bleeding soule. To dy without thee is eternall death; but to liue with thee is an endlesse life. The sacrifice thou delightest in (o Lord) is a troubled spirit, and an humble and contrite hart thou wilt not despise. This sacrifice I desire to offer vp vnto thee; with such an hart I would present thee: if it be not to thy liking wound it yet more deep, that the bleeding of my inward griefe may be a faythfull wit∣nes of my loue, & the multitude of my teares wash away the guilt of my sinne, that I may appeare before thee. 5. I confesse (o Lord) that I am suncke downe into the depth of misery, yet let not misery preuayle where mercy raygneth; nor
sinnes remayne where IESVS blesseth. Thou hast called me (sweet Sauiour) and I haue heard thee: despise me not therfore when I call vpon thee. Thou didst looke vpon me with thy eies of mercy, when I loued sinnes; turne not away thy face now I hate and de∣test them. Thou hast promised that, who wa∣keth in the morning shall find thee, therfore let my watchful eies receiue this blessing to see thee. Although I be not worthy to behold thy heauenly countenance; yet am I bound to fall at thy sacred feet, and ask pardon for so often offending thee. Therfore since hope differred afflicteth the mynd, ease me of this griefe; take away this sorrow from me; let me after long seeking know how to find thee, for Loue suffereth no delay, & therfore meruaile not that, amore langueo, I languish with desire of thee. How Blessed Magdalen hath notice of Christ, and findeth him in the house of the Pharisie. Luc. cap. 7. CHAP. III. THE shining Sonne of Iustice CHRIST IESVS, now began to spread his beames of light more freely though the Land of Iury,
and Fame began to post to all parts with the shrill report of his life and doctrine, when our Blessed MAGDALEN, either by her Sister Saint Martha, or otherwise, came not only to haue notice of him and his celestiall doctrine, but also to know in particuler where he was: which aslone as she vnder∣stood, taking a box of precious Oyntment, she made great hast vnto the house; and fin∣ding him at dinner with his disciples and o∣thers, not so much as saluting any, but bold∣ly rushing in, she ranne vnto the Phisitian of her soule; and not daring to looke him in the face whome she had so often and so grieuous∣ly offended, guided by the mother of all ver∣tues Humility, standing behind him she be∣gan to wash his sacred feet with floudes of teares; with her beautifull hayre she did wipe them; with all loue and deuotion she kissed them; and lastly powred out her precious Oyntment vpon them, to refresh them. 2. But stay my hasty penne, me thinkes thou runnest too fast, and hast too soone po∣sted ouer so rare and singular an example of vertue; giue me leaue a little to discourse with this holy Penitent, and deuout Pylgrime. Tell me (o sweet MAGDALEN) where is all thy courteous behauiour, that thus so vnman∣nerly
thou rushest into a banquet not inuited? Didst thou not feare to offend the presence of him whome thou didst seeke, with so great boldnes? Didst thou not imagine thou mi∣ghest haue been kept backe by force, and so haue been disgraced? Didst thou not foresee the murmuration of the proud Pharisie a∣gainst thee? Could not the modest shamefast∣nes of a woman detayne thee? Did not the multitude of thy sinnes affright thee? Did not the rumour of thy badd life and name confound thee? Could not the vnfitnes of the tyme and place delay thee? Finally did not the very light of IESVS terrify thee? How therfore durst thou in this strange and vn∣accustomed manner present thy selfe vnto him? 3. Alas, I see thou art to busie to an∣swere me, yet I am not so busy but I will an∣swere for thee. Apelles the Prince of Painters comming vpon a tyme to the Citty of Alexan∣dria, was there receiued with great disdayne by the Paynters of the said Citty, and by one Planus was feygnedly inuited to the Kinges Table, that he might from thence be repel∣led with disgrace, comming thither, as the King might imagine, vnsent for, as indeed it happned: for the King most dishonorably
commaunded him to depart, it being the cu∣stome that none might approach vnto that place vnlesse he were sollemnly inuited: but Apelles most ingeniously cleared himselfe from that blemist, saying, he was inuited, and that sollemnely; and being demanded by whome, snaching vp a cole from the fier he paynted such a liuely image of him who had inuited him, that he caused great admiration, and was exceedingly honoured by the King, and held in no small estimation. 4. But (alas) Apelles his art was not able so to expresse the image of him that inuited him, as our Blessed MAGDALEN had in her hart and countenance expressed and imprin∣ted the liuely image of IESVS, who inuited her, though others might thinke she was not called or inuited. No, no, O happy Saint, thou didst not come vnto him before thou wert inuited, who came to call and inuite sinners vnto him: and although he did not send visibly for thee, yet he came himselfe visibly to seeke thee, and with an inward light and ioyfull messenger did call thee, and therfore no breach of courtesy to seeke him, nor any impeachment to thy best demeanour to come vnto him. Yea rather great discour∣tesy had it been, with the couetous miser,
ambitious wondring, or fleshly catiffe to ex∣cuse thy selfe. Coeperunt omnes simul se excusare: they began all to excuse themselues; but thou, O Blessed Saint, knewest very well the force of him who called thee, the loue of him who inuited thee, the mercy of him who sought thee. And therfore assone as euer thou knew∣est, thou didst prepare thy selfe with all due reuerence and respect to seeke him; how then couldst thou feare to offend him with thy boldnes? Neither could these ore of any force detayne thee, where so strong loue did direct thee, quia sortis est vt mors dilectio, because loue is as strong as death. 5. Well didst thou foresee the murmu∣ration of that proud and arrogant Pharisie; but what could those vayne words hurt thee, where the sacred mouth of IESVS ready was to defend thee. Well might the modest shamefastnes of a woman haue detayned thee, had not thy inward blush been such, as out∣wardly thou didst respect nothing. The mul∣titude of thy sinnes might well haue been ter∣rible vnto thee, had not the multitude of Christ his mercyes appeared greater before thee. The rumour of thy bad name might haue byn cause of confusion, had not the only remedy byn to be confounded. The vnfitnes
of the tyme and place might haue kept thee back, but that there is no tyme or place vnfit to follow Christ, and humbly to demand for∣giuenes of our sinnes. The very terrour of his presence might haue amazed thee, had it not been the best remedy to delight thee. 6. Therfore I cease to wonder that this Blessed Saint not with importunity, but very fitly, and with so great diligence came so fast to seeke the remidy of her festred woundes. Let vs therfore marke with attention how she proceeded: for doublesse her example will be profitable vnto vs, and the fragrant odour of her excellent vertues farre surpasse the sweet perfurmes of her precious Oynt∣ments. Neither without mystery hath the holy Ghost guided the penne of the holy E∣uangelist to set downe so exactly and in par∣ticuler all her actions. Iob was afflicted that we might learne; and Toby stroken blind for our example, that by these myrrours of pa∣tience we might learne to suffer: Vt posteris da∣retur exemplum patientiae, sayth the Sacred Text, that they might leaue an example of in∣uincible patience vnto all posterity: yea as S. Paul wittnesseth, Omnia quae scripta sunt, ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt: All things that be written, be written for our learning and in∣struction:
and therfore let vs now discusse with diligence this matter of no small im∣portance, and consequence. The excellent Vertues of the Blessed Saint are yet more at large declared. CHAP. IIII. ECCE mulier quae erat in Ciuitate peccatrix: Behold a woman who was a sinner in the Citty. The holy Euangelist making men∣tion of a Pharisie who had inuited Christ vnto his house, begins to enter into the des∣cription of the admirable conuersion of our holy Pilgrime, and as a thing very wonder∣full and strang, he inuiteth vs vnto attention with an Ecce, Behold: which manner of spea∣king signifieth some notable fact to follow. What therfore should we behold? A woman that was a sinner in the Citty. What did she? Assone as euer she knew that IESVS dined at the house of the Pharisie, she presently went thither with a box of precious Oyntment. But perhaps some will meruell why S. Luke being to paynt forth the vertues of this Bles∣sed Saint, beginneth with mention of her sinnes? This maketh not a little for her prayse and cōmendation, who ouercōming so many
difficulties did come at last to exercise such rare acts of vertue: yea in this doth appeare the excellent art of the holy Ghost, for seeing that she was to be so great a Saint, the first ground being laid of black, the beautifull lu∣ster of her vertues might appeare the better, and be the more admyred, and therfore he bids vs behold, Ecce: which reflection vnto her sinnefull life, doubtles doth giue a greater grace vnto her vertues. 2. Neither must we when we heare this word Peccatrix, to wit a Sinner, haue such imagination that she was a common Harlot, nor yet excuse her so much on the contrary side, that we say she sinned not at all but see∣med a sinner; these two extremes must be a∣uoyded. For we must acknowledge her a sin∣ner, sith the Ghospell saith so, and that she was much noted for it, that he calleth her so. But no maruell that her defectes seemed so great, and were so scandalous in the sight of the world; for being a noble Woman, and of great worth, vpon whom the eies of the vul∣gar sort vse allwayes to be most fixed, euery thing in such a person seemeth greater then it is; and the more renowned the persons be, the greater the scandal if their falt be known. And this is the reason, that Blessed MAG∣DALEN
was accounted a sinner, and so by the holy Euangelist described, according to the fame that ranne of her, and the occasion she had giuen therof, which now with the aboundance of her teares she washeth away. For assone as she knew that Christ was in the house of the Pharisie, she needed no fur∣ther messenger, but with all speed she hasted vnto him, Vt cognouit, sayth the Euangelist, assone as euer she knew. 3. Heere beginneth the first steppe vnto all Vertue; heere is the fountayne and source of all good; heere is the ground and founda∣tion of our spirituall building, to be diligent and watchfull in putting in execution the diuine inspirations we haue receiued, as this Blessed Saint did. The Euangelicall seed, saith CHRIST, was sowen in foure places, yet it grew but in one: so the diuine inspi∣rations we receiue into our harts, either we lett them be deuoured by the foules of the ayre, that is wicked spirits; or else we permit the thornes of vices to grow so fast, that they choake them; or falling into a hard and stony hart, they proue naught for want of the moy∣sture of deuotion. But that which falles in the good ground, that which is sowed in an excellent hart, taketh deep roote, & keepeth
fast that light allready receiued, and maketh it fructify an hundred fold. Verbum Dei retinent & sructum offerunt in patientia: they keep the word of God, and bring forth fruite in pa∣tience. Such was the hart of Blessed MAG∣DALEN, after the Sunne of Iustice had reue∣sted this darke cloude with his beautifull beames of grace; she kept it too sure from the foules of the ayre to come neere it; that it should not dy for want of moysture she made her head a fountayne, and her eies springs of teares to water it; and least the pricking thor∣nes of sinne might offend it, she plucked them vp by the rootes, and in the consuming fire of contrition burned them. O admirable diligence, by which she deserued that the Church should singe in her honour, Ab ipsa fauce Tartari redit ad vitae limina: from the very mouth of Hell she returned to the gate of Heauen. 4. Attulit Alabastrum vnguenti: She brought an Alabaster box of oyntment. The box was of Alabaster stone, very white, full of oynt∣ment. What is the mystery of this? Besides the ordinary courtesy of anoynting our Sa∣uiour his feet, she meant that he should mollify her stonie hart, and make her soule white. A sit vessell for all kind of heroicall
vertues, whose sweet perfumes might be most pleasing vnto Christ; and therfore no doubt she said with the Spouse, Dum esset Rex in accubitu suo nardus mea dedit odorem suum: whilst the King was in his banquet, my spikenard hath hath giuen forth it odour. Neither was it in vayne that she presented this box of pre∣cious oyntment vnto Christ, and powred it out vpon his sacred feet, but that sinners might learne, not only to aske forgiuenes of their sinnes, but also to bring vnto Christ such oyntments as may annoynt his feet, that is almes, by which the poore may be refre∣shed. 5. Et stans retro secus pedes eius. And stan∣ding behind neere vnto his feet. O Queene of Vertues, Humility! how well thou dost instruct thy followers! how fit a place hast thou found for a penitent sinner whose feet had gone astray, to bring her to the sacred feet of him who neuer erred steppe: & how well was she placed behind him, whose hea∣uenly countenance and diuine Maiesty she thought her selfe vnworthy to behold: Yet neere vnto his holy feet thou hadst placed her, that viewing well the impression of them, she might afterwards the better follow them. There might you haue seene this heauenly
penitent, the first that euer came to Christ for help and remedy of their owne sinnes: there, I say, might you haue seene her stand couered with a modest veyle of true Humility, with her eies fixed vpon those Sacred feet; the re∣membrance of her former life cutting the ve∣ry synewes of her hart, & that bleeding with griefe, true contrition purifying her soule, loue crauing for pardon, and her outward teares giuing certayne testimony of her in∣ward sorrow. In so much that lachrimis coepit rigare pedes eius: with her teares she began to water his feet. By which word rigare, to water, is signified the aboundance of her teares, and by the aboundance of her teares the greatnes of her sorrow and contrition. 6. Plantes which be newly set, & flowers planted in gardens must be watred, that is, not only water cast superficially vpon them, but in so great aboundance that it sinketh downe throughly to the rootes, & therfore much water is required for this effect. So did Blessed MAGDALEN, who wept so much as the Holy Ghost would expresse the aboun∣dance of her teares by this word rigare, to water; and by this giue vs to vnderstand her penitent teares, and by these outward signes her inward griefe, her bitter panges, and di∣uine
loue. But as loue is neuer satisfied, but ascendeth like fier; so the Blessed MAGDALEN in whose hart now diuine loue had chosen a perpetuall pallace, was not content with her teares to wash the venerable feet of her Sa∣uiour, if vnto this extraordinary and strange lauatory she should not adde as strange a towell to wipe them, and therfore, capillis ca∣pitis sui tergebat: she did wipe them with her hayre. 7. O excesse of diuine loue! what stange effectes canst thou compasse! yea what canst thou not effect! Are not these the hayres which she so much esteemed, that she would not suffer the least of them to be mangled or disordered? Are not these the golden twindes wherein she placed the chiefest of her ioy? Are not these the gilded spangles, wherwith the ayre seemed to delight it selfe to play? and how is it possible that she should bring them now to this vse to wipe feet? O yes, they be the feet of IESVS, they be the feet of the Sonne of God, they be the feet of God himselfe, they be reliques which she esteemes not only beyond her hayres, but prefers them before her life, worthy of all respect, worthy of all honour, worthy of all dutifull seruice in the world.
8. Besides those handes, those eyes, those hayres, that hart, which before she had im∣ployed to offend him, now with all duty she doth dedicate vnto his perpetuall seruice, and thinkes it the fayrest iewell that euer a∣dorned her hayre, if any thing from the feet of CHRIST should hange in them. And now indeed she esteemes her owne hayres, not because her owne, but because they haue byn honoured with the sacred feet of Christ. And as if she had enuied at her owne hayres, that they were so happy to kisse those feet, not permitting them to inioy that priuiledge alone, she with her tender lipps attemptes the like. Therest of her excellent Vertues are prosecuted. CHAP. V. OSCVLABATVR pedeseius: she did kisse his feet. O how deuoutly doth she con∣secrate her selfe peece by peece vnto him, her hands, her hayres, her teares, her lipps, her hart, finally all that she hath, all that she is, there she presents before his diuine Maiesty, as a burnt Sacrifice for pardon of her sinnes. And now she giues the holy Kisse of sacred Peace, in signe that neuermore she will offend
him: Misericordia & Veritas obuiauerunt sibi, Iusti∣tia & Pax osculatae sunt. Mercy and true contri∣tion haue met togeather, Iustice and peace hath kissed one another. And the more to shew the vehemency of her kindled affection she did not only once kisse them, or for a litle while, but as CHRIST himselfe witnesseth, continually: Ex quo intraui, non cessauit osculari pedes meos: Since I entred into the house, she neuer ceased to kisse my feet. 2. Her self thus diuersly sactificed vnto him, yet she was not content, but vnguento vngebat, she did annoynt them with oynt∣ment. She would needs annoynt those Bles∣sed feet with this sweet refreshing oyle, in recompence (in some sort) of that heauenly oyle of gladnes wherewith he had imbal∣med her wounded Soule and dying Hart. O precious oyntment, and happily bestowed, but yet of low price, or no price at all, in comparison of that heauenly liquour, that flowed from thy weeping eyes! O fragrant smell, whose perfume was fit for such a per∣son, yet far inferiour to that sweet odour which did ascend from thy burning hart, whose smoking incense was more gratefull then a thousand oyles. Oyle being powred forth sinketh into the thing it falls vpon, in
such sort that hardly, or not at all it can be taken out: And the oyle that fell from her penitent eyes, left such impression on the feet of CHRIST, that no age shall be able to blot it forth of memory, no iniury of tyme shall be able to blemish it, or any malice to defile it. 3. The oyntment no doubt was very precious, and might haue byn powred as well vpon his head as his feet, but that the rare Humility of our penitent Pilgrime would not permit her so much as to looke so high; but Loue reserued that duty for ano∣ther tyme, which she with no lesse care and diligence performed, as after we shall declare. The scope at which this Blessed Saint did ayme, was no lower then Heauen, therfore no meruaile that she laid so sure a foundation of Humility, without the which her famous Tower of so rare Sanctity could neither arise, nor stand; but vpon such a sure ground, vpon such a firme & immoueable foundation what could be expected sutable vnto them, but her singular modesty, her strong resolution, her vnspeakable griefe & sorrow for her sinnes, such rare contrition, such flaming Charity, such perfect vnion with him, from whome she knew she had byn too longe disunited;
but now againe lincked in such sort, that no stormes, no blastes, no labours, no persecu∣tions, no deceites, no flatteries could euer draw her from that happy course she had be∣gun, frō that best part which she had chosen, from those thrice happy feet, where she had receiued so liberall a pardon of her manifold faultes and offences committed against him, and with that generall Pardon, particular grace, neuer more to offend him in the like sort.
THE SECOND DAYES IOVRNEY. Of the enuious murmuration of Simon the Pharisie: and how Christ defended his de∣uout Pilgrime the Blessed Magdalen. CHAP. I. AS the gladsome light of the sunne is a pleasant recreation to those who can behold it, but very dan∣gerous vnto the wake sighted who are not able to receiue the brightnes therof: euen so I find that vnto all true louers of vertue, the rare example of our Blessed MAGDALEN must needs be a most gratefull light, and great comfort; but vnto the proude Scribes and Pharisies, blinded with the selfe conceit of their owne Sancti∣ty, it could be nothing else but scandall, cause
of enuie and murmuration: like as from the same flower the labouring Bee gathereth hony, the venimous spider poyson, accor∣ding to the good nature of the one, and the poysoned disposition of the other. And Saints from the same garden do pluck most beauti∣full flowers of the infinite Wisedome, Power Bounty and Mercy of Almighty God, from whence the euill disposed take occasion by their owne pride of no small hurt, all by mi∣staken scandall, and offence. So that where our Blessed Sauiour began to open the trea∣sure-house of his Mercy, there the proude Pharisie began to thinke much, and without any further deliberation said in his hart: If this man were a Prophet, he would easily know both who, and what a one she is who toucheth him; for she is a sinner. But Christ who saw his inward thoughts, vnto whose all-seeing eye nothing is or can be hid, giue him a sharpe answere with a sweet demaund, telling him, He had a word to speake vnto him, who answered, Mai∣ster, speake. Then our Blessed Sauiour as well conforming himselfe to his capacity, as de∣sirous to make him giue sentence against himselfe with his owne mouth, he propoun∣deth vnto him this Parable. 2. There were two debters vnto a cer∣taine
vsurer, the one was indebted fiue hun∣dred pence, the other fifty, neither of them being able to discharge their obligation, he forgaue them both; which of those two lo∣ueth him best? Simon the Pharisie answered, I thinke he vnto whome he forgaue the greater summe. Rightly answered, saith our Blessed Sauiour, and turning himselfe towards the humble Penitent, said vnto Simon; Dost thou see this wo∣man? I came into thy house, thou didst not so much as giue me water to wash my feet, but she hath done it with her teares, and with her hayres hath wiped them: Thou hast not giuen me the kisse of peace, but she hath neuer ceased since I entred into thy house to kisse my feet: Thou hast not annoynted my head with oyle, she with her oyntment hath done it to my feet; therefore I tell thee, many sinnes are forgiuen her, because she hath loued much; to whome lesse is forgiuen, loueth not so much. O diuine sentence flowing from the eternall fountayne of wisedome it self! How much was the wisedome of Salomon commen∣ded, who by offering to diuide the tender in∣fant, found out forth with the true mother, and ended the strife! How much was the vpright iudgment of the Prophet Daniel ex∣tolled, who with his heauenly prudence found out the deceitfull calumniation of the wicked Iudges, and iustified the innocent
Susanna! But what wit (o Lord) can admire, what tongue declare, or what hart diue into the depth of thy infinit wisedome, who so sweetly, and yet so throughly couldst cure the murmuring mynd of the proude Pharisie, and withall defend thy deuout penitent, and thy selfe; and this to make him blush, who had performed so little, and yet could mur∣mur at her, who had done so much. 3. The custome of those Countries of Palestina was, that at the entring into their houses, they washed the feet of their ghestes, gaue them the kisse of peace, and annoynted them with a sweet refreshing oyle. All these duties of courtesie had the proud Pharisie o∣mitted, and yet had not eyes to see, nor hart to thinke well of her, who had performed it in so new and strange a manner. O miserable wretch, looke well what thou sayst. Consi∣der it againe before thou speakest: Peccatrix est: She is a sinner, thou saist. O blinde errour, & wilfull blindnes! O rash censure! She was a sinner, it is true; therfore she is, how kno∣west thou that? who made thee the searcher of the hartes secrecy, whose key is only in the hand of God? How can thy bleard eyes see into anothers hart, who canst not see the mi∣sery of their owne Conscience? Take, hypo∣crite,
the beame out of their owne eye, and then looke for the moate in anothers, when thou mayst better discerne it. Thou makest thy selfe Iudge where thou oughtst not, and therefore by the iust iudgment of God thou hast giuen sentence against thy selfe with thy owne mouth. 4. O wretched wight, couldst thou not be content to murmure at the poore Pilgrime but with the sharpe sword of thy cutting censure, thou must strike the inocent lambe of God? The Sauiour of the world? The light of heauen? Hic, si Propheta esset &c. If this man were a Prophet &c. If he were a Prophet he would know, thou saist; and who told thee, he knew not both what, and who she was? Could it not suffice thou didst cōdemne her for a sinner when she was iustified, but thou must condemne Christ of ignorance be∣ing full of wisedome, yea Wisedome it selfe, and infinit Wisedome? But I do not maruell that thou couldst not strike the one but thou must hit the other. For now sweet IESVS, and Blessed MAGDALEN were so vnited that they could not be separated one form the other. Neither could the one receaue the wound which should not grieue the other. Therfore if pitty cānot moue thee to pardon
the woman who came vnsent for by thee, let hospitality constrayne thee to pardon the ghest inuited by thy selfe. Or if thou canst not hit the one but thou must needs wound the other, then pardon both. For he may easily be pardoned who neuer offended; and she deserueth al pardon, who so much lamen∣teth that she hath offended. 5. But Blessed MAGDALEN how dost thou suffer all this iniury? what dost thou all this while? I see thou art so busie at thy IE∣SVS feet, thou wilt not speake vnto me. I see thee so imployed thou canst not answere me. As for the Pharisies rash speaches, thou either dost not heare them, or not regard them, or if thou didst heare them, where humility had taught thee to sit, Patience had taught thee to suffer, and Charity to forgiue. And more what needed any excuse of thyne, when truth it selfe did defend thee? Therfore sweet Saint, I now perceiue in what thou didst imploy thy self all this while. The remem∣brance of thy former life did afflict thee, the possession of thy present ioy did absorpe thee, the firme purposes of future amendment did comfort thee: therfore no maruell, that no perturbation or calumniation could distract thee.
6. The silly Lambe is safe from the dan∣ger of the rauening Wolfe, whilest the vigi∣lant Pastour is at hand. And Blessed MAG∣DALEN secure from carping tongues vnder the shadow of Christ his wings. The houe∣ring doue is not free from perill, vnlesse in the hollow holes and creuisses of the rocke, nor this Blessed Penitent could haue escaped, but vnder the protection of this Allmighty rocke. Now Blessed Saint sit secure, wash, wipe, kisse, and annoynt those happy feet, whose only touch may make thee also happy: Loue that mild Phisitian whose heauenly balmes can only cure thee. Follow that Pa∣stour whose diuine counsell cannot erre in directing thee: and neuer permit thy selfe to be separated from him, whose company is life vnto thee. 7. But o louing Sauiour, detayne not thy selfe too longe with this murmuring Pha∣risie: although it be in her defence, yet she longeth for thee, and desireth to heare from thy sacred mouth, that she is pardoned: she looketh for thee, therfore sweet Sauiour looke once againe vpon her, and let her heare what thou saist vnto her.
How Christ denounceth the sinnes of the sorrowfull Magdalen to be forgiuen. CHAP. II. THE proud Pharisie being put to silence, and by the sentence of his owne mouth condemned, our Blessed Lord and Sauiour of the World, turneth now his diuine speach vn∣to his weeping MAGDALEN, and vttereth the most comfortable words that could be i∣magined for a woman in her case. What saith he? Remittuntur tibi peccata tua: Thy sinnes be forgiuen thee. O Blessed Saint, now giue me leaue to reioyce with thee for this thy happy liberty. How glad were the children of Israël, when they had escaped the longe Captiuity and slauish seruitude of Pharao the King of Aegypt; but what was that in com∣parison of thy ioy, when thou sawest thy self freed and deliuered from the seruitude of Sa∣than? How ioyfull a sight was it vnto the people of God to see a pillar of fire in the night to direct them, and a cloude in the day to de∣fend them! but how much doth thy ioy ex∣ceed that, who hast the Sonne of God to di∣rect thee, and God himselfe to protect thee? Vnto the holy Patriarke Abraham after the
conquest of many enemyes, was made this promise, Noli timere Abraham, ego protector tuus sum, & merces tua magna nimis: Be not affraid Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy reward is very great. But what surer shield, or grea∣ter reward can there be expected, then that which thou, O Blessed MAGDALEN, hast al∣ready obtayned, to wit, sweet IESVS? Ther∣fore be not affraid, he will be thy shield a∣gainst thyne enemyes; he will giue thee, yea he will be thy great reward; be the guerdon of all thy labours, he the Crowne of all thy Victoryes; he the pay of all thy Loue: Remit∣tuntur tibi peccata tua: Thy sinnes be forgiuen thee. 2. How gratefull is the light to one who longe tyme in close prison hath byn barred fromit? And how thankfull would he be to him, who should forgiue the debt for which he was imprisoned? What gladnes would he receiue, who hauing lost some pre∣cious iewell of great esteeme, if he should chance againe to find it? Finally what feast would he make, if being in the last extremi∣ty of some dangerous death, should escape it? Then Blessed Saint reioyce, and let vs all re∣ioyce with thee, from whose eyes the light of the sunne of Iustice had long byn hidden,
who wert fast locked vp in the Gayle of sinnes, but now forgiuen the debt; Who hast how recouered that precious iewell of grace which thou hadst lost; and lastly hast escaped the perillous rocke of Eternall death: ther∣fore in thy honour, with our holy Mother the holy Church we will singe, Laudemus Deū nostrum in conuersione Beatae Magdalenae: Let vs prayse our Lord God, in the conuersion of Blessed MAGDALEN. Let vs giue him hum∣ble and harty thankes, because Remittuntur tibi peccata tua: Thy sinnes be forgiuen thee. 3. We see a black and pitchy cloude, ra∣ther a terrour then any cause of consolation vnto the beholder, but if the sunne with his pregnant beames doth but strike vpon it, pre∣sently it becometh so beautifull, that the pu∣rest siluer seemes but pale in comparison ther∣of. The beautifull Rayn-bow with the di∣uersity of colours wrappeth the vnderstan∣ding of man to admiration, and in a manner forceth his eyes to gaze vpon it, and yet is it nothing else, but a watry cloude, which the beautifull beames of the sunne with their re∣uerberation vesteth in so many and sundry coloured sutes. O let me inuite your eyes to a brighter sunne, & to a happier cloud. The glittering beames of Christ his mercy stri∣king
vpon the darke cloude of weping MAG∣DALENS deuout hart, hath vested her with so many sutes of vertue, as before she was stay∣ned with spotts of sinne. She is now most beautifull to behold, who before was not worthy to be named. 4. Neither in vayne is she compared to the Rayn-bow; for as that was sent for a signe of the great mercy of Almighty God, after the example of his seuere Iustice by the drow∣ning deluge, to tell them, that his wrath was passed, his anger ceased; so now this Blessed Saint is placed so high in the fauour of Christ, that by this example we may assure our selues of the tender loues she beares to sin∣ners when they repent. Besides, as the cloud not only through the reuerberation of the sunne, yealdeth that pleasant prospect to the view, but being carried with the wind let∣teth fall those heauenly dropps which refresh the whole earth: in like manner our glorious Saint doth not only shine with these singu∣lar fauours and prerogatiues of being cured by Christ, and the first who came vnto him for remedy of their owne sinnes; but also be∣ing carried by the sweet gale of the Holy Ghost into the harts of those who desire to immitate her true Pennance, she distilleth
those celestiall and heauenly dropps of dew which only can refresh them, by her holy prayers and intercession obtayning true con∣trition of their sinnes, and a firme purpose neuermore to offend. 5. Iacob thought his Sonne Ioseph to be slayne, but when he vnderstood he liued, Re∣uixit spiritus eius, saith the sacred Text, his spirit reuiued. Ezechias hearing he was to dye turned his face to the wall, and did nothing but weepe, vntill he heard that his life was prolonged. That holy man Tobias would re∣ceiue no comfort, because he could not see the gladsome light of the sunne: Quale gau∣dium mihi erit qui in tenebris sedeo, & lumen caeli non video? What ioy can I haue who sit in darke∣nes, and see not the light of heauen? But what ioy did he receiue when the Angell Ga∣briel restored his sight? Alas these are but sha∣dowes of ioy compared with that which Blessed MAGDALEN receiued when she heard, remittuntur tibi peccata tua, that her sinnes were forgiuen her; when the life of her soule was restored, when the light of Grace did shine vnto her: therfore reioyce o Blessed MAG∣DALEN, for now thy sorrow is turned in∣to ioy, and this ioy none shall be able to take from thee.
The murmurations which were made, when they heard, that the sinnes of the Blessed Penitent were forgiuen. CHAP. III. THE Ghestes who were inuited and pre∣sent at the banquet, hearing our Blessed Sauiour not only to defend the weeping MAGDALEN, but also to forgiue her her sinnes, they began not a little to maruell, and say a∣mongst themselues, VVho is this, that forgiueth sinnes? For they did not indeed beleeue that he was God, and yet they knew, that none but God could remit sinnes. Wherfore they mer∣uailed at so great power, and from whence he should haue it; and yet, poore soules, they had not the grace to acknowledg this diuine power in him. O blind Iewes, who haue the light of Heauen and Earth before your eyes, and do not see it! The remedy of all your euill, and do not acknowledge it! The only desired glory of your Nation, & do not regard it! Neither do you demaund in an humble and dutifull manner to know him, but in a scornefull and mocking sort to de∣ride him, Quisest hic? Who is this? Who can this be, who taketh so great power vpon him?
Who is this that forgiueth sinnes? Who is this that diueth into the very secrets of mens harts? Is he not a man as others be? Is he not of our nation? Was he not borne in Bethleem, brought vp in Nazareth? Is not his Father Io∣seph, and his Mother Mary? Who is this? 2. O poore deceaued people, you haue eies to see the outward shape of his manhood, but you want light of Faith to discerne the inward vertue of his Godhead. You iudge according to the weakenes of his Humanity, not being able to behold the Allmighty po∣wer of his Diunity. You haue harts to loath him as presumptuous, and not affection to loue him as mercifull. You haue enuious tongues to carpe at his inculpable actions, but not a word to defend his innocent person. 3. Alas: haue you not also your soules spotted with the blemish of hateful sinne; and why do you not make hast vnto this health∣full pond and wholesome Lauatory of Soloë, which signifies Missus: that is, sent? For he is sent, indeed, vnto you to cure your manifest diseases, therfore leaue to censure his actions, and make hast to be cleansed by him. Do you not heare; or if you heare, do you not beleeue that roaring voyce in the desert, Ecce Agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi: Behold
the Lambe of God, behold him who taketh away the sinnes of the world? Then demand no further, who is this? and lesse wonder at his forgiuing of sinnes, whose power is far greater then you imagine, and his oue far beyond your malice. Cease therfore to cen∣sure, and learne to loue: leaue off your enui∣ous speaches, fall downe before him, and imitate this deuout Pilgrime. None but God, indeed, forgiueth sinnes, and he doth, as you see; therfore he is God. 4. For if you will but open your eyes and consider him well, not wrapped in the poore veyle of our Humanity, but in the rich weed of his powerfull Diuinity, you will not meruaile that he forgiueth sinnes. If you beleeue, that in power, Wisedome, and Ma∣iesty he is equall with his Eternall Father, you wil not admire that he remitteth sinnes, and healeth sinners. If you beleeue that with his powerfull word he created Heauen and Earth of nothing, adorning the one with beautifull ornaments of light, the sunne, the moone, and starres; and inriching the other with sundry kinds of herbes, plantes, flowers, beastes, byrdes, foules, fishes and the like, for the vse of man, you will cease to wonder that he destroyeth sinne the only distruction
of man, whom he so greatly esteemeth; in so much that to keep him from the power of the Diuell, and seruitude of sinne, he made himselfe man, and gaue his life for man, both for his remedy and example. For as Saint Leo writeth, nisi esset Deus verus, non adserret reme∣dium; nisi esset Homo verus, non praeberet exemplum. Vnlesse he should be true God he could not haue brought vs a remedy; vnlesse he should be true Man he could not giue example. What maruell then, that such a man forgiueth sinne? yea who but he should forgiue it? 5. Sinne was most abhominable vnto him in heauen, and therfore he spared not the very Angells, but threw thē downe head∣long, when they spotted their pure garment with the blemish of sinne; and not content heerewith, sinne yet raygning on earth, he descended from his Pallace of Eternity to per∣sue it, & with the losse of his owne life quite to destroy, vanquish, and ouercome it. Such is the vnspeakable hatred that he beareth vn∣to it, and therfore where he is but present, sinne flyeth from him: for with his sword of Iustice he expells it. This is he who for∣giueth sinnes, therfore demaund no more with curiosity, Quis est hic qui etiam peccata di∣mittit: Who is this that also forgiueth sinnes?
but rather come with humility vnto him and aske forgiuenes of your owne sinnes, for he is infinitly mercifull, and wil forgiue you, if you will with sufficient care seeke after him; if with true humility, due respect, with vnfaigned loue imbrace him, and with deser∣ued hatred abandon, and detest your former sinnefull life, as this Blessed Pilgrime did. 6. Discouer your wound if you will be healed, lay open your disease if you will be cured, follow the stepps of this happy Saint if you will be comforted. She sitteth mour∣ning at his Blessed feet, and behind him with humility; she washeth them with teares of contrition; she wipeth them with the hayres of her affectionate loue; and with the same she kisseth and imbraceth them, shewing a feruent will and desire to follow them; she annoyntes them with fragrant oyle of a firme purpose neuermore to offend him. Behold she hath broken the yee, she hath opened the way for sinners to come to CHRIST. Let vs therfore follow her rare example; let vs seeke to imitate her excellent vertues, who haue not been free from her vices; that euery one to his comfort may heare that short, but sweet sentence, Remittuntur tibi peccata tua: thy sinnes be forgiuen thee.
Christ commendeth the Faith of Blessed Mag∣dalen, and dismisseth her in peace. CHAP. IIII. THE louing eyes of our Lord and Saui∣our IESVS CHRIST were so fixed vpon the deuout teares of this Blessed Penitent, that he little then regarded the wispering speaches of those that were present, but tur∣ning his discourse vnto the Blessed MAGDA∣LEN, vnto whom he had allready turned his hart, said: Fides tua te saluam fecit, vade in pace: thy Fayth hath saued thee, depart in peace. 2. Fayth is the first ground of our Iusti∣fication, without which it is vnpossible to please God, as the Apostle writeth, and therfore this must be the first step to all good, as the same Apostle witnesseth. Credere enim oportet acce∣dentem ad Deum, quiae est, & inquirentibus se remu∣nerator sit. For he that commeth to God must belieue that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those who seeke him. This counsell Bles∣sed MAGDALEN did put in practice before Saint Paul euer preached it, as she did also an other singular admonition, that he giueth vs in his Epistle to the Romans: Sicut enim exhi∣buistis membra a vestra seruire immuniditiae & iniquita∣ti
ad iniquitatem: ita nunc exhibete membra vestra seruire iustitiae in sanctificationem. For as you haue exhibited your members to serue vncleannes and iniquity vnto iniquity: so now exhibite them to serue iustice vnto sanctification. All which she did most exactly performe, as be∣fore you haue seen. And therfore now our Blessed Sauiour doth begin to commend her from the first beginning, that is, her stronge Faith, Fides tuate saluam fecit: thy Fayth hath made thee whole; and this Faith was in so high degree that vnto it our Sauiour doth at∣tribute the forgiuenes of her sinnes; not that Faith of it selfe is sufficient (as the Heretikes of these tymes bragge out of this place) but as the first ground and disposition, without which nothing else can be pleasing vnto God, as Saint Pauls testimony before aleadged doth make playne: and besides, because her fayth was very great, and that a perpetuall monu∣ment might remayne of it for our example. He had said before, that her sinnes were forgiuen, because she loued much, which is to attribute the forgiuenes of her sinnes vnto Charity: nei∣ther are these two contrary, for when short∣ly after he annexeth, thy Fayth hath made thee hoale, it is meant of that Fayth which is ac∣companied with Charity, which in this wo∣man
how eminent both the one & the other were, no man so blind but seeth, no vnder∣standing so obstinate, but must confesse it. 3. So that Fayth was the first ground, and foundation by which she did acknow∣ledge his diuine power, that he could forgiue sinne. Hope was the second steppe, wherby she fully persuaded herselfe, & with true con∣fidence in his bountifull goodnes, hoped that he would pardon her; and loue obtayned the sute to be granted. And therfore her loue was not idle, her Fayth dead, or her hope vayne, but all accompanied with so many good workes as her ability could affoard vn∣to her louing Maister, with a firme purpose afterward to continue in them, as she did vn∣till her death, with no lesse admiration then edification of the whole world. 4. Vade in pace: Depart in peace. O bitter, sweet sentence! Bitter, because she must de∣part from him; but sweet, in that they must remayne friends: bitter, to be out of his sight, from whom she had receiued her second life; sweet, that she hoped neuer againe to offend him: bitter, that she could inioy no longer those sacred feet; sweet, that she intended euer to follow the stepps of them: bitter that she could not heare still the word of life, bitter
that she might not heare the words of life: sweet, that she meant for euer to choose to heare them. Finally she must depart from, but neuer be separated from him in Loue and Charity, her body absent, her soule present alwayes with him, the warre is ended that was wont to part them, and the peace is gi∣uen that wil alwayes vnite them: Vade in pace: Depart in peace. 5. When our Blessed Sauiour was borne, the very night of his Natiuity he sent an An∣gell to denoūce Peace vnto men on Earth, not vnto all, but bonae voluntatis, to men of a good will, men who had their wills comformed to the will of God, or desired to conforme them, to leaue their sinnes, to eschew vice, to follow vertue, to gaine saluation of their soules. This was the warre betwixt God and poore MAGDALEN, in whose hart the light of CHRIST had once shined: but now the combat being ended, now her mynd being changed, her vnderstanding by Fayth infor∣med, and her hart by grace reformed, all things made beautifull that were deformed, there remayneth nothing now but a shower of peace, Vade in pace. 6. Go Blessed MAGDALEN with peace of hart, peace of mynd, peace of conscience,
peace with God, peace with Man, peace with thy selfe, peace with all, and peace in all, Vade in pace. Thyne enemies are drowned in the sea of thy teares, the huge waues of thy contrition haue ouerwhelmed them, the stronge & mighty billowes of thy vehement loue hath ouerthrowne them; vnus ex eis non re∣mansit: not one of them appeareth. Goe in peace, they are all suncke and swallowed vp, descenderunt in profundum quasi lapis: they are gone downe to the very bottome like a stone: the vehemency of thy loue & sorrow hath cleane deuoured them; submersi sunt quasi plumbum in aquis vehementibus: they be drowned in the vi∣olent streames, like a peece of lead; therefore go in peace. The Flesh rebelleth, the World rageth, the Diuell roareth for reuenge, yet Vade in pace, go thou in peace. He that sendeth thee from him will protect thee, he is Lord ouer them, and will curbe them, he is their conquerour, and will keep them in subie∣ction, he is their Creatour, and will gouerne them: Finally he is God and will rule them, therfore feare not, but depart in peace. And least the scruple of thy former life should af∣flict thee, thou hearest from the mouth of Truth it self, that thy sinnes be forgiuen thee, and this generall pardon from the sacred
Mouth of him, whome thou so dearely louest can be no lesse then a full pardon, a plenary Indulgence both of thy sinnes, and all the paynes that be due for them: therfore go in peace, thy sinnes be forgiuen thee, thy debts are payd: Grace hath washed thee, Loue gui∣deth thee, Peace is thy companion: Vade in pace. 7. With how great reason doth the Spouse in the Canticles say; O Lord, meliora sunt vbera tua vino, that thy pappes be better then wine; for what are these, but, as S. Ber∣nard noteth, quòd patienter expectat delinquentem, & misericorditer recipit poenitentem: that he expe∣cteth patiently a sinner vntill he commeth, and then with mercy receiueth him: & ther∣fore most fitly by the Kingly Prophet he is called Longanimis, & multùm misericors: one full of longanimity, and very mercifull. All which we see most clearely in this Lookin∣glasse of Pennance, and Mirrour of Repen∣tance S. MARY MAGDALEN. Wherfore, O powerfull Saint, obtayne of thy louing Maister, that I may perfectly imitate these rare vertues of thyne; that profound humili∣ty in the sight of Christ; that perfect Faith in belieuing him; that firme hope and trust in him; that burning Charity in louing him;
that true cōuition for thy sinnes; that aboun∣dance of teares in weeping for them; that patience in suffering those murmurations; that silence in thyne owne cause; that dili∣gence in seeking the best remedy; that pru∣dence in chosing the best part; that modesty, that resignation, that fortitude, and all the rest of thy admirable vertues, which like glit∣tering starres in the Firmament do shine most beautifully in this thy conuersion, giue a most gladsome light, and yield a pleasant prospect to vs poore sinners heare on Earth. Grant therfore sweet IESVS for the prayers and merits of this thy Blessed Saint, that I may truely print them in my hart, and per∣fectly follow them. Of the Names of Blessed Mary Magdalen. CHAP. V. THE holy Euangelist S. Luke, who be∣fore had no other name for our deuout Pilgrime, but Peccatrix, a sinner; now in his next Chapter following he honoureth her with the names of MARY, and MAGDALEN. For speaking of a company of good and de∣uout woman who followed Christ, and mi∣nistred vnto him of their goods, the first na∣med
amongst then is Maria quae vocatur Magda∣lena, MARY who was called MAGDALEN: and because many tymes the name is not without some great mysterie, I easily persuade my selfe that the name of this so great a Saint doth not altogeather want of the same. And first to begine with MARY, which as the holy Fa∣thers haue noted, hath diuers significations, we will reduce this name to foure. MARY is as much to say, as Stella maris, Illuminatrix, vel Illuminata, amarum Mare, and Domina. That is, starre of the sea; lightned, or noe that giueth light; a bitter Sea; a mistresse, or Lady: all which how fitly they do agree vnto this our Blessed Saint, I thinke none will doubt that is but indifferently instructed concerning her life and vertues. That she was a Starre of the Sea, it is of itselfe cleare; for what is this wretched world but a Sea of miseryes, and valley of teares, and by what Starre should poore sinners guide themselues in so great pe∣rill and danger, but by the example of those, who with true pennance haue escaped the like: and amongst all repentant sinners who hath left vs a more cleere example to follow, then Blessed MAGDALEN? and therfore most fitly may be called Maria, Stella Maris, MARY, Starre of the Sea.
2. Almighty God created two great lights in the beginning of the world, the one to be a ruler in the day, and the other to be a guide in the night: and Christ in his Church left two great lights, two holy MARYES a∣boue the rest, the Blessed Virgin MARY his Mother, and Saint MARY MAGDALEN, the one very bright and neuer loosing the light, the other farre inferior, and sometime eclypsed; the one signified by the Sunne, the other by the Moone, yet this moone is a great comfort to those who walke in the night: for by the light of her example they may easi∣ly find the way to Grace, which otherwise perhaps they might misse. 3. She was both Illuminata, lightned by the Grace of God, and set on fyre with the burning flames of Charity, and became also a giuer of light vnto others, as after we shall see. And in this her rare example doth all rea∣dy appeare, that she was amarum Mare, a bitter Sea, by reason of the aboundance of her bitter teares she shed not only at her conuersion, but al her life, at her brothers death, at the Crosse, at the Sepulcher, in her long pennance in the desert, that we may very well say of her, Magna est velut mare contritio tua: that thy con∣trition (O MAGDALEN) is great, euen like
vnto the Sea. Beautifull Noemi after many crosse griefes, and sorrowes, would no more be called by that name; Ne vocetis me Noemi, id est Pulchram, sed vocate me Maria, id est Amaram, quiae amaritudine valde repleuit me omnipotens. Call me no more Noemi, that is to say Beautifull, but call me Mara, that is Bitternes, because the All∣mighty hath filled me full of bitternes. So our Blessed & holy MARY would not be knowne by the name of Beautifull, as indeed she was, but MARY, that is bitternes, because the bitter griefe for her sinnefull life had made her so. And by this she came also to be Domina, Lady, and Mistresse of her selfe, and her owne pas∣sions, which is the greatest dignity and most honourable Title in the world. She was therfore Starre of the Sea, who being light∣ned by the sunne of Iustice her selfe, gaue light vnto others. She was the bitter Sea, wherein not raging Pharao, but the roaring furies of Hell were ouerwhelmed with all their forces. She was Lady of her owne pas∣sions in this world, and now is Lady of an Eternall Kingdome in Heauen: and a true Lady and Mistresse vnto all such, as with true repentance and contrition shal call vpon her, and desire to serue her and to come to heauen by her help and assistance.
4. Concerning this name of MAGDALEN, it is to be noted, that this Blessed Saint was the daughter of very rich and noble Parents. Her Father was called Syrus, her Mother Eu∣charia, she had a Brother called Lazarus, and a Sister named Martha. To Lazarus after the death of his Parents (who died very soone) were left great possessions either in Hierusalem or there about: Bethania befell vnto Martha; and the Castel or Towne called Madalene be∣longed to MAGDALEN, wherof she tooke her Name: which I find also to be an Hebrew word, and commeth of Gadal, which signi∣fyes To be great, and from thence Migdal is de∣riued, which signifyes a stronge Castell, or To∣wer. And indeed most fitly from hence she tooke her Name; for what is Blessed MAG∣DALEN, but a strong Castell or Tower of defence? And as a Castell or Tower is not on∣ly the defence and safeguard of it selfe, but of all the rest of the Citty adioyning to it; so our Blessed Saint doth not only defend her selfe from the fierce assaults of the Diuell, but also all such as fly to her protection, or come vnto her for refuge. In the old Law ther were ordayned certayne Cittyes of refuge, for the guilty to fly vnto for help and security from their enemyes; and in the Law of Grace a∣mongst
others, as one of the chiefest Christ his bounty hath left this refuge for sinners to fly vnto in their necessityes. And of this Tower we may well say with the Spouse, Mille clypei pendent ex ea, omnis armatura fortium: A thousand shields hange vpon it, all kind of armour for valiant and strong men: that is, in her life are all kind of vertues, wherby they who be true followers therof, do vse to arme, and defend themselues. 5. It is the vse in some Port Townes to rayse vp certayne watch-towers in the forme of a Lanterne, and keeping light in them in the darke and cloudy nights of winter, they serue to direct the half-lost Marriners to find the way to the said Port. Neither hath our Blessed Sauiour left his Church without this especiall comfort of a glorious Saint, raysed from the depth of sinne, vnto the height of honour and glory, who with her shining light and holy life doth direct vs poore wan∣dring marriners of this vast world, to find the true way vnto the safe Port of our salua∣tion. By all which it appeareth, how fitly this Name of MARY MAGDALEN, doth agree vnto her, as Saint Luke heere with par∣ticuler direction of the holy Ghost called her, Maria, qae vocatur Magdalena, MARY who is
called MAGDALEN. The reasons why the holy Euangelist now manifesteth her Name, which before he had concealed. CHAP. VI. THE pennes and harts of the Holy Euan∣gelists being guided by the holy Ghost, it is not possible that any thing should be written amisse; therfore no defect was com∣mitted in leauing out her Name in the first place; nor any fault in setting it downe in this. But the modest style of the Euangelists is such, that for the most part when they speake of others faults and defects, they con∣ceale their names (vnlesse they be such whose Names to their greater shame and confusion are permitted to be written, as Iudas, Pilate, and others:) but speaking of their vertues they vse to name, them, vnlesse themselues speake of their owne vertues. Here vpon it is that S. Matthew is not named by the other Euangelistes, by himselfe he is. And the same modest humility that moued S. Matthew to name himselfe when he speakes of himselfe as a sinner, moued S. Iohn to conceale his owne name when he speaketh of himself as a Saint,
and veyleth himselfe vnder the name of the Disciple whome IESVS loued. 2. This was one reason (doubtles) that moued Saint Luke in the conuersion of the Blessed MAGDALEN to conceale her name, because he was to paynt her a sinner, and that not in the best manner, but as it were a scan∣dalous woman, Mulier in Ciuitate peccatrix; a Woman that was a sinner in the Citty: so that by this name he was then to describe her. Besides it is not to be meruailed, that she was not named before being a sinner, for sinners indeed haue no names, as S. Chrysostome noteth (vnlesse vnto their owne infamy, as I said before) and the Kingly Prophet cryes out, that sinners should be blotted forth of the booke of the Liuing, since they be dead, delean∣tur de libro viuentium, & cum iustis non scribantur. Let them be blotted out of the booke of life, and not be written amongst the iust. So poore MAGDALEN being a sinner had no other Name, but Sinner: nor was she named for her more confusion, as some are, because she came to seeke a true remedy for her sinnes. 3. But assoone as the Grace of the Holy Ghost had washed away the blacknes of her offences, which before had fowly blotted her Name, presently the holy Euangelist espied
it againe, and let it downe neuer more to be put orth, Maria quae vocatur Magdalena; MARY who is called MAGDALEN; because now he was to writ of her prayse in following of CHRIST, without any more mention of a Sinner; although he adde that seauen Diuells went forth of her, expelled by the mighty hand of IESVS, as S. Marke also in the 16. Chapter of his Ghospell rehearseth. Which words haue caused great diuersity of opinions amongst learned men; some thinking them not to be Diuells, but diuers sinnes; others taking them in the sense as the workes sound that they were very Diuells indeed. But in what sense souer they be taken, it is certaine, that the victory of the Blessed MAGDALEN by the help of of CHRIST was very great, so strong was her resolution, that no multitude of sinnes could affright her, no force of euill customes daunt her, no intisements of the world allure her from that happy course she had begunne, such inuincible force of loue had she to breake through so great a ranke of haynous offences. 4. Iudith left her proud enemy weltring in his owne bloud to her perpetual glory and his no lesse infamy: Iahel by her cunning dea∣ling nayled the threatning Sisara to the groūd;
and Hester by her heauenly prudence brought raging Aman, and the rest of hers, and her countryes foes vnto their vtter ruine and de∣struction: but the Victory of Blessed MAGDA∣LEN was against farre stronger foes, against inuisible powers, against the Prince of dark∣nes; and therfore so much the more is the ho∣nour & glory of God to shine in her prayse. Moreouer, this is the same MAGDALEN that washed our Sauiours feet, that was the Sister of Lazarus, and wept for our Sauiour at the Sepulcher: and this, supposing what S. Iohn writeth, and our holy Mother the Church followeth in the feast of her day, ought not now to be called in doubt, howsouer in former tymes it hath been more obscurely handled. 5. Neither was our Blessed Pilgrime vn∣gratefull for what she had receiued of Christ, but presently dedicating her selfe wholy to his seruice with a most willing hart and lo∣uing mynd, she did minister vnto him of her temporall goods, from whom she had recei∣ued so many spirituall blessings. O prudent MAGDALEN! how well hast thou recouered what was lost, and how wisely prouided for what is to come! By thy true contrition, and seruent charity thy sinnes are forgiuen thee.
For the present thou dost follow Christ and heare his heaunely doctrine; and layst vp thy riches in his hands, where thou shalt be sure to find them againe with great increase. If he shall not loose his reward who giueth a cuppe of cold water to one of Christ his friends for his sake, what reward shalt thou haue, who dost giue vnto Christ himselfe, & in so great aboundance? And this thou wilt do thy selfe in person that thou mayst be sure nothing to be wanting vnto him. O how many comoditys do arise of this thy diligent seruice, and following of Christ, not only vnto thy selfe, but also vnto vs who follow thee, that we may imitate so happy an ex∣ample! 6. The famous saying of Pythagoras was, Sequere Deum Follow God. Which thou dost farre better fullfill then any of them did, hea∣ring his diuine Sermons, refreshing thy hart with the dew of his heauenly doctrine, and with his spirituall instructions ouercōming the greatest difficultyes. What an infinite treasure is this, o Blessed Saint, that thou hast chosen! Neither doth the infinite Wise∣dome of God refuse her, nor disdayne to let her follow him, although she was knowne before by the name of Sinner. But with this
he satisfyes all complayntes and murmura∣tions, Non veni vocare Iustos, sed Peccatores: I came not to call the Iust, but Sinners. Such is the great bounty and loue of Christ, and so much he desired to encourage vs, that we should not be ashamed to come vnto him, since he is so louing to inuite vs, so liberall to pardon vs, and so friendly to let vs follow him, and be serued by vs. Yea so farre off was our Bles∣sed Sauiour frō being ashamed that she should follow him, as rather he was much glorified in it: like as an excellent Phisitian who had cured some sicke patient almost despaited off by all, would not only cure the diseased per∣son, but euer after keep him with him in testi∣mony of so rare a cure. Or like a valiant Cap∣tayne after the hard conquest of a strong for∣tresse, should not let it go any more out of his handes, but keep it in his owne custody, in memory of so famous a victory. 7. The Iuy of it selfe is a very weake tree, not able to rise from the ground, but cat∣ching hold vpon some stately Elme, or Oake, or leaning vnto some strong wall, it moun∣teth as high as they, and is an ornament vn∣to them. The Blessed MAGDALEN of her selfe was feeble, not able to ascend and fol∣low Christ; but leaning vnto that true
rocke, catching hold vpon those stable bows of the Tree of Life, she followed him, she ascended with him, and he did glory in her. Ionas had an Iuy tree created to comfort and protect him, & laetatus est Ionas super haeder a laeti∣tia magna: and Ionas reioyced very much at the Ioy. So our Sauiour had this conuerted sinner to minister vnto him of her goods, that no iniury of tyme should annoy him, being very glad of her seruice, as himselfe signifyes in the Parable of the lost sheep, which the sheepheard finding, imponit in humeros suos gau∣dens: taketh vp vpon his back with great ioy. Thus vnto the rest of her heroicall Vertues, shewed at her conuersion, she addes this la∣bourous diligence, & gratefull imployment both of her goods, her labours, her selfe, fi∣nally all she hath in the seruice of CHRIST. Blessed did the Queene of Saba account the seruants of Salomon, that they were worthy to be in his presence, and behold his Kingly countenance; but ecce plus quàm Salomon hic: be∣hold our Blessed MAGDALEN hath found a greater Salomon here: and therfore most hap∣py in his presence, who neuer willingly would be depriued of so great a blessing.
THE THIRD DAYES IOVRNEY. How Christ was entertayned by S. Martha. And how Blessed Magdalen sate at his feete, being accused by her Sister, and excused by him. CHAP. I. AS I said before, the Castle, or Towne of Bethania did belong all or great part therof to S. Martha, and this being not far from Hie∣rusalem, our B. Sauiour not only many tymes passed that way, but resorted thither; and S. Martha most willingly did en∣tertayne him. She had a Sister whose name was MARY, to wit our Blessed MAGDALEN, and as the one was altogeather imployed in preparing a feast for IESVS; so the other was
no lesse solicitous how to be feasted by him, and therfore as Martha was busied in many things, so MARY was contented with only this, to sit at his feet, and heare his heauenly speaches; with such content and sweetnes, as only they can imagine who haue tasted of the like banquet. So glad was the Spouse when the could get vnder the wings of her beloued, that, as it were bragging, she said, sub vinbra dius quem desideraueram sedi, & fructus eius dulcis gutturi meo: Vnder the shaddow of him whom I desired I sate, and his fruit was sweet vnto me. And what maruell, for mel & lac sublinguae gius, the sweetnes of hony and milke is vnder his tongue. Therfore S. Peter was very loath to depart from him, when he said, Domine ad quem ibimus, verba vitae aeternae habes? Lord, to whom shall we go, thou hast words of life eternall? How then could our Blessed Pilgrime be drawne from those sacred feet? Maria autem debat secus pedes Domini, & audiebat verbum illius: MARY did set at the feet of our Lord, and heard his words. 2. But not long did this quiet repose of hers indure without a storme, for presently her Sister comming to our Sauiour, made a ouing complaynt: Domin, non est tibi curae, uòd soro mea reliquit me solam ministrare? dic ergo
illi vt me adiuuet: Lord, dost thou not care that my Sister hath left me all alone? tell her therfore, that she may help me. How feare∣full was the Blessed MAGDALEN, when she heard this complaynt of her Sister, least our Blessed Sauiour should haue said, Rise and helpe her; not that disdayned to do it, or wanted loue or respect to her Sister to per∣forme it; but that a greater loue did preuayle with her, and loath she was to be depriued of that heauenly food which her hungry soule receiued from her dear Maisters mouth. But it fell out far contrary to her imagina∣tion, & much otherwise then she looked for. For as S. Augustine saith, he that was sollicited to be her Iudge, became her Aduocate, and he that was vrged to make her rise, and goe away from him, gaue her security to sit still, telling her Sister that she busied & imployed her selfe about many things, whereas one was necessary, which MARY had chosen, and that was the better part, neither should it be taken from her. Nor did our Blessed Sauiour in this blame the diligent ministery of holy Martha, but distinguished the functions, not condemning the one, but highly praysing the other; Martha well, but MARY better, Martha laborious, MARY quiet, Martha im∣ployed
in feeding of CHRIST, and MARY in being fedd by him; Martha's labours were to haue an end, MARYES rest was to last for euer, and therfore the best part, which cannot be taken from her. 3. O Blessed Saint, who couldst chose so well! so happy a part! so worthy a por∣tion! Now sit secure and voyde of care; be not affraid, thy election is approued by him who cannot erre, thy choice praysed by him who cannot flatter, thy reward promised by him who cannot deceiue, & what thou hast is thyne for euer, because it shall not be taken from thee. O that my tongue were able to speake, or my hart capable of the vnspeakable comfort thou didst receiue, when thou didst heare thy selfe defended, thy choyce appro∣ued, and thy sitting at IESVS feet confirmed. 4. Our first parent Adam, after sinne, was excluded from Paradise, least (as he had byn disobedient to tast the forbiden fruit of good and ill) he might be so bold as to attempt to tast the fruit of life, and therefore Cherubims were set at the gate of Paradise to desend it. But thou o happy Pilgrime, after the true re∣pentance of thy sinnes, art not kept backe, but admitted to the fruit of life, neither doth any Cherubim hinder thee, but the Lord of Che∣rubims
protect & defend thee; who is the true life and medicine of thy soule, the remedy of all misery, the fountayne of all comfort, the citty of refuge, the tower of defence, the Oc∣cean of all graces, and finally the chiefest part of all felicity, and therfore most fittly said; Maria opcimam partem elegit: MARY hath chosen the best part. And doubtlesse it is a great feli∣city to haue chosen the best part, but yet one condition is required to crowne this happy choyce, that is, not to be taken away, and that is also promised by Christ, non auseretur ab ea; it shall not be taken away from her. 5. Then Blessed Martha be cōtent, trouble no more thy Sisters happy rest, sollicite no more her Maister in this case; she hath chosen, he hath granted; she heareth, he speaketh; she is comforted, he contented; thy function is different from hers; she hath made another choyce; she cannot descend to help thee; thy life is sollicitous, hers quiet; thy function la∣borious, hers in rest; call her not, her Maister will not let her come, because she hath cho∣sen the best part, which she must not loose, and therfore will not leaue; neither will her louing Maister be content she should be awa∣ked from her quiet rest, vntill she please. Har∣ken what she saith: adiuro vos filiae Hierusalem, ne
suscitetis, neque euigilare faciatus dilectam meam, quoadusque ipsa velit. I adiure you daughters of Hierusalem, that you do not trouble or a∣wake my beloned, vntill she will her selfe. 6. I giue thee most harty thankes sweet Sauiour for all these fauours shewed vnto this Blessed Saint. O let thy bountifull mercy be preached throughout the whole world, and thy singular loue to this wandring Pilgrime vnto the furthest bounds therof! O diuine Wisedome and heauenly inuention of thyne, who didst come, as thy selfe witnesseth, to call sinners! and what better way to bring them vnto thee, then placing this Blessed Saint at thy feet, adorning her with such rare vertues, induing her with such singular graces, and honouring her with such excel∣lent prerogatiues! What sinner now will not fly vnto her, and being with her, how can they be without thee! 7. The prudent Fowler catching one liue byrd, tyeth her in a thred, and hideth himselfe, which she hopping vp and downe causeth many others to come within the cō∣passe of his net, and so are caught. O diuine Fowler, how cuningly hast thou placed this Blessed MAGDALEN at thy feet, fast tyed in the linckes and bandes of loue; and how
many doth she cause to come and fall into thy net! But o happy fall, the only way to rise! and thrice happy be they who fall into thy netts, where they shall be caught, not to dye but to liue for euer, and inioy this happy part with her, who was partly cause that we were so happily intrapped. Of the sicknes of Lazarus, and Letter of the two Sisters vnto Christ. And of Lazarus his death, and miraculous raysing. CHAP. II. MY intentino is not in this place to ex∣plicate any more of this Ghospell then serueth to my purpose, that is, to the laying open the rare vertues of our weeping Pil∣grime, whose Heroicall actes my feeble hand, but willing hart followeth with no small comfort. This Blessed MAGDALEN was Sister vnto Lazarus and Martha (as before I haue said) all three beloued of our Sauiour, as his diuine Secretary telleth vs heere in his Ghospell. Lazarus languishing with a long infirmity, not able to withstand any longer the terrible stroke of death, gaue euident si∣gnes that his life drew towards an end. The fearfull Sisters not without cause, suspecting
that which indeed followed, hoping to pre∣uent the danger by our Sauiours presence, wrote very briefly vnto him: Ecce quem amas infirmatur: Behold whom thou louest is sicke. Which letter being receiued by our Blessed Sauiour, according as his diuine Wisedome had decreed, he differred his coming vntill Lazarus was indeed departed this mortal life, and buried. After foure dayes he came vnto Bethania, where many people were assembled to comfort the sorrowfull Sisters. Martha vn∣derstanding of his comming met him by the way, before he was come into the Towne; Maria autem domi sedebat: and MARY stayed at home, not knowing that her Maister was so neere: but so soone as her Sister returned, and told her in her eare, that her Maister was come and called for her; Illa vt audiuit surrexit citò: So soone as she vnderstood, she start vp presently, and came vnto him in the place where Martha had left him. 2. But alas I am gone too soone from the house with her; let vs looke backe againe, let vs behold her weeping amongst the sorrow∣full company that came to comfort her, let vs marke attentiuely her quicke obedience when our Sauiour called her; for doubtlesse heere is matter worth the noting. Surrexit
citò: she arose quickly: Yea, yea, the hart of MAGDALEN could not rest when she knew that IESVS way at hand, when she heard her Maister named, neither did she so much as take her leaue of the companie, or tell them whither she went, but lett them doubtfull if she went to the Sepulcher to weepe for her departed brother, or not. Nor had she any rea∣son to make dalay, it was Vox dilecti pulsantis; the voyce of her beloued knocking at the dore of her hart, therfore she rose quickly, and in a trice she was with him. But o Blessed Saint runne not too fast, let me accompany thee in this happy course, let me talke with thee in the way: what desires boyled in thy hart? what flames of loue? what prompt obedi∣ence? what inward ioy ioyned with outward teares? what watchfull diligence looking e∣uery way to espie him? I see thy sorrow on the one side wil not let thee heare me, and thy ioy on the other caries thee from me. Thy Maisters name sounded in thy eares will not let thee giue eare vnto me; the abundance of thy teares do drowne thyne eies thou canst not see me, yet my faynting hart cannot chose but follow thee: and since I cannot heare thee speake vnto me, I will be so bold as harken what thou sayest to sweet IESVS,
when thou camest vnto him. 3. Dominesi fuisses hic, non esset mortuus frater meus. O Lord if thou hadst byn heere my bro∣ther had not dyed. Thus she spake vpon her knes at our Sauiours feet, for videns eum cecidit ad pedes eius: seeing him, she fell downe vpon her knees at the feet of her Maister, as her wonted home, doubting not but from thence she should receiue a salue for her grieued hart, or at least with his diuine presence mitigate her sights and teares. 4. But when the shining lampe of Eternity cast his beautifull countenance vpon that wa∣try cloud, it did not turne the cloud into a bright and gladsome hew, but rather (o Mi∣racle!) was himselfe inuested with the cloud of griefe, & lacrymatus est Iesus, and IESVS wept. O beautifull teares of Blessed MAGDALEN vnto the which CHRIST IESVS ioynes his teares! O strang Adamant of diuine loue of our deuout Pilgrime, who draweth water from the rocke, and reares from CHRIST himselfe! Now doubt not worthy Saint but thy brother will reuiue at thy request: now cease to weepe, thy reares haue done inough, they haue brought water of infinit valew, a dew of vnspeakable worth, and beyond all prize, which sprinkled vpon thy brothers
dead body will giue it life againe. Tell him therfore (vbi posuist is eum) where haue you laid him; shew him the place, bid him come and see, Veni & vide. And thus they led him vn∣to the graue, where the Almighty hand of the Sonne of God at the request of Blessed MAGDALEN shewed his diuine power ouer him, called him from out the earth, raysed him from Death, to the great comfort, and no lesse admiration of all that were present, especially of the two Sisters, and most of all of the Blessed MAGDALEN, by whose prayers (as the prayer of her Feast doth witnes) our Sauiour wrought this famous miracle. How Blessed Magdalen annoynted our Sa∣uiour againe before his Passion. Of the murmuration of Iudas, and how Christ defended her. CHAP. III. NOvv are we come to that Heroyical act of loue, for which our Sauiour would haue this Blessed Saint famous throughout all the world, to wit, the precious oyntment powred vpon his head a few dayes before his bitter death and passion; of which the holy Euangelistes vnto her pepetnall honour and
renowne do make most honourable men∣tion, where they speake of the box of pre∣cious oyntment that she brought and po∣wred vpon his head being at the table. And doubtlesse the variety of names which the holy Euangelistes vse to declare this oynt∣ment, easily giues vs to gesse at the excellent worth of it. Cambysis one of the most potent Kings of Persia, as a rare and singular gift, sent vnto the King of Aegypt a box of Alabaster ful of precious oyntment, wherby is sufficiently declared that it was a thing of great esteeme; and it was of Alabaster stone, which doth con∣serue the oyntments from corruption, as Pli∣ny witnesseth. And amongst all kind of oynt∣ments, that of most price, was that which the Euangelist calleth Nardus, the Spike-nard, as Clemens Alexandrinus noteth. It was also said to be vnguentum pisticum, that is, True, not fey∣ned or adultered. It was also called spicatum, because some oyles were made of the leaues of Nard, others of the Spike: this second was the true and best. Of this was the oyle of Blessed MAGDALEN, of exceeding great worth, in so much that by this argument the learned Cardinall Baronius concludeth, that Blessed MAGDALEN was very rich, who so often, and with such precious oyles so aboundantly
did powre them vpon our Sauiours head and feet. For it being the custome, that ghestes should be refreshed with this courtesy, how∣soeuer they who inuited our Sauiour perfor∣med their dutyes or not, yet Blessed MAGDA∣LEN of her part would not be wanting. Nei∣ther was she content to powre it vpon his head, as ordinarily they vsed, but also an∣noynted his feet, which being very delicate and tender, were with the labours of the way, and heae of the weather in such sort iniured, that they might well be capable of this charitable office, especially if (as many thinke) he went barefoot. 2. MARY therfore did take a box of this precious Spike-nard, a most fragrant oynt∣ment, saith S. Iohn, and did annoynt his feet, and againe did wipe them with her hayre. This oyntment was to be powred vpon the head, and so she did, as the other Euangelists write, but she bestowed part therof also vpon his feet, and afterward wiped it off againe with her hayres, as who should say, then it was fittest oyntment for her hayres when it had touched our Sauiours feet. Neither did she deale so niggardly, as to keep any of it from him, but breaking the box in peeces powred it vpon his head at the Table, that all
the house might be partaker of the vertue therof, & domus impleta est exodore vnguenti: and the house was filled with the fragrant odour of the precious oyntment. But where vertue shineth so bright, vice must needs repine, and where charity yieldeth so sweet a smell, enuy must needs belch forth her poysoning stench, and from whose venimous mouth must it come, or from what poysoned hart, but from that false-harted and treacherous Iudas, and that with the cloake of vertue, for shame and feare of being descryed? And what cloake did he chose, but the title of his care towards the poore? Quare hoc vnguentum non veijt trecentis de∣narijs, & datum est egenis? Why was not this oyntment sol for three hundred pence, and giuen to the poore? But there wanted not an eagle-eyed Euangelist, to discouer his mis∣chieuous intent, & lay him open to the view of the world in his deformed and vgly shape. He said not this (saith S. Iohn) because he ca∣red for the poore, but because he was a thiefe and carried the purse. O wicked wretch, doth thy mynd still runne on money! Is it not in∣ough that thou meanest to sell thy Maister for thirty pence, but yet thou must gape at other three hundred? and at this last fauour offe∣red him before his death, doth thy cankred
hart repine! 3. But perhaps some will say, that not only Iudas, but the rest of the Disciples (at least some of them) did no lesse, as the other Euangelists write. To which obiection I easily answere, that the other Euangelists by a figure do take one number for another, as they vse oftentymes to do: or else, as S. Augu∣stine and others expound, the rest hearing Iu∣das speake, they also spake of it, but they with true zeale and deuotion to the poore in∣deed, he with auarice and enuie: and there∣fore S. Iohn making no account of what the others said, only reuealeth the malicious in∣tent of Iudas, and calls him Theefe. 4. But why do I entertayne you so long with these speaches, and keep you from hea∣ring the defence of the deuout MAGDALEN? Why are you troublesome vnto this woman (saith CHRIST?) you say why should there be permitted so great a losse? I say, why do you molest her? You say it might haue been sold for three hundred pence: I say, Sinite illam, let her alone, she knoweth what she doth. You say, it might haue been giuen to the poore: I say, you haue the poore allwayes with you, but me you shall not allwayes haue so. You say, it is cast away: I say, it is a good worke,
and not cast away, but kept vntill the day of my buriall; and that she doth that now which then she shall want opportunity to performe. And besides, this which you think lost, is such a worke, that I will haue it registred in perpetuall memory for her grea∣ter honour and prayse, that wheresoeuer this Ghospell shall be preached in all the world, there shall be mention made of this heroycall act in memory of her. 5. It was thought to be a great losse, be∣cause it was of great price; yet our Blessed Sa∣uiour answered, as if it had been nothing, quod habuit hoc fecit: what she could do she did; for although the oyntment of it self was very precious as I haue shewed before, yet if two circumstances be noted, it will seem nothing at all, yea if it had been the most precious ie∣well in the world. For if we consider the person on whome it was bestowed, and the deuotion of her that gaue it, doubtlesse it will appeare litle or nothing, and therfore most fitly he said, quod habuit hoc fecit, she gaue what she had: because our Blessed Sauiour well saw, that in comparison of what she de∣fired to giue, or bestow vpon him, that was nothing in her hart. 6. But the inward rancour of Iudas his
infected mynd was more styrred vp with the great praise of Blessed MAGDALEN, and ther∣fore he went forthwith vnto the proude Scribes and enuious Pharisies, and there to sa∣tisfy his couetous mynd, and to be reuenged to the fill, he sold his deare and louing Mai∣ster for thirty pence. O wicked merchand, how ill hast thou made thy bargayne? Hast thou sold the treasure of Heauen and riches of the world for thirty pence? Hadst thou come vnto his Blessed Mother, or the deuout MAGDALEN, they would haue giuen thee much more, to haue left off thy bad inten∣ded purpose: but Auarice hath blinded thee, Malice hath wholy possessed thee, and ther∣fore I see no remedy for thee, since thou wile not returne againe to thy Maister, and aske pardon for so great a sinne, so soule a fault, and haynous offence. 7. Thus farre I haue followed my de∣uout Pilgrime step by step this third day of her tedious iourney: but now hauing lost her sight, and not knowing whither she is gone, I am constrayned heare to rest this night; and to morrow meane to make all diligent inquiry which way I may take to find her.
THE FOVRTH DAYES IOVRNEY. How Blessed Magdalen met our Sauiour carrying his Crosse to Mont Caluary, and was present at his ignominious Death. CHAP. I. NOVV had the rauening wolues ceased vpon the innocent Lambe of God, and were going to exe∣cute their last cruelty vpon him, himselfe carying a heauy Crosse vpon his back, where on he was to dy; when behold many deuout woman who had follo∣wed him before, and now meeting him, be∣gan most pittifully to bewayle so lamentable a spectacle and vntolerable abuse offered vn∣to the Sonne of God: amongst which were the Blessed Virgin his dearest Mother, and
our holy MAGDALEN his faythfull Penitent. And now was the shining light of the world Christ IESVS, brought vnto the last euening of his life, and his beautifull beames were quite obscured, by the darke cloudes of vgly death: yet did not our louing Pilgrime for∣sake her deare Maister in this so great extre∣mity, but with the Blessed Virgin stood most constantly at the foot of the Crosse with a wounded hart, beholding the bleeding woundes of him whom she loued more then her owne life. Stabat iuxta crucem Iesu mater eius, & soror matris eius Maria Cleophae, & Maria Mag∣dalene: Neere vnto the Crosse of Iesus stood his louing mother, her sister MARY Cleopha, and MARY MAGDALEN. Saint Mathew maketh expresse mention of there MARYES besides the Blessed Virgin, and saith many other deuout woman were there present also, out of which places we may easily gather the rare vertues of our Blessed MAGDALEN, to whose prayse (after Christ and his Blessed Mother) this my laborious Pilgrimage doth most of all tend. 2. Here therfore we must admire the great Cōstancy & true Fortitude of our Bles∣sed MAGDALEN, two fit branches to spring from the root of truest loue. She followed him in his preaching, seruing him with all
diligence; she grieued to see him dragged through the streets of Hierusalē with a huge Crosse vpon his back; she followed him vn∣to the Mont Caluary; there she stands as neere the Crosse as she can; there the weeps, sighes, and bewayles the losse of so deare a Maister, so louing a Lord, so sweet a Sauiour. The ancient Aegyptians in signification of true and immoueable affectiō were wont to paynt an Almond tree, and a doue siting at the roote of it, with this poesy: necdum cessat amor: loue ceaseth not as yet. Who doth not see vnder this florishing Almond tree, the Crosse, this groaning Doue to sit, and yet her loue not to cease, but rather to increase; necdum cessat amor. No, no, it was not false friendship grounded vpon tyme, and hanging vpon Fortunes wings; but that diuine loue which the holy Ghost saith, that in true friends doth neuer fayle, omni tempore diligit qui amicus est: A true friend loues allwayes. The Apostles promi∣sed to go and dye with him, but (alas) at the princh they left him, yet stood our Blessed MAGDALEN at the foot of the Crosse neare vnto him, not fearing any thing whilest she had her Maister in her sight, either dead or aliue. 3. Besides, if the vertues of a woman
may be gathered or ghessed at by the compa∣ny that she kept (as easily they may) behold in what cōpany our Blessed Pilgrime goeth: with IESVS, with his Blessed Mother, with the deuout MARYES, and holy women, and therfore worthy to be inserted into that holy Catalogue, as by the holy Euangelist she is. Great was the griefe of the Patriarke Iacob when he beheld the garnent of his beloued Sonne Ioseph besmeared with bloud, whereby he thought his child to be deuoured. Many were the treares of the louing parents of young Tobie, when they saw their sonne did not re∣turne at the day appoynted. How much did the Kingly Prophet lament the vntimely death of his beautiful Absolom, though disobe∣dient vnto him? How many teares did the Prophet Hieremy shed, seeing in spirit the de∣struction of the holy Citty of Hierusalem? With what griefe then would Blessed MAGDALEN lament, when she saw her deare Maister murthered before her face, & could not help him? What teares would she sheed in the ab∣sense of her only comfort? How much would she grieue at the vntimely death of the beau∣ty of the world obedient IESVS, and how could she but mourne to see the holy Citty of Hierusalem to be depriued, by hero owne blind∣nes,
of so rich a treasure! 4. Giue me leaue, o Blessed Virgin Mo∣ther, and Queene of Angells, by the greatnes of thy griefe to take a proportionable mea∣sure of the sorrowful pangs of weeping MAG∣DALEN. It is said of the Blessed Virgin, that the dolours of Childbirth (from which by particular priuiledge she was freed) were doubled at the foot of the Crosse at the tyme of our Blessed Sauiours Passion: so as the pro∣phesy of Simeon was fulfilled, tuam ipsius ani∣mam pertransibit gladius: the sword of his Passion shall passe through thy hart; and by this she is said to be more then a Martyr, as diuers Fathers write. Now if we will make a ghesse at the Blessed Virgins griefe, we must take it from the measure of her loue, and that being beyond all humane apprehension, the great∣nes of her griefe must also be vnspeakable. 5. Then with the same rule, and weight let vs descend vnto our Blessed Pilgrimes griefe. Her loue as our Sauiour witnesseth was great, and indeed the effect of it did shew it to be very great, dilex multùm: she loued much, and therfore by the same rule her com∣passion much, her sorrow great. 6. But perhaps some will say, I brag to much of her, being so neere the Crosse, when
the other Euangelists write, that they were all a far off. To which many not improbable answers many be giuen. For since S. Iohn saith, they stood neere, it must be so; and since the rest say, they stood a loofe off, it must not be denied. Perhapps therfore they were not so neere as the souldiers were, and they that crucified him, and so in comparison of them a farre off; yet not so farre off, but they might both see him, and heare him speake, as they did, when he spake to his Blessed Mother, and to the holy Euangelist: and in this res∣pect they might be said to be neere. Or else, at the first they were neere, as people vse to come as neere to the place of executiō as they can, especially at the death of those whome they loue; so at the first they might be neere and after be driuen back by the rude, discour∣teous and barbarous souldiers. Or perhaps at the first, they stood a loose, as S. Matthew and Saint Luke write, but afterward drew neere, and then our Sauiour spake, as S. Iohn witnesseth. She was therfore present at the death of CHRIST, at the seauen words which he spake, and all the while most constantly stood at the foot of the Crosse, in company of the Blessed Virgin.
How Blessed Magdalen was present at the taking downe of our Sauiour from the Crosse, and accompanied his sacred Body to the Sepulcher. CHAP. II. THE Redemption of mankind in most copious manner being finished, and the beloued Sonne of God hauing giuen vp the ghost towards the euening, two noble Dis∣ciples Nicodemus, and Ioseph of Arimathia hauing begged of Pilate the inestimable relique of the world, the Blessed Body of our Lord and Sa∣uiour IESVS CHRIST, they came and tooke it downe from the Crosse with all due respect and reuerence, in the presence, & (doubtles) with the help of the Blessed Virgin, and the rest of that deuout company: and hauing woone it vp in the best manner they could in that tyme and place, they caried it into a garden thereby, where was a sepulcher all∣ready made, wherein neuer any as yet had byn laid: and our deuout Pilgrime, as S. Luke noteth, followed vnto the monument, and tooke particular notice as well of the place where, as the manner how he was laid. 2. S. Matthew writteth, Erat autem ibi Ma∣ria
Magdalene, & altera Maria sedentes contra sepul∣chrum: There was MARY MAGDALEN, and an∣other MARY siting ouer against the sepulcher. Heere sate our wofull Pilgrime in a sad me∣ditation, thinking with her selfe, that she had not as yet bestowed her last farewell v∣pon him with her precious oyles, and ther∣fore she sate musing, and plotting with her selfe how she might find out some opportu∣nity to come and annoynt that sacred Body: but the next day being their Sabaoth, which was most strictly obserued amongst the Iewes, it was no little payne vnto her to thinke, that all the next day she could not come to take her last farewell of her liuelesse Maister. 3. S. Luke maketh mention of their com∣ming to the monument, how they viewed it, and noted the manner of the placing of his Body, viderunt monumentum, & quemadmodum positum erat corpus eius: They beheld the monu∣ment, and how the body was laid; which did playnely signify the vehemency, of their affection, and the great heed they tooke least they should mistake the place, and so be fru∣strate of their chiefest desires. And hauing taken such speciall notice therof, and of the circumstances of the buriall, they departed
home vnto Hierusalem, and so made ready their sweet spices and precious oyntments, that they might goe as soone as the Sa∣baoth should be past; for on the Sabaoth they rested, as the precept commaunded them. 4. By all which we may euidently see, the excessiue loue, and excellent charity of Blessed MAGDALEN towards CHRIST, perseue∣ring with him at the Crosse, following him to the Sepulcher, noting the place, & man∣ner of his buriall, buying of her oyles, prepa∣ring her persumes, as one that had nothing in her mynd but IESVS, nothing in her hart but CHRIST, nothing in her thought but whom she loued, and nothing else to imploy her la∣bours, but about her deare Maister, and lo∣uing Sauiour. O who could haue heard the feruorous speach and diuine conuersation of these holy MARYES, when they sate at the Se∣pulcher! when they retuned to Hierusalem! when they brought and prepared these sweet perfumes! Of how little esteeme would they thinke the most precious oyles and sweetest perfurmes, in respect of that sacred body vpon which these heauenly balmes were to be be∣stowed! How often would they mingle and temper them to make them more fragrant,
and fiting for such a Corse! how often would they imagine their hands now already in the worke, and their harts would bleed to be∣hold him dead, from whom they had recei∣ued life! How often would they wish the sunne would hasten his course, that it might be night the sooner, & the sooner day againe, that they might set forth to accomplish this their desire! Neither can I perswade my self, that any sleep could shut vp the watchfull eyes of Blessed MAGDALEN all that night, but with harty wishes, and longing desires she past that long day (as she thought it) and te∣dious night. How Blessed Magdalen goeth on Sunday morning to the Sepulcher to annoynt the sacred Body of her deare Maister. CHAP. III. NOVV had the neare approach of the gladsome Sunne giuen euident tokens that the dawning of the day was at hand, when behold the Blessed MAGDALEN, with the rest of the deuout MARYES began to take their iorney to the place for which they had so long prepared themselues. And heere doth our Blessed Pilgrime shew the firmenesse of
her loue. Neither would she stay that the brightnes of the sunne, or light of the day might direct her, but presently set forth cùm adhuc tenebrae essent, whilest it was yet darke, and so came vnto the monument by sunne rising. Their talke in the way was, Quis reuo∣luet nobis lapidem ab ostio monumenti? Who shall remoue the stone for vs from the dore of the monument? for the stone indeed was very great, as S. Marke witesseth. But that diffi∣culty quickly ceased, for they saw the stone remoued, and an Angell sitting vpon it, bidding them not to feare, for Christ was risen, and that they should go quickly, and tell the same to the Disciples; which they doing our Sauiour appeared vnto them in the way, where they imbraced and kissed his feet. 2. But seeing that S. Iohn maketh men∣tion of a pecular apparition vnto the Blessed MAGDALEN alone, and S. Marke saith, that our Sauiour appeared first to our Blessed MAGDALEN, it is like that he appeared twice vnto her. And because this apparition men∣tioned by S. Iohn doth euidently shew the ex∣cessiue loue of the Blessed Penitent, I am ob∣liged not to passe it ouer without particular discussion of so singular fauour. Our Bles∣sed
Saint therfore not finding her deare Mai∣sters dead body which she hoped to haue im∣balmed, she stood at the Monument without weeping; and as Loue is all wayes solicitous, she stooped downe to looke if any where she could see him, whom she so much loued, and without whom she thought she could not liue. And behold so diligently she searched for one, that she found two, and not Men but Angells, one at the head, another at the feet, who demaunded the cause of this her so great griefe and sorrow, Mulier quid ploras? Wo∣man why weepest thou? She soone replyed; tulerunt Dominum meum, & nescio vbi posuerunt eum: They haue taken away my Lord, & I know not where they haue laid him. Neither did she stay to make any further demand of them, or answere any further vnto them, but tur∣ning about looked for her dead Maister, who in shape of a Gardiner appeared vnto her, and she knew not that it was the Iewel she sought so much, nor the Treasure which could only make her rich: yet this she demaunded of him, Si tu sustulisti eum &c. If thou hast taken him away, tell me, and I will take him. He de∣maunded of her two things, why she wept, and whome she sought. She answered to both very strangly, If thou hast taken him
away: neither telling him, what Him she meant, nor knowing whome he was she spake vnto, as though all the world had knowne her mynd, seen her hart, and pittied her wunt; thus with excessiue loue she was transported beyond her selfe. 3. Then the bountifull goodnes of sweet IESVS would detayne his louing Disciple no longer in the maze of loue, but taking off the maske of his vnknowne shape, called her by her name, MARY, she answered Maister, and running to her wonted place, his feet, fell downe and imbraced them, which our Sa∣uiour forbidding said, touch me not, I haue not yet ascended vnto my Father; but go vn∣to my brethren and tell them, that I ascend to my Father, and yours, my God, and your God. Then came Blessed MAGDALEN, and told the Disciples: I haue seen my Lord, land thus he said vnto me. 4. O Blessed Sauiour, quàm dulcis te quae∣rentibus, sed quid inuenientibus? How sweet art thou to those who seeke thee, but what tonge can expresse the delight they feele who find thee? How then shall my weary pen be able to vnfold the great aboundance of ioy of this thy louing Disciple, who so diligently sought thee, and so happily found the! She sought
thee first in the Sepulcher and could not find thee, and therefore supposed she had quite lost thee. She sought thee dead and found thee aliue, & therfore doth not know thee; whom when she found, what force could detayne her from thee? But O Blessed MAGDALEN, since my faltring tongue is not able to vtter what my willing hart desireth, giue me leaue a little to sollace my selfe in this diuine Dia∣logue betwixt thy Louing Maister and thy selfe, and with my rude vnpolished muse to gratulate this thy vnspeakeable happines. Maria stabat admonumentum foris plorans. Mary stood at the monument without weeping. VVHEN Christ that Orient pearle, and shinning sunne VVas drownd in VVesterne streames vpon the Crosse, Then Magdalen her flouds of teares begun To shew her loue, and to be wayle her losse: Thus gold appeares, when purified from drosse. How at the monument she did deplore, Shall be her monument for euermore, No dismall death had darkned so her eyes, But watchfull diligence imbalm'd in woes, All clad in sable weed with mournefull cryes
For her deare Maister, to the place, she goes, And headlong into griefe her selfe she throwes. Her hart dismaid, her senses so be num'd As with her Maister she had byn intomb'd. But yet this little sparke of hope remaynd T'imbalme his body with her fragrant oyles, By this her labour at the least she gaynd Some little parcell of the former spoyles: In this her watch, and ward, she runnes, and toyles. But when depriud of that which her befell No tongue, no pen, nor hart the griefe can tell. No MARY more, but Mara be thy name, Let bitternes in thee thy name expresse Thine eyes, thy hart, thy sighes, thy sobbs the same, Yea, yea, such musicke must be thyredresse: This must recall thy former happynes: This mitigate thy sorrowes plungd in paine, This call thy louing Maister backe againe. But dolefull MAGDALEN behold at hand Heere comforters from heauen sent to thee, Behould two glorious Angells here do stand, And seeme to meruaile much these teares to see Looke vp, speake to them, aske them who they be. She naught regards the Angells that are sent, VVhom none but Lord of Angells can content.
But they to make the wound of griefe more deepe, And to renew the newly wounded sore, Demaund the cause, and aske her why see weep: VVhich words her tender hart in pieces tore, VVashed with teares and bleeding yet in goare. Yet answere will she make, though to her cost And comfort find to speake of whom she lost. T'was not inough with ignominious death, To take away the life of Life from me, VVhere on my dearest life, my spirit, and breath Depend no lesse then all the world may see Since neither heauen nor earth can comfort be. This not inough, the more my hart to stay My treasure rob'd, my Maister stolne away. Yet this not all that cuts my panting hart, And stabbes my dying soule with griefe a new, But hatefull Enuy with a fatall dart VVoundes me to death in taking from my view My Maister, ere I gaue the last adieu. And yet a further wound augments my feare, I neither know by whom, or when, or where. Thus to the Angells of the star-deckt Polc She giues a farewell with a silent songe, As if therewith she seemed to controle This their demaund that held her there too long, As cause from whence her further grieses had sprong.
And back vnto her former hope she goes, To weep and wayle, and tolament her woes. Neuer Aurora in the mornings prime Bedewd with stillest drops of pale sac'd night, Did seeme more beauteous in the summer time, VVhen Phebus spreades his glittring beames of light, Then did our weeping Pilgrime in the sight Of those who did behould the flowers of loue, And seas of teares, ech one another moue. From flames of loue, fountaines of flowing teares Sprong forth, and bubling with a sweet-tun'd voyce, Yield pleasant musike vnto all that heares: And heauen it selfe awaked with the noyse Could not but choose at these her teares reioyce. O strang effect of loues all-couering power, VVrought in this princely seat, & mighty tower. Thus casting oft her watry eyes about, To see if yet at length she could espy Her louing Maister, or could find him out VVho in her hart (though dead) could neuer dy, Though now indeed not dead, but stands her by, VVhome she so much with mornful teares lamēt, Yet seeing doth not know her chiefe content. For finding whome she sought she seekes to know, If he could tydings giue of whome she sought. O extasy, what is't that blindeth so
Her weeping eyes, and this effect hath wrought! O heauenly loue, that such an art hath taught, To see, to find, to aske, and to abtaine, Yet not to know, to purchase greater gaine! Then Christ to add more fewell to the fire, And to augment the Ocean of her teares, Disguis'd and masked in a strang attyre, Vnto his half-stayne MAGDALEN appeares, And soundes this dolefull ditty in her eares. VVoman why weep'st thou? what meanes all this moane? VVhome seek'st thou thus dismaid? thus all alone? She tells no cause of griefe, but soone replyes; If thou hast taken him from hence, but tell The graue, the place, the tombe wherein he lyes, She vowes to fetch him backe what ere befell, For nothing daunts the hart where IESVS dwell. Thus won with teares, he comes without delay, VVhom neither heauē, or earth, or hell could stay. And with a word giues life vnto her hart, That euer flowing griefe had almost kild, And vgly death stood ouer with a dart, But all to late, for now her hart was fild VVith heauenly ioyes, into the same instild. This word MARIA sounding in her eares, Asswag'd her griefe, stild sorrow, dried vp teares.
Neuer the chased hart with deadly wound, VVith swifter course vnto the fountaine hast, Then MAGDALEN, when she her Lord had found, VVho being knowne, then all her griefe was past: Thus heauenly loue still speedeth at the last. And to her wonted place his feet she hies, But this her suite her Maister now denyes. Denyes? O heauens! then MAGDALEN must dy, For only vpon this her life depended, Therfore sweet IESVS, if thou dost deny, Her sitting at thy feet, her life is ended. Poore MAGDALEN in what hadst thou offended? VVhat cloud had thus eclip'st thy morning sunne? Ending thy ioyes when they were scarce begun? No, no be not dismaid, tis nothing so, For other things he now designeth thee, Yea to his dearest Brethren thou must go, And tell the newes which thou thy selfe didst see, How he from pangs of vgly death is free, In Galilee for him they must attend, VVhence to his heauenly Father heele ascend. Thus MAGDALEN vnto th' Apostles went Bedecked with the beauteous beames of light VVhich vnto her the Sunne of Iustice lent, After the sable shroud of darkesome night, Loe how the sleeping Lyon shewes his might,
To men a woman newes of life to bring: And well, for death from woman first did spring Now MAGDALEN let cease thy mournfull teares, Thy Maister liues, and neuer more to dy; Then lay a side thy sighes, thy sobbs, thy feares, The ioyfull tunes of pleasing mirth to try, VVhich now thy Maister neuer will deny. Then preach his mercy to the worlds last coast, And sacrifice thy selfe a liuing hoast.
THE FIFTH DAYES IOVRNEY. The imployment of Blessed Magdalen, from the Resurrection of Christ, vntill her bani∣shment out of Iury. CHAP. I. OVR Blessed Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, hauing sent word vnto his louing Disciples by the deuout MARYES, that he would meet them in Galilee, and that there they should see him ascend vnto his Eternall Father, it is not to be doubted, but our happy Pilgrime amongst the first prepa∣red her selfe to be present at the last departure of her deare Maister, where we may belieue she tooke her last adieu with no lesse excesse and signes of loue, then she had alwayes be∣fore shewed in the rest of her life, where the
holy Euangelists haue made any mention of her, as in diuers places they haue copious∣ly done. And when she had with the Blessed Virgin & the holy company of the Apostles seen our Sauiour most triumphantly (to their great ioy, and vnspeakeble comfort) ascend vnto his heauenly Pallace, and Princly feate, and with them also receaued that copious blessing which our Lord gaue them, as S. Luke writeth, she returned with the same Apo∣stles, and deuout women into the Citty of Hierusalem, to expect the comming of the Holy Ghost, and there they remained in con∣tinuall prayer, as we read in the first Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said of them; Erant perseuerantes vnanimiter in oratione cum mulieribus & Maria matre Iesu, & fratribus eius. They were al perseuering togeather in prayer with the women, and MARY the Mother of IESVS, and his brethren. Amongst which wo∣men to accompany our Blessed Lady, to wait vpon her, and to serue her, as also to ex∣pect that diuine spirit promised vnto them, our Blessed Pilgrime was present, and at the comming of the Holy Ghost receaued her portion of heauenly grace amongst the rest. 2. Neither dare I be too curious to search, or too bold to define, how great a gift she
did receaue, but that I leaue to the mild Rea∣der to censure at his pleasure, hauing first con∣sidered the admirable beginnings, the con∣stant perseuerance, and the rest of the rare ver∣tues of this Blessed Saint, and to weigh with himselfe, that if grace be giuen according to the measure of loue (as it is wont) she that with her loue deserued remission of so many sinnes, followed our Sauiour so diligently; and by the same loue deserued to be the first vnto whom our Blessed Sauiour appeared after his glorious Resurrection (his holy Mo∣ther excepted) and besides was made the first denouncer of his triumphant victory ouer death, hell, and sinne, vnto his deare Apo∣stles. All these things (I say) considered, let him ghesse at the manifold guifts and graces that her Maister would now bestow vpon her, being in his Kingdome of heauen, who was so liberall vnto her before, being heere on earth. 3. Moreouer the grace of the Holy Ghost where it is, cannot be idle, but must shew it selfe according to the measure of it greatnes: if therfore we consider, the meruailous effects that it wrought in this glorious Saint (as after we shall see) we must needs confesse that the grace of the Holy Ghost was communi∣cated
vnto her in great aboundance. Eliz for hauing his eyes vpon his Maister, when he was carried vp into paradise, deserued not only his Maisters cloke, but also his double spirit. If then our Blessed MAGDALENS eyes and hart not only in the tyme of his Ascensiō were fixed vpon her dearest Maister, but al∣waies after as if he had caried her hart to hea∣uen with him, what graces, what succours, what clokes of vertueto couer her soule, what singular gifts to adorne her spirit, may we i∣magine she was indewed with? But wherfore doe I detaine my pen so long from setting downe the rare example of her admirbale vertues after her Maisters departure, by which (as I said before) the inward beauty of her in∣riched spirit will the better appeare. How Blessed Magdalen was banished out of Iury, being daungerously committed to the sea: and how miraculously she landed at Marsells in France. CHAP. II. NOVV doth my true and trusty guide S. Luke the Euangelist cause me to leaue the holy Land, and seeke my wanding Pil∣grime some where else. For hauing described
largly the death of the Blessed Protomartyr S. Stephen in the acts of the Apostles and 7. Chapter, in the next following he telleth vs that, Facta est inilla die persecutio magna in Ecclesia quae erat Hierosolymis, & omnes despersi sunt per re∣giones Iudeae & Samariae praeter Apostolos. And it hapned at that time, there was a great perse∣cution in the Church which was at Hieru∣salem, and all were dispersed through the coū∣tryes of Iewry and Samaria, sauing the Apo∣stles. But I find our Blessed MAGDALEN to haue byn too great a freind of Christ, to be permitted to liue either in Iewry or Samaria, for as the ancient tradition and opinion of many learned writers is, she was with her brother Lazarus, her sister Martha, Maximinus one of the Disciples of Christ, Ioseph of Arima∣thia and others, imbarked in a ship, without any guide, sayle, or oars, and so commit∣ted to the vast sets and mercylesse waues to be a prey for death. 2. But the all-seing eye of the prouidence of Almighty God, who hath care of the smal∣lest birdes of the ayre, and the least wormes vpon the earth, was not wanting vnto his lo∣uing and particuler children, in so great and imminēt daūger for his sake, but with a sweet gale of his diuine spirit brought them safe to
the place where he intended to be honoured by them. 3. O Blessed Saint, o happy Pilgrime, now cast thy fauourable eyes towards me, who haue so long followed thee, the vast Ocean, the surging waues, and threatning billowes shall not affright me, so I may be made worthy to follow thee, and behould the infinit goodnes of thy louing Maister still towards thee. He promised that where two or three be gathered togeather in his name, he will be in the middest of them; then how can it come to passe that so happy a company be∣ing gathered togeather in his name, and for the defence of his doctrine put themselues in daunger of their liues, that being now all which was left to loose for sweet IESVS sake; how can it be (I say) but he must be there in the midst among you, and therfore Blessed MAGDALEN I know thou fearest nothing. 4. S. Peter being yet but yong in fayth cried out vnto his Maister being asleep, Domine salua nos, perimus: but thou Blessed Saint lear∣nedst to beleeue, and hast forgot to feare, and canst remember nothing else but loue, which indeed admits no troublesome feare, perfect charitas for as mittit timorem. O that my weake vnderstanding were able to conceaue who
diuine speaches our B. MAGDALEN would make vnto her deare and louing Mater, how much she would thanke him for so singuler a benefit, as giuing her so fit an occasion to suf∣fer losse of goods, to be banished out of her country, & put in ieopardy of her life for his sake, who she so dearly loued: how often would she say, if it be thy diuine will (sweet Sauiour) that I should be made a prey vnto these greedy fishes, behould I am ready to o∣bay; if it be thy pleasure that these deep seas should be my tomb, here I am prepared to accpet of it; if thou dost delight to see me tos∣sed vp and downe these waters, & coasts, thy will be done; if thou wilt direct me to any place to spread the glory of thy holy and ve∣nerable name, Ecce ancilla Domini, behould thy handmaid ready at thy call. Finally whatsoe∣uer may be most pleasing in thy sight, though most contrary to my sense, let that befall me. These and such like deuour speaches would our Blessed MAGDALEN like fiery dartes send vp to heauen vnto her Maister, who was not absent from her, & thus spend her time both day and night vntill by the direction of the holy Ghost they were all brought safely into France, and there landed at Marselles. 5. Long time was the Arke of Noë tossed
vpon the huge waters of the Deluge, vntill at length, the mercy of Almighty God, ouer∣flowing his Iustice, he withdrew his wrath∣full reuenge, and the Arck rested vpon the mountaynes of Armenia. Long had our Bles∣sed Pilgrime byn tossed in the dangerous seas, vntill at the length the mercyfull hand of her louing Maister, brought her to the moun∣taynes of Marsilia, where after she had concur∣red to the conuersion of those Countryes, and spread her Maisters heauēly doctrine in those parts, she chose her selfe a little habitation, where for the space of thirty yeares she liued in contemplation of the diuine mysteries of the life and Passion of her dearest Lord and Sauiour, as anone we shall see.
THE SIXTH DAYES IOVRNEY. Of her Pennance in the Desart. How Blessed Magdalen gaue her selfe wholy to a Contemplatiue life. CHAP. I. BY the diuine sentence our Sa∣uiours mouth, our Blessed Pil∣grime had chosen the best part, that is to sit at his sacred feet, and heare his diuine Sermons; and now she is gone to fly as it were out of the world after him, and in this remote and hidden place, to giue her selfe wholy vnto the sweet contemplation of his mysterious Life and Passion, and vnite her selfe so per∣fectly with him, that she might therby make that happy part which she had chosen so sure, as it should neuer be taken from her. 2. The cause and manner of our Blessed
MAGDALENS chosing this place, I find writ∣ten by Siluester (in Rosa aurea) a graue Author thus: So great was the fauour, and respect, which the people began to beare vnto this Blessed Saint, after those Countryes were conuerted, that our holy Pilgrime was thin∣king with her selfe very seriously how she might auoid such popular applause, which she did as carefully seeke to shunne, as others do diligently seeke and hunt after. And be∣hould her deare Maister was nothing wan∣ting to her good desires, for she was miracu∣lously taken and caried to the said desart, and placed before the mouth of a vast Caue, which afterward she liued in, where no lesse mira∣culously she was defended from venemous and poysoning serpents, and by S. Michael vn∣derstood that it was the will of her sweet IE∣SVS, that she should serue him there in that sort, & that she should be a rare Patterne and singular Example of true pennance vnto all posterity. 3. Wherfore Blessed MAGDALEN behol∣ding her selfe in the safe creuises of this rocke free from all accesse, she gaue most harty thankes vnto her Lord and Maister, desiring that he would vouchsafe to yield her a flow∣ing fountaine of water thereout, which
by her humble entreaty and deuout prayers she obtayned. Then aboue a thousand euill spirits enuying at her great happynes, visibly appeared, and in the Hebrew tongue began to make most sweet and melodious harmony; which, when more diligently she did harken vnto, hearing them say that she must not vse so much prayer, suspecting them to be (as indeed they were) diuells, she cried out to her IESVS, & presently S. Michael was present with his army, saying, Adsum Magdalena, ne timeas: I am here MAGDALEN, feare not: who expelled all her enemyes, and lefther free from all mo∣lestation, where afterward she liued as in a Paradise, and was rapt seuen tymes in a day, to heare the celestiall musick of the An∣gells, singing prayses vnto Almighty God: where our Sauiour did appeare vnto her, and did comfort her, and in the space of thirty yeares, which she liued in that desert, he ap∣peared vnto her an hundred and ten times. All this and much more you may read in the Author a foresaid, reuealed by her selfe vnto a holy man called Elias.
Of the excellency of Pennance, and how gratefull a Sacrifice it is vnto Al∣mighty God. CHAP. II. IF a man should fall into some daungerous disease, whereby he should be brought to such an estate, that nothing could be expected but death; that antidote, doubtlesse, would be accompted excellēt, which should bring with it a present remedy. If one should be bitten with some venemous beast; that would be thought the chiefest coūterpoyson that should presently cure it. Finally if one should fall in∣to some hideous pit, or deep dungeon wher∣out there were no hope at all to escape by his ownediligence; he should be esteemed a faith∣full friend who should release him from this extreme misery. But alas, what disease may be compared to a Mortall Sinne, what stin∣ging Viper so dangerous, or what danger of misery so much to be lamented; and therfore the vertue of pennance much to be esteemed, which is the only Medicine to cure this di∣sease, the only Antidote against this poyson, and the sole refuge to get forth of this dread∣full depth of misery & sinne. All men (except
by some particular priuiledges) are concea∣ued and borne in sinne, for remedy whereof Christ hath left the Sacrament of Baptisme in his Church, whereby the soule is inuested with the nuptiall garment of Grace. Where∣fore if this garment be once spotted or stay∣ned with the bemish, or mackle of mortall sinne, there is no other remedy, but the water of true pennance to wash it out, and there∣fore by the Fathers it is called the second Table after shipwrack, for vnlesse they lay hand vpon this table of wholesome pennance, they sinck downe into the bottomeles pit of eternall perdition. 2. The Cherubim that kept the gate of Pa∣radise is said to haue had a sword, yea and a fyery sword, and that it was continually in motion, to giue vs to vnderstand, that vnto Paradise there is no accesse but by woundes, by mortificatiō, by affliction, & by the sword of pennance, which is also a fyery sword: for as fyre doth both burne and giue light, euen so true pennance doth burne vp the sinnes it findeth, and besides giueth vs light to walke in the path and right way to Heauen: therfore it is in continual motion, to signi∣fy that none can enter, but they must be tou∣ched by it. And that our Sauiour expresly
saith, Nisi poenitentiam egeritis, omnes simul peribitis; Vnlesse you do pennance you shall perish eue∣ry one. Therfore for our example, the three Kings after they had found our Sauiour, he taught them to returne vnto their Country another way, Per aliam viam reuersi sunt in regio∣nem suam: that by this we who haue left our Country (to wit Paradise) through Pride, Disobedience, Auarice, and the like, must by the contrary vertues of Humility, Obedi∣ence, Liberality, and such like, ioyned with Pennance, retourne vnto it. And this is the gratefull Sacrifice that appeaseth the wrath of God, as the Kingly Prophet by experience teacheth; Sacrificiam Deo spiritus contribulatus: cor contritum & humiliatum Deus non despicies A Sacri∣fice to God is a troubled spirit: an humble and contrite hart (o God) thou wilt not des∣pise. 3. Which may very well be confirmed by the Parable of the lost sheep, which the sheephard taketh vpon his back, and calleth his neghbours togeather to reioyce with him for that he hath found the sheep which was lost. And moreouer he auerreth that, gaudium angelorum est incaelo super vno peccatore poenitentiam agente, That the Angells in heauen reioyce at the conuersion of one sinner, more then at
many other must that need not repentance. What meaneth also the louing receite of the prodigall child, but the great loue where∣with Almighty God receaueth sinners, when they come vnto him with true repentance? This was the continuall cry of the holy Bap∣tist in the desert; this the matter of our Saui∣our his Sermons; this the all arme of the A∣postles after Christ his Death, Resurrection and Ascension; finally this the only remedy of a wounded soule. 4. What changed Zacchaeus from the Prince of the Publicans, to a follower of Christ, but Pennance? By this the other Publican S. Mat∣thew was made a great Saint and a worthy Apostle. By this the good thiefe deserued to heare, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. By this the notable persecutor of the Church Saul, became a Paul, the Apostle and Doctour of the world. Finally by this our Blessed MAGDALEN of a sinfull woman became to fol∣low CHRIST, and became so rare a Saint, so great a Penitent, and so much esteemed of CHRIST, and honoured of all; who was not only content with the inward sorrow and griefe of her sinnes, by which she obtayned forgiuenes therof, but now she chooseth a place, where she may still weep and bewayle
them vntill her dying day; and where she may afflict and punish her selfe, and giue most humble thankes vnto her Lord and Maister, who dealt so mercifully with her, when he said, remittuntur tibi peccata tua; thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Therfore no meruaile if with this guide she became so famous a Courtier of Heauen, worthy to be visited so often, not only by Angells seauen times a day, but by our Sauiour himselfe an hundred and ten times, as before I haue noted. Thus excellent is the vertue of Pennance, and thus gratefull in the sight of God: therfore must be estee∣med of all, sought of all, by the rare example of this Blessed Saint, whome CHRIST hath left vs, to the end, that we may follow her happy steps, to his honour and glory, and our owne eternall happynes. How fit a place of Pennance Blessed Mag∣dalen did choose. CHAP. III. THrice hapy Saint, thy part was iudg'd the best, VVhen at the feet of Christ thou first secure, In shaddow of th' Allmightyrocke to rest, From whence no sweet-tun'd Svrens could allure, That Rocke with milke and hony did abound: But in this Rocke what pleasure to be found?
The hardest stones inlieu of bedds of dourne Must serue, and hunger for the chiefest meate; The cragy Rocke it selfe doth seeme to frowne, That any thither come to choose their seate: The place forelorne, cold, barren, all things scaut, Only a great aboundance of all want. VVhat strong election, what vnwonted choyce Caus'd, or compell'd thee thus to take thy flight, Both from the world, and from the very voyce Of humane conuersation, banisht quite? VVhat wrought this suddain change, what Eagles winger Can mount thee thus aboue all earthly thinges? Ah pardon gracious Pilgrime, now I see The chiefest reasons of thy wondrous choyce; Loue ioyn'd with Pennance thus haue mounted thee VVith Christ to speake, with Angells to reioyce; Seauen tymes a day by force of loue ascending, VVith troupes of Angells at thy side attending. O happy Rocke from whence this sacred Doue, Did take her slight to view that statly tower; VVhere for reward, and guerdon of her Loue, She built her selfe an euerlasting bower. Thus seeing still she loues, and louing tast That heauenly food, which euermore shall last.
Is barren Rockes haue melted with thy teares, And hardest stones growne soft where thou didst rest; Sith nought but hardnes in my hart appeares, Vouchfase this fauour, graunt me this request: That in this craggie Rocke and stonie hart Of myne, thou wilt accept the better part. And frame it so, that like the mourning Doue It may lament what erst is done amisse; And burning thus in flames of heauenly loue, It may deserue a portion of that Blesse, VVhere Christ hath plac'd thee (Blessed) to inuite Those sinnefull soules who wander in the night.
THE LAST DAYES IOVRNEY, from solitary Pennance, to Eter∣nall Happynes. How Blessed Magdalen knew she was to de∣part this life. And how she receieued the Blessed Sacrament. CHAP. I. CONCERNING this last passage of our deuout & happy Pilgrime thus writeth Villegas, a graue and Learned Doctour out of others. Saint MARY MAGDALEN after she had conuerted many soules vnto God, retired her selfe into a caue of the desart, where she led a solitary life for the space of thirty yeares or there about. Her diet was herbes & roots: her clothes were all consumed, but God co∣uered her with her owne hayre. She was lif∣ted
vpin the ayre by Angels seauen tymes in the day and night, and during that tyme she heard Celestiall harmony. This was seen at the end of thirty yeares (after she had retyred herselfe) by a Priest who was gone into the same desart to serue God. MAGDALEN told him who she was, and desired him to govn∣to S. Maximinus, and to wish him from her to come alone vnto the Church on Sunday following at the houre of Mattins. The Priest did as the holy Saint willed him, & S. Maximinus reioyced greatly at this new em∣bassage. Sunday came, and he at the houre ap∣poynted went to the Church, where he found S. MARY MAGDALEN in the middest of many Angels eleuated two cubits from the ground, making her prayer with her armes spread abroad. The holy Bishop gaue her the Blessed Sacrament, which after she had recea∣ued very reuerently and deuoutly, she gaue vp the ghost; the Angells caried her soule into heauen with great ioy; and her body was buried in the same place. Thus farre Villegas. 2. By which we may gather the great loue and singular fauours of our Blessed Saui∣our to his deuour Penitent. Neither was it sufficient with so many particular priuiledges to grace her, and so often to visit her, but
that he would also let her vnderstand before of her death, that she might come and aime her selfe with that sacred food, and like ano∣ther Elias valiantly passe the rest of her iorney and Pilgrimage, now growing towards an end; and so giue vp her Blessed Soule into the hands of her louing Maister, who so greatly loued her, so strongly guarded her, and now so louingly inuiteth her. Of Moyses the great seruant of Allmighty God it is said, Mortuus est Moyses seruus Dei iubente Domino: Moyses the seruant of God departed this life, our Lord commaunding it. So may we say of our Bles∣sed Pilgrime, Mortua est Magdalena discipula Chri∣sti, iubente Domino: that MAGDALEN the Dis∣ciple of Christ died at his commaund. For hauing receiued the Blessed Sacrament, infol∣ding that sacred Body in the armes of her lon∣ging soule, altogeather inflamed with diuine loue, now with the Spouse crying out tenui, nec dimittam, that she had her Beloued, nor would she stay behind him any longer, and he moued with the longing desire of this happy Pilgrime, denied not her sute, but granted her demaund, and tooke her with him into eternall blisse and happynes.
Of the greatnes of the glory of Blessed Mag∣dalen in Heauen. CHAP. II. IT is not my intention in this Chapter ei∣ther rashly to designe what degree of glory our Blessed MAGDALEN hath in the Celestiall Court, or contentiously to striue to place her aboue other Saints; but only to proue that she hath a great Crowne in Heauen, and that I know no true Christian will denie. 2. Wherfore let vs see what pregnant reasons we can produce to shew the greatnes of the glory of this Blessed Saint. First it is a certayne and infallible ground, that Glory is giuen according to the Charity that euery one hath, and accoridng to the greatnes of their Charity they shall shine euery one in their degree, as S. Paul writeth; alia claritas solis, alia claritas lunae, alia claritas stellarum: stella enim dissert à stella in claritate, sic & resurrecti mortuorum. There is one clearnes of the sunne another of the Moone, and another of the Starres: for as one starre differeth from an∣other in brightnes, so also doth the resur∣rection of the dead. And S. Augustine sayth Promissa est diuersa species claritatis, quia diuersa su
merita charitatis, there is promised a different kind of brightnes, because there be diuers me∣rites of Charity: and to this purpose S. Hie∣rome, and diuers others interprete that of the Prophet Daniel: Qui autem docti fuerint, fulgebunt quasi splendor firmamenti, & qui ad iustitiam erudiant multos, quasi stellae in perpetuas aeternitates. The learned shall shine as the brightnes of the Fir∣manent, and they who induce others to ver∣tue, like starres for euer. The crowne there∣fore is giuen according to the measure of Charity. Moreouer the diuine Wisedome of Allmighty God doth manifest vnto his Church many tymes by particuler fauours done vnto Saints, whilst they liue amongst vs, how great they are in his sight, and by this giueth vs to gesse at the glorious crowne he hath prepared for them in Heauen. This being so, though no humane wit is able to cōceiue the glory of the least Saint in Heauen, yet by these aforsaid signes we may perceiue them beyond our reach, and so admyre them. 3. If then on the one side we will consi∣der the rare vertues of our Blessed Pilgrime, and especially her burning loue, which (as Christ himselfe witnesseth) was great, because she loued much; and againe the singular fauours of Christ shewed vnto her, euen in this life,
we may easily imagine what place he hath reserued for her in heauen which she now in∣ioyeth. By loue she obtayned a full remission of all her sinnes; by Loue she followed Christ, giuing him both her selfe, and what she had (being very rich.) Loue placed her at the foot of the Crosse to see him dye; Loue made her seeke him dead, whē she knew him not aliue; Loue made her not to feare the dangers of the raging seas; Loue ledd her into the silent desart; Loue brought our Sauiour so often downe vnto her; Loue mounted her so often to heare the heauenly melodie and harmony of glory; and finally Loue hath caried her to Eternall blisse, and crowned her with a glo∣rious diademe of neuer-ending happines. 4. O Blessed Sauiour, true sheepheard of soules, and sweet sollace of wretched sin∣ners, I giue thee most humble and harty thankes for all these benefits, & tender Loue shewed vnto this most happy woman. Pray∣sed be thy Name for euermore; let thy infinit Wisedome shine to the worlds end; let thy vnspeakeable mercy euer be pronounced a∣boue all thy workes; let thy powerfull and Allmighty hand be knowne to al weake and feeble sinners, that taking hold vpon that happy rocke, by example of this penitent Pil∣grime,
thy may escape the dangerous gulfe of sinne, and bottomeles pit of Eternall perdi∣tion. O holy MAGDALEN, o glorious Saint, o happy Pilgrime, behold I haue inquired after thee, I haue followed thee with my penne further, then (alas) with my body I am able to ascend: thou art secure, I in feare; thou in the safe hauen, I in the tempestuous sea; thou in quiet rest, I in perpetuall labour. Help o Blessed Saint with thy potent pray∣ers, that I may ouercome the feare, escape the dangers, profit in my labours, and at the length come vnto thee. Amen. Of some Myracles, testifying the Sanctity of Blessed Magdalen. CHAP. III. THE feast of this Blessed Saint is celebra∣ted on the 22. day of Iuly, which was the day of her death in the yeare of our Lord 64. and in the tyme of the Emperour Domitia∣nus. In a Monastery of S. Dominicks Order in those parts, as Surius and Villegas witnes out of Syluester Pierius, are most certayne testimonyes of her Sanctify. There is shewed the head of this holy Saint; it hath on the forehead some skin, and there appeareth the place where
our Sauiour touched her with his finger in the Garden, when he said, noli me tangere: there is also seene an arme of this holy Saint, and some of her hayres in a vessell of glasse; the rest of her Body is there kept in a siluer Shryne. 2. There is also seene in a glasse a little earth somewhat redd, which as it is said, Blessed MAGDALEN gathered at the foot of the Crosse, when IESVS CHRIST was crucified thereon. The Religious men of that Couent affirme, that euery yeare on Good Friday, the said bloud mingled with the earth doth seem to boyle. And the most of these things she re∣uealed her selfe vnto Charles the second King of Sicilie, in the yeare of our Lord 1279. whom she miraculously deliuered out of prison, and brought him home to Narbona, telling him where, and by what signes he should find out her Reliques, which in tyme of Warre, for feare of being abused by the enemyes, had byn hydden and transported; all which with a gratefull mynd he did fulfill, as the said Au∣thors write. Many also be the myracles and benefits that God hath wrought in this & o∣ther places, by the intercession of the glorious Saint S. MARY MAGDALEN vnto many de∣uout persons, whome she hath deliuered out
of danger both of body and soule. 3. One notable thing I read, which ma∣keth greatly to her glory, written by Surius, in the life of S. Catherine of Siena, and this it is. On a tyme our Blessed Sauiour with his Vir∣gin Mother appeared vnto this worthy Saint and holy Virgin, togeather with S. MARY MAGDALEN, & pro eius consolatione saith Surius) voluit eamipsam Beatissimam Magdalenam esse illi matrem: for the consolation and comfort of Saint Catherine, he would haue the most Bles∣sed MAGDALEN to be her Mother. And how gratefull a gift this was vnto her, the words following do testify: Fuit hoc sanctae Virgini gra∣tissimum, & cum multa humilitate se illi commenda∣bat, at{que} deinceps semper eam matrem dicebat suam: This was most gratefull vnto the holy Vir∣gin, and with great humility she vsed to com∣mend herselfe vnto her, and euer afterwards called her Mother: and was also a great imi∣atour of her, especially in diuine contem∣plation & perfect loue with CHRIST, till her dying day. 4. Neither is it much that this Blessed Saint Catherine did so greatly esteeme her, and call her Mother, since the Catholike Church teacheth vs all to do the like:
Pia mater & humilis, Naturae memor fragilis, In huius vitae fluctibus, Nos rege tuis precibus. Pious and humble Mother deare, Remember vs of brittle mold; And in these stormy waues of feare, Vs orphans with thy prayers vp hold. Which title of Mother I do not find to be giuen to any other Saint (the Blessed Virgin excep∣ted) in respect of the vniuersall Church, but vnto her. Therfore if we be in the Catholike Church, we must haue Blessed MAGDALEN for our Mother: and doubtles if we behaue our selues as true children, she will shew her selfe a most tender Mother indeed, and manifest her truest loue and affection vnto vs. And this is the reason why I do not maruell, that I find so many deuoted to this glorious Saint; some because they haue been great sinners, others because she loued much, and all because she is our Mother. And if any should be found who are not deuout vnto her, it procedeth either of Pride, that they acknowledg not them∣selues sinners, nor thinke to stand in need of such a Patronesse; or else of Ingratitude, not to be myndfull of so louing a Mother, giuen
them by the Holy Church; or lastly of Igno∣rance, that they know her not to be the mo∣ther of all sinners: which ignorance I will easily pardon if heereafter they will amend. 5. Thus haue I endeauoured to the vtter∣most of my power, to paynt forth the vertues of this happy Pilgrime. And well I say to paint, for as paynting is but a shaddow of what indeed it representeth; so whatsoeuer I haue said, or can write in the largest volumes, are but shaddows, and representations of her true and solide Vertues: which I must needs acknowledg as farre beyond my reach, as a liue man is to be preferred before one that is paynted. And if there be any thing in this Treatise that may induce any one to follow Vertue, & fly Vice by her example, the prayse be to Allmighty God, and to this Blessed Saint. If any thing, that may seeme to breed either scandall or offence, I desire pardon, ho∣ping my good intention may excuse me.
A DIALOGVE BETWENE A DEVOVT SINNER and his Patronesse Saint MARY MAGDALEN. SINNER. WHilest wanton Poets with their ranging wits, Clymbe to the toppe of high Parnassus hill; And choose the Muse that best their fan∣sie fits, Their humor please, & satisfy their will, And at the Muses sountayne learne their skill: Ile change this course, Ile clymbe a holter moūtayne, Ile seeke a happier Muse, a better fountayne. Sweet MAGDALEN the Mother of my Hart, Be thou the Muse, the Fountayne, and the Hill; Some reliques of thy teares to me impart, That mourning I may sigh, and weep my fill, For good omitted, and committed ill. A fault once done can hardly be amended Only by sorrow that we haue offended.
Magdalen. VVhen sorrow drownes thy hart, and teares thyne eyes, Then art thou fit thy Patronesse to view; Neuer with her thou better sympathize, Then being vested in that watry hew, And all be sprinkled with that heauenly dew. Be not affraid I come not to affright thee, But rather with my presence to delight thee. S. VVho speakes? M. Thy Magdalen. S. But where? M. Heere by thee. S. And thy deare Maister, where is he? M. In glory. S. I aske to follow him. M. Heele not denie thee. S. Ah, but I haue offended him. M. Be sory. S How should I do it? M. Marke then well my story: Loue rayseth teares, by teares loue still increaseth; And thus by loue and teares his anger ceaseth. S. I call to mynd when first thou did'st beginne, To wash his sacred feet with floods of teares; M. Do thou the like, bewayle, lament thy sinne, Let hope support thy hart, abandon feares: In this thy loue, in this thy griefe appeares. And being freed from bondage, looke not backe, But follow Christ, and seeke for what thou lacke. Sit at the Crosse and weepe to see him stayne, VVho for thy loue his life esteem'd as naught;
To sit and mourne with him do not disdayne, VVho thee, lost sheep, through all the world hath sought, And with his pricelesse precious bloud hath bought. View him vpon the Crosse, and choose this part, Then take him downe, and bury him in thy hart. There will he teach thee how to loue him best, VVho in thy hart so louingly is plac't; Thy conscience then with quietnes and rest, Thy hart with ioy and comfort shall be grac't; All ruines shall be rays'd that were defac't. Take courage, with my suffrage ile defend thee, And at the houre of death I will attend thee. S False world, all earthly things farewell, adiew; Too long intangled in thy nets, and snares I struggled to be free; but now to view A fayrer Citty do I bend my cares: VVho beaten is by tyme, in tyme bewares. To thee my selfe I giue sweet Saint, heere take me; I vow, in life or death ile neere forsake thee. FINIS.
