A3943 R35834 [ocm]15564847 103799
THE TRUE LIGHT Owned and Vindicated, AND THE BELIEVERS IN IT DEFENDED: AND Blasphemy and Blasphemers Justly Detected. Rom. 2. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever thou art, that judged: For wherein thou judgest another, thou con∣demnest thy self; for thou that judgest, doest the same things. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.
TO THE READER. Friendly Reader, ONE Eminent Proof of a Christian is, a Peace∣able Spirit, and his living, as much as in him lies, at Peace with all Men: Indeed it is a State and Station so desireable by us, that had we met with Reflections and Revilings which were only Personal, we value the Peace and Comfort of Retire∣ment so much, that we should have willingly lain down under it, with only speaking to the Persons that have injured us: But the occasion of our now appearing is Doctrinal, and in Defence of the Holy Light within, which some Priests in Norfolk have Charged with Exposing Us, the Followers of it, to Blasphemy, as taught by us. Now our Opposers pretend to Accuse Us out of the Writings of some of our Friends, but have hitherto dealt unfairly by us, in refusing us the Knowledge of those Books, and their Pages, wherein they are dis∣satisfied; which, if they had granted us, it might have made way for an Amicable Satisfaction. We have been Conversant with some of the Wri∣tings of our Friends, but know not any Book (to be just to the Author) that has any such gross Conse∣quence to be drawn from it; if we met with any thing of that Nature, we should with Sincerity Detest the same: And we have desired Justice in this respect, viz. To know the Name of the Author, Book and Page;
but they have denied us, which makes us conclude, that it is a contrived Business by them, 1st. To cast that Scandal and Odium upon us, and then endeavour to Incense the Government against us. And indeed their Practice in our Country of Norfolk, to stir up some Mgistrates against us, and to carry it further, viz. To Incense the Government, doth sufficiently shew, that it was a design: Yet we know there is an Over-ruling Power, that bounds and limits all things, and before him we spread our Cause, and doubt not, but he will be our Helper in every Exercise, that comes up∣on us. And this know, tho' we have returned the Charge upon these our Adversaries, it is not that we delight in Controversie, but to Vindicate that Glorious Truth, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath made known unto us. And now we Appeal to all People, that have had knowledge of us, whether we have Acted like Blas∣phemers: For God knoweth our Hearts and Consciences, we are not Conscious to our selves herein. This is our tender and just Request to all that shall read this ensuing Treatise, Lay aside all Partiality, and (Noble Berean-like) examine the Testimony of Scripture, and see whether what we have herein Asserted be not Con∣sonant therewith.
THE TRUE LIGHT Owned and Vindicated, &c. COntroversie we love not, but are concern'd to appear in the just Defence of our Holy Pro∣fession; and at this time, more Principally, of that divine Light within, which being struck at by certain Priests in Norfolk, who are in an eager Pursuit after us, as though they had a design to devour us at once; and for that end, they have endeavoured to blacken the People called Quakers with most gross Charges of Blasphemy, and in as high a Nature as well could be Exhibited against a People: And all this with a design to render us Obnoxious to the Go∣vernment, who have granted us the free Exercise of our Consciences towards God: For which Priviledge we have been and are truly Thankful unto God and the Government, and hope we shall never give occasion unto them to abridge us of the same. But we being of late Exposed in Print, by a Charge of Blasphemy, and several loud Clamours, as though we were Blasphemers; and that Henry Meriton, John Meri∣ton, and Laurence Parke, the Priests aforesaid, might do their Business effectually, in Charging us, they have given under their Hands, in their first Letter, these Charges, viz. That we, the People called Quakers, are guilty of Blasphemy; take it in their own words (say they)
I. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against God. II. We Charge you with Blasphemy against Jesus Christ. III. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against the Holy Scriptures. Very high, and most severe Charges; and to com∣pleat and confirm their Charges, says, in their Fifth Charge, V. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, leaves you without any certain Rule, and exposes you to the fore-mentioned, and many other Blasphe∣mies. Now this being Assigned by them, for the Exposing Cause of the afore-mentioned, and many other Blas∣phemies; we shall make it appear, that it hath no such Tendency, or Exposing Cause or Effect in it: So we may conclude the whole Structure of their Charges, being built upon it, becomes Null and Void; and in∣stead of Proving the Quakers Blasphemers, they (the aforesaid Priests) have brought the Guilt of Blasphemy upon themselves, in all those Particulars, they have Charged the Quakers withal, which is plainly Proveable upon them: And God will plead with them, for that great Indignity they have offered to his Divine Being, who is the Glorious and Everlasting Light, and Shines in Man. It's probable these Men see not what they have done; for Prejudice hath blinded them, and drawn them into a Fierce Pursuit of the Quakers, and that causlessly too, which has insnared themselves. But had they minded that Exhortation of Paul, Philip. 4. 5. they had not lost the Conduct of Modera∣tion, which might have kept them back, from wrong∣ing an Innocent People, and also have preserved them from that Guilt of Blasphemy they have brought upon themselves; and the Beam is in their own Eyes, Mat. 7.
3, 4. And they are taken in their own Snare, which they have laid for the Quakers. Here are their Charges truly Stated and Applied, according to what they im∣port, against the Quakers. Pr. I. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against God. Qu. How cometh this to be so? Pr. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to Blaspheme God. Pr. II. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against Jesus Christ. Qu. How cometh this to be so? Pr. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to Blaspheme Jesus Christ. Pr. III. We Charge you, with Blasphemy against the Holy Scriptures. Qu. How cometh this to be so? Pr. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to Blaspheme the Holy Scriptures. Ay! And not only the fore-mentioned, but many other Blasphemies, the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you unto. Now let all Moderate People judge, by what here followeth, whether these Men before-mentioned are not become Guilty of Blasphemy themselves, in every respect, as is above-said: For First, We do Solemnly, and in good Conscience, Testifie and Declare, in be∣half of the People called Quakers, That they Profess and Teach no other Light within, for Man to be led and guided by, than what the Holy Scriptures hold forth, and declares of very plainly, concerning the Eternal God, and Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, and the Eternal Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son; who with the Father and Son, is one God blessed for ever.
Now, saith the Scripture, 1 John 1. 5. This then is the Message that we have heard of him, and declare unto you, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: And Verse 7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all Sin. 1 Cor. 4. 6. For God, who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, hath shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. This they, the Quakers, teach, and nothing contrary, nor repugnant thereunto (nor never did.) Now, saith the Priests aforesaid, in their Fifth Charge, We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to the afore-mentioned, and many other Blasphemies. Observe, The Quakers are taught to believe, ac∣cording to the afore-mentioned Testimonies of Scrip∣ture, That God is Light, and Shines in Man, to make Man Fruitful in the Knowledge of Himself: Therefore God's Appearance within, is their Light within. And this the true Ministers teach, according as every one hath received Ability from God: And contrary to this the Quakers never taught. Now saith H. M. J. M. and L. P. in their afore∣mentioned Charge, viz. We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to Blaspheme God. Now the Quakers teach no other Light, but what the Holy Scriptures do plainly and plentifully declare of, viz. Jesus Christ, as God's Covenant of Light, who came in the Flesh, in the fulness of Time; who was Conceived of the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary, Mat. 1. 18. and 2. 1, 2. Luke 1. 30, 35. and 2. 11.
Being of the Seed of Abraham and David, according to the Flesh; and in the Body by the Grace of God: Tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. Offered up him∣self a Sacrifice for Sins, acceptable and well-pleasing to God the Father, Eph. 5. 2. Bearing our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes healing comes to the truly Believing Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And that through Death, he might destroy him that hath the Power of Death; and bring forth Life and Immortality unto Light, through the Gospel of the Grace of God, Heb. 2. 14. 2 Tim. 1. 9, 10. And is declared to be the Son of God, with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Rom. 1. 3, 4. And is ascended into Hea∣ven, sits at the Right Hand of God, glorified with the same Glory that he had with the Father, before the World was, John 17. 5. And is our Mediator, appearing in the Presence of God for us; and in the appointed Time of God the Father, shall come to Judge the Quick and the Dead; and now is in a most Spiritual Glorious Manner with his Church: And in his Divine Being is one with the Father; and is Eminently Declared of, as God's Covenant of Light, as the Holy Scrip∣tures witnesseth; John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God: All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men. Vers. 6, 7, 8, 9. There was a Man sent from God, whose name was John: The same came for a Witness, to bear Witness of the Light, that all Men through him might Believe. He (John) was not that Light, but was sent to bear Witness of that Light: That was the true Light, which lighteth every
Man that cometh into the World. John 8. 12. Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the World; he that followeth me, shall not abide in Dark∣ness, but shall have the Light of Life. And Paul, that able Minister of Jesus Christ, was sent to the Gentiles,Acts 26. 18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them which are Sanctified by Faith that is in Christ. And when some were turned to the Lord at Ephe∣sus, he saith unto them, Ye were sometimes Darkness,Eph. 5. 8, 9, 10. but now are ye Light in the Lord: Walk as Children of Light (for the Fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth) Proving what is acceptable un∣to the Lord. And other Scriptures plainly shew forth the Excellent Appearance of Christ, as God's Covenant of Light, as Isaiah 49. 6. Luke 1. 78, 79. and 2. 32. Acts 13. 47. Now as God is in Christ, and he saith, I and my Father are One: So is he the Divine Light in Man; and we own no other Light within for a Teacher, but as is aforesaid, of the Father and Son, Inlightning us by the Holy Spirit: And we profess no other Light within to be our Guide. Now the Priests Second Charge is, Blasphemy against Jesus Christ; and say they, We Charge you, That the Light within, as taught by you, exposes you to Blaspheme Jesus Christ. 1. If the Light which shines in the Heart of Man, be God and Christ, as we believe and teach, then it's impossible the Light within, so taught by us, should expose us to Blasphemy against God, Christ, or the Holy Scriptures.
But the Light which shines in the Heart of Man, is God and Christ, Therefore, &c. 2. If the holy Scriptures proceeded from this divine Light within, as we believe and teach, then it is impos∣sible this divine Light within, should expose us to Blas∣phemy against the holy Scriptures. But the holy Scriptures proceeded from this divine Light within, therefore, &c. 3. Now we the People called Quakers, do own and teach no other Light within, to be our Guide, but what the Scriptures do declare of, concerning God, Je∣sus Christ and the holy Spirit; and as the Scri∣ptures testifie of the Light, so they set forth its Teachings. Psal. 43. 3. O send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me, let them bring me, unto thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles: Psal. 36. 9. For with thee is the Fountain of Life, in thy Light shall we see Light: Psal. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Paths. John 12. 36. While you have the Light, believe in the Light, that you may be Children of Light; and verse 46. (saith Christ) I am come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in me, may not abide in Darkness: John 3. 21. But he that doth Truth, cometh to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that they are all wrought in God. But to the Unbelievers hear what the Scriptures say, Isa. 10. 17. The Light of Israel shall be for a Fire, and his holy One for a Flame, and it shall burn and devour his Thorns and his Briers in one Day: John 3. 19, 20. And this is the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light, be∣cause their Deeds were Evil; For every one that doth Evil, hateth the Light; neither cometh to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: Eph. 5. 13, 14. But all things
that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light: For whatsoever doth make manifest is Light: Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that Sleepest, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light: 1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanseth us from all Sin: 1 John 2. 10. He that loveth his Brother abideth in the Light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. The holy Scripture doth excellently set forth the true Light in Man, and the precious Benefits received by believing in it, and walking in it; it guides to Christ the Fountain, that we may be washed, and know the cleansing Vertue of his Blood, and thereby know a part with him: Yea, a holy Interest sealed to our Immortal Souls. Now the Scriptures bears this Testimony to, and concerning, the divine Light, and the Quakers own nor teach no other Light for their Guide, than as the Scri∣ptures doth thus plentifully set forth, and bear Testi∣stimony unto: Therefore they that contradict the Scri∣pture in their Testimony concerning the divine Light within, and its teachings, they Blaspheme the Scri∣ptures. But the Priests aforesaid do contradict the Scripture; therefore they Blaspheme the holy Scri∣pture-Testimony, in saying, The Light within as taught by us, exposes the followers of it to Blasphemy. And until they can prove that the Quakers teach another Light, than what is aforementioned, their Charges are returned upon themselves. 1st, Guilty of Blasphemy against God. 2ly, Guilty of Blasphemy against Jesus Christ. 3ly. Guilty of Blasphemy against the holy Scriptures: And all this is proved upon them, from their 5th Charge under their own Hands, and lies upon them until they
can make it appear, that the Quakers hold forth some∣thing else for the Light, than what the Scripture wit∣nesseth unto, concerning the divine Light, which we are satisfied they can never do; and indeed looks like a piece of Madness in these Undertakers, that they should Charge Christ the Light within to expose to Blas∣phemy. O! how will they answer this in the great Day of Judgment, to offer such great indignity to God, the Fa∣therJam. 1. 17. of Lights? O! that they might find a place of Re∣pentance, for God inlightens mankind not to expose them to Error, but to shew and preserve them out of It. And Man cannot Err in following of the Light, but doth always Err, when he goes from, or Rebels against the Light. They are of those that re∣belJob 24. 13. against the Light, they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths thereof: But the Path of theProv. 4 18. 19. Just is as a shining Light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect Day: The way of the wicked is as Dark∣ness, they know not at what they stumble. Thus it's plain, when Man Errs, he goes from the Light, and therefore he is judged by the Light: And if any pro∣fessing the Light for their Leader, do Err (which they may) the Light it self is not to be charged there∣with, because it leads Man to abstain from every ap∣pearance of Evil, and to cleave to that which is Good: ToRom. 12. 9. eschew Evil, and do Good, and live for ever more; Blessed be the Name of the Lord, who hath preserv∣ed the holy Scriptures, that we have the Testimony thereof, which are so plain concerning these divine Truths; happy are they, that know the Light of God's holy Spirit to inspire and inlighten Them; they can say, that which was written aforetime, was written for our Learning, that we through Patience, and the Com∣fortRom. 15. 4.
of the Scriptures might have hope: And they are truly profitable for Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Instru∣ction2 Tim. 3. 16. 17. in Righteousness, that the Man of God (which none can truly be, but as they are led by the Spirit ofRom. 8. 14. God) may be perfect; throughly furnished unto every good Work. The Lord open the eyes of Nations, and (if it be his Will) all People that they may come to his Light,Isa. 60. 3. that the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God11. 9. may cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea; that so Darkness may be dispersed, and Wickedness put an end unto, and Sincerity, Integrity, Tender∣heartedness, with Love unfeigned, may grow amongst all People: So shall we wear the Badge of Christ'sJohn 15. 12. Disciples. This will open our Hearts more and more, in Love towards God, and this will dispose and in∣cline us to Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, soMat. 5. 6. shall we have a taste of Heaven here, and by abideing faithful, and following the Lord fully, shall have an assurance of the full enjoyment thereof hereafter; which the Lord grant, for his dear Son's Sake, to all sincere tenderhearted People, of whatsoever Name or Profession they may be; is our desire, who love So∣briety and Tenderheartedness among all Perswasions. Richard Ashby, John Fiddeman, John Cade. FINIS.
