C1080B 99832168 198911
THE CASE of the GARBLER FOR THE City of LONDON. THAT time out of mind there hath been an Office within the City of London the Garbling of several Druggs, Spices, and other things Garbleable, with Anci Fees, which have proved by Experience to be Of Publick Vse to the Subjects of t Kingdom, and for the Honour of our Commodities when Exported after Sale thereof within t Kingdom, by advancing the Value of the same in Foreign Markets, and preventing Disputes t often happen. That the same was Confirmed and Established by an Act of Parliament made in Reign of King James the First, not only for the Prevention of Corrupt mixtures with Spi and Druggs, to the danger of Mens Bodies, but of Frauds and Deceits in the Sale of same. That the present Officer hath a Grant for Life from the City in the Year 1686, wh is since confirmed by the Act for Restoring the Cities Charter; That he renders 30 per Annum Rent to the Chamber of London for the same, and pays 76 l. per Annum Tax And that he necessarily keeps Seven Sworn Officers constantly attending this Publick S∣vice, and is at 400 l. per Annum more Charge for the Execution thereof. That his clear Profit is not 200 l. per Annum, notwithstanding a very valuable Consi∣ration paid for procuring the same at first. That his Behaviour since his Admission, hath been free from any Just cause of co∣plaint. For he never Extorted, or Received any other Fees than what were Ancie and time out of mind. And as to the Pretended Imposition of New Rates: It's tr he hath offered to Garble the Jesuits Bark, and other Commodities lately Imported in th Natures Garbleable, according to the Tenure of the said Custom and Act, for certain R and Prices, less in proportion than the Antient Fees, for Commodities requiring less Lab and time out of mind Imported. That for those New Commodities he hath not Garbled any, but only when request and never Seized, nor Sued for any Neglect of the same. That he never claimed any Fees for Goods Exported within Eight Months with Sale, according as the Act provides for. That he never Prosecuted any Suits in the Exchequer on Frivolous Occasions, never received any Penalty; but generally took much less than his Duty of Garblage. That the End and Use of the said Office created by Custom, and confirmed by Act Parliament; was, and really is for the benefit of the Buyer, and prevention of Fraud the Seller, by disposing one, or a mixt Commodity, instead of another single and un∣rupted. That the True and Original Reason of Complaint against the said Officer, is not Extortion or Neglect of his Duty, or other Personal Offence; but his Diligence in Execution of his Office, and unfortunate Discovery of False and Counterfeit Drugs Spices, and the mixing of Soil and Rubbish with Garbleable Goods after the same w Garbled, and the Seal of the Office fixt to the same; and his refusal to take his Fees, set his Seal without doing his Duty. All which is Humbly submitted to the Consideration of Honourable House; And it's hoped for the Reasons abo∣mentioned, that this Honourable House will not permit bringing in of any Bill, to alter the Law now in force; being only designed for private ends, and to obstruct Publick good.
CASE of the GARBLER FOR THE City of LONDON.
