C4878 [ocm]11179736 204874
Loe heere a Beauty, in her Morn, who shakes Day from her Hayre, and whose Perfection makes The Sun amazd a Heavn on Earth to view, So much can Birth, and Education doe I-Chantry-sculp- R C
The Second Part OF Youths Behaviour, OR Decency in Conversation Amongst Women: Containing Excellent Directions for the Education of young Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other Persons, and Rules of Advice how at the first to deport themselves, and after∣wards govern the Affairs of a Family. By the same Hand that translated the last Volume of Caussin's Holy Court. Whereunto is added a Collection of Select Proverbs and wise Sentences out of severall Languages, usefull in Discourse and the go∣vernment of Life, many of them never in Print in any Language. By the same Author. Together with severall Letters profitable and de∣lightfull according to the Nature of the Subject. Prov. 31.29. Many Daughters have done vertuously but thou excellest them all. Prov. 12.4. A vertuous Woman is the Crown of her Husband. London, Printed for W. Lee, and are to be sould at the Turks-head in Fleetstreet over against Fetter-Lane. 1664.
TO THE True Mirrour of her Sex, the truly Honourable Mrs ELLINOR PARGITER, AND To the most accomplished with all reall Perfections Mrs ELIZABETH WASHINGTON her only Daughter, and Heiress to the truly Honourable Laurence Washington Esquire, late∣ly deceased, &c. Madam: IN the beginning of Times, there was an Equality of Condition amongst All, It was Vertue which after∣wards made the Distinction, and gave the Preheminence, which as it did re∣flect a generous luster upon Posterity, so this luster by the Access, and Degrees of Knowledg was wonderfully improved by Education. It is every Day disputed amongst the Professors of Philosophy, Whether the seed of Morall Vertues be lodged in our Hearts by Nature, or not; which
although it be granted to be true, yet it cannot be denied but Education doth a∣waken and quicken them into growth, and fruitfullness: It is that which doth give an addition to them, and doth ren∣der them as usefull as they are beautifull. It being the Constant Method, and the Business of Art, and Knowledge to pro∣fit and to perfect Nature. And indeed without Education, there is such a winter, and a Sloth of Igno∣rance upon our understandings, and such an extravagance in our Practise, that either, little, or Nothing doth spring up, or the Production is so unseasonable, that it runs into such wild Seeds of Errour, and Licentiousness, that raunting Fals∣hood will put on the Face of Truth, Im∣pudence will pass for good Manners, and the fowlest deformities for the greatest Beauties. Education is that Noble, and unwavering Light which abundantly doth comfort and confirm us in the way of Honour, and doth faithfully admonish, and direct us when we are out of it. And although the Experience, and the Practise of it doth Crown old Age
with Happiness, yet it is Youth that must be seasoned with the Principles of Know∣ledge. Youth as it is more tender, so it is more tractable and more apt to re∣cieve, and to retain Instructions. But it is the Infelicity of the best Natures to be soonest wrought upon, and the female Sex being of a more delicate Constitution than the Masculine, is exposed to greater Dangers of Temptation; for by how much the Complexion is the purer, by so much it is more subject to be stained; And, indeed, in most Beauties there is a secret Flattery by which they do tempt themselves, and whiles they desire to be commended, they do begin to be seduced. Madam: These Considerations, and some others like unto them, have prevai∣led upon me to undertake this Treatise of the Education of young Gentlewomen which I hope will prove as profitable as I have found it difficult; for although there are extant in Greek, and other lan∣guages, many excellent Books concern∣ing the Institution of Youth, yet I never have read any that have precisely treat∣ed of the Education of Gentle women. I
here most humbly prefer it to your Ac∣ceptance, and protection, and to the growing. Honour of her Fathers House, your most accomplished Daughters, not that she needeth any Precepts, ha∣ving so Incomparable an Example as your self, but that making it her business to imitate you, others may prefer it to be their Happiness to imitate Her, and so by the Community of Practise, and the Benefit of Instructions, some Credit may peradventure arrive to these rude Indea∣vours of Him who is, Madam, Your most humble and most devoted Servant, Robert Codrington. Feb. 10th 663/4.
An Advertisement of the Bookseller to the Reader. SOme years since I printed a Book intituled Youths Behaviour, and having found what satisfaction it gave unto the Readers by the many Impressions that was sold thereof, I was again, and again encouraged by some Eminent Personages to make an Addi∣tion to it concerning the Education of young Gentlewomen, which induced me to acquaint my self with a Gentleman of Knowledge, and Learning, to whom I gave certain Heads in relation to the whole Subject, who did take the pains to draw them up into so many Chapters, which I here present to the publick view, to be either annexed to the for∣mer Book of Youths Behaviour, or to be sould alone by it self. I presume the Workwill be acceptable; and the rather, because it is a Subject (although very necessary) yet rarely treated on. I have alwayes used my utmost Indeavours to please my Rea∣ders, as may appear by the list of the many Books I have priued, the Names whereof I have inserted at the End of this Book. And to leave nothing unattempted that
might convay Profit and Delight unto young Gentlewomen, I have for their sakes also in an Alphabetical Order the most remarkeable Proverbs used al∣most in all Nations; One Proverb is ca∣sually omitted, which by reason of the distance and Delayes of the Author, and the Charges of the Press doth properly seem to challenge a place at the End of this Advertisement, and it is, Far fetcht and dear bought, is fit for Ladies. I could not contain this Second Part of Youths Behaviour in less compass than nineteen Sheets of Paper; so that both Parts do make a compleat Work, by which both Sexes may be so well ac∣complished in their Behaviour and Car∣riage, that nothing will be wanting to any ingenious Apprehension. The Price of both together is two shillings; if you buy them by them∣selves, the one is six pence, and the other eighteen pence.
The Table of the Contents of the seve∣rall Chapters in this Book. CHAP. I. OF the Ordering and Education of young Ladies, from the seventh year unto the twelfth, &c. page 1. CHAP. II. Of their Ornaments, and Apparell. page 17. CHAP. III. Of their Hours and Times of Recreation. page 26. CHAP. IV. Of their Behaviour. page 31. CHAP. V. Of Beauty. page 43. CHAP. VI. Of Wisdome requisite to them. page 49. CHAP. VII. Of their Honour, and Reputation. page 56. CHAP. VIII. Of Learned Ladies. page 60. CHAP. IX. Of Marriage. page 63.
CHAP. X. Of the Vanity of some young Gentlewo∣men. page 78. CHAP. XI. Of their Knowledge in Spicery. page 87. CHAP. XII. Of the Art of Candying, and Preserv∣ing. page 98. CHAP. XIII. Of the Art of Distilling. page 99. CHAP. XIV. Of Dayries, and the making of Butter and Cheese, belonging to Countrey-Gen∣tlewomen, and not improper to be known by those of the City. page 103. CHAP. XV. Of Diet. page 107. CHAP. XVI. Of the Raising of Pasts. page 122. CHAP. XVII. Of Chyrurgery. ibid. CHAP. XVIII. Of New Fashions. page 124.
CHAP. XIX. Of Business and Employment, and the bene∣fits thereof. page 131. CHAP. XX. Of Idleness, and how prejudiciall both to Mind and Body. page 134. CHAP. XXI. What Pleasures to be permitted to young Gentlewomen. page 135. CHAP. XXII. Of the Vertues of Silence and Secrecy. page 139. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Advantages of an honourable Paren∣tage. page 143. CHAP. XXIV. Of Women in generall. page 146. CHAP. XXV. Of Modesty. page 150. CHAP. XXVI. Of immodest Songs, and vain Ballads. page 155. CHAP. XXVII. Of Memory, and the great benefits of it. page 171.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of Disobedience to Parents. page 173. CHAP. XXIX. Of Sleep, or Rest. page 175.
The Contents of the First Part. CHap. 1. General and mixt precepts, as touching civility amongst men. p. 1 Chap. 2. Of the first duties and ceremonies in conversation. p. 8 Chap. 3. Of the fashion of qualifying or titling of persons to whom one speaketh, to advise them to break a jest. p. 14 Chap. 4. Of cloaths and arraying the body. p. 16 Chap. 5. Of walking, be it alone or in company. p. 18 Chap. 6. Of discourse. p. 21 Chap. 7. Of carriage at the Table. p. 29 The Contents of the New Additions. A Letter from a Gentleman to a Scholar, to whose tuition he commits his Son. p. 45 His Answer. p. 47 A Letter from a young Scholar to his Sister. p. 48 Her Answer. p. 49 A Copy of a Letter to a friend, touching his Powdered head of Hair. p. 50 A Discourse upon some Innovations of Habits and Dressings. p. 53 Added now this Year 1663. OF the first entrance of a Youth in the Ʋniversity. Three Alphabetical Tables: The first explaining the Ti∣tles of Books written upon all Arts and Sciences. The second, of short sayings in Latine and English, with some few Mottoes: the like also in French, to encourage youth, and others, to improve their understanding in discourse and reading. Also the brief Table at the end of that Treatise of Youths Be∣haviour, for the explanation of the hard words in the Book, which is much enlarged throughout the whole Book; being but a part before.
Imprimatur, G. STRADLING, S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christ. Pat. D. Gilb. Archi∣ep. Cant. à Sac. Domestic. Ex Aed. Lambeth. Nov. 12. 1663.
THE EDUCATION OF YOUNG LADIES AND Gentlewomen. CHAP. I. Of the Ordering and the Education of young Ladies and Gentlewomen from the seventh year of their Age unto the twelfth, and so, to the sixteenth, &c. GReat was the Errour of Francis Duke of Britany, who declared himself to be the more ina∣moured with Isabella Daughter of Scotland, because he understood she was altoge∣ther
unexperienced in the knowledge of good Literature, alledging that a young Lady (being to be married) was learned enough, if she could but put a difference betwixt the shirt and Doublet of her Husband. This indeed was a weak conceit, for they who would not have young Ladies indued with letters, do deserve to have what they so much fear, and preposterously do ground their suspitions, on those Reasons, which ought to afford them the greatest Security. It is the help of Learning that forti∣fies the best Inclinations, and they who are perswaded that the reading of Books is but a School to learn to do evil with more dexterity,Their Reading. may do better to believe that young Gentlewomen do thereby find a greater means to correct, than to corrupt themselves. In the Education therefore of young Gentlewomen, the chiefest care is to lay a good foundation, by giving them in their minority such generous Incou∣ragements, as may promise to their Parents much happiness when they shall arrive to the full growth of under∣standing. And the best way to improve their understandings is to bring them up to
the Knowledge of Letters; For young Ladies when they have arrived to some knowledge by reading, afford great pleasure in their Conversation to others, and receive no less when they are alone by themselves; for Reading assisteth Conversation, and is absolutely necessa∣ry to make the Spirit acceptable and gratefull; for as in Reading they do ga∣ther and find, almost on all occasions, a fit subject for discourse, so by conver∣sation they find a happy and easie me∣thod to deliver themselves with Orna∣ment, and to joyn plenty to facility: And without this Education, Conver∣sation is an intolerable Tyrant; for we cannot without torment intertain any Discourse with those Gentlewomen, who if they be of the Countrey, can administer no other Discourse unto you, but of their Ducks, or their Geese; or if they be of the City, can talk of no∣thing, unless it be of their Whisks, or their Gorgets, or those Attires that are most in fashion. And because Education exceedeth Nature, for by Nature we have a Be∣ing only, but by Education a Well-being; A great care is to be used by the Pa∣rents,Their Ex∣ercise. as soon as the Infant is able to go, or to speak, concerning the forming
of her Mind, and the well-ordering of the Body: we will speak first of the Body. To preserve the Body in health (when Physick is not requisite, and Physick in such tender constitutions is but seldom to be used) some moderate Exercise is required, as walking in the fields, if the season be dry and fair, or if the weather be not so kind, some Re∣creation that reflects on motion within the doors. The Faculty of Dancing in a young Lady is very commendable, but so, as not to make it the most re∣markable in her properties, For where Dancing is the best, Beshrew me I suspect the rest. The curious do here give precepts not to lie too long in bed, by dulling the Spirits with too much sleep, nor yet to repair too late to rest, by decaying them with too little. There are Cautions al∣so prescribed for young Ladies for their sitting, and stooping, and for the car∣rying of young children in their armes to preserve the Body upright, and in a strait posture. Remedies also to pre∣vent infirmities incident to the Bodies of young people, and to rectifie exube∣rances, and defects by Nature, which
because they properly belong to the practical care of the Physician and Chi∣rurgion, we shall leave these Conside∣rations unto them, and passe from the well ordering of the Body to the form∣ing of the Mind. I have already made mention, that Reading of Books doth conduce much to the Improvement of the understand∣ings of young Gentlewomen;What Books they are to read. now great care is to be taken to provide them with such Books as may enrich their knowledge, and to teach them what to love, what to fear, and desire. In the first place they are to read Books of Piety, which may inflame their hearts with the love of God; and in this all the faculties of their Memory, Imagination, and of their Reason are continually to be exercised; it cannot be imagined how much this Impression prevaileth even to the conquering of Nature it self, for this will preserve their souls from the contagion and cor∣ruption of the world; the better to ef∣fect which, their Governesses, who have the care of them, must use their utmost diligence to keep unviolated the two Gates of their Souls, that is, their Ears, and their Eyes, and especially to keep them from conversing with those
persons who delight in wanton and loose discourses, it being a far easier task to surprize the Ear, than the Eye; for in the perusal of good Books, the Eye cannot erre, but idle discourses do pleasantly and privately insinuate themselves into the Ear, and do carry a bad Air with them that doth infect the Soul. It may here be questioned, Whether the reading of Romances may be per∣mitted to young Ladies, of which di∣vers men speak diversly according to the variety of their fancies; but the most received opinion is, that such Ro∣mances that are of a serious, generous, and of a noble Subject, are not only to be permitted, but to be preferred to their observance; and I am ready to jump into this opinion with them; for I know a young Lady in this City of London, who reading in Cassandra of the Love betwixt Orondates and Statyra the Daughter of Darius, and of the crosse Events, that, up to a wonder, did attend it, was so delighted with the Story, that it left an honourable, and a gallant Impression upon her Spirits; not that she was in love with Orondates (though represented to be a Princely personage) but with the magnanimity of his noble
Patience, and with his incomparable Constancy, and Courage that did render him so remarkable. And young Gen∣tlewomen, I would to God, that you had all such accomplished persons for your Husbands, as Orondates is there ex∣pressed to be. To entertain young Gentlewomen in their hours of Recreation, we shall further commend unto them,The grounds of all the thirty Hi∣stories are true, as appears in the last Epistle be∣fore the Book. Gods Re∣venge against Murther; And, The Ar∣cadia of Sir Philip Sydney; Art mi∣dorus his Interpretation of Dreams. And for the Business of their Devotion, there is an excellent Book entituled D. Taylors Holy Living and Dying: The Duty of Man, in which the Duty to God and Man are both comprehended. Having thus made an Assay of the Education of young Gentlewomen, as to their Reading, we will now pro∣ceed to their Working,Their Needle working. which consists in several particulars, as True-Stitch, Sattin stitch, Queen-stitch, Rock-work, Frost-work, Mosse-work, and a hun∣dred more of the like curiosity, which being altogether the Exercise and Sub∣jects of the Needle, and not of the Pen, we will leave them in their performan∣ces to the Eye and Care of their Gover∣nesse or her Substitute, and proceed, to
instruct you what their Instructresse her self, o their Governesse ought to be. Their Go∣vernesses.The persons to guard and instruct young Gentlewomen, should be Gen∣tlewomen well born themselves, of a civil and a sweet pleasing conversation; they should not in their teaching pro∣ceed against their Schollars in any rough or severe manner, but instruct them sweetly, mildly, and cheerfully; they should not strike them, nor startle them with any loud importunity of Reproof, which breedeth in tender Constitutions, a fear and a hatred of that which they should love, and takes away their courage and delight in learning. The precept of the Apostle to Parents, Col. 3. may be well applied unto them, Parents provoke not your children to wrath, least they be discouraged. Undoubtedly there is something ser∣vile in Rigour and Restraint, which looks another way, and is an Enemy to Ingenuity and Honour; Taunts are for Fools, and Blows for Beasts that understand not Reason, and Reason being the Beauty of Action, is to be accompanied always with cheerfulness, and an allowed liberty. Many Instances may be given of the
evil consequences which attend unad∣vised and passionate Governours in Schools, whether Male, or Female. I do read that in the dayes of Queen Eli∣zabeth a great part of the Schollars did run away from Eaton-School, by reason of the great Severity of the School-master, which gave occasion to Mr As∣cham, by the Incouragement of some great Personages, to write that excel∣lent Book concerning the Education of Youth. Some years since a Governess of a School in the County of Northampton, being falsly and spitefully possessed by two of her Schollars, of some evil car∣riage of another of their fellows, with∣out any examining of the accusation whether it were true or false, did give the innocent Maid such violent corre∣ction, that she grew distracted on it. The like lately happened in Surrey, where a young Maid lying longer in Bed than she was accustomed, and com∣plaining of a great pain in her head, was so cruelly intreated by her Gover∣ness, that she sent up a lusty Maid unto her, to overcome the violence of one pain, by the smart of another; and this was performed with so much Inso∣lence and Tyranny, that on the next
day the poor young Gentlewoman di∣ed. This was not long since done, and it is still so fresh in memory, that her Parents and Friends do no sooner hear her Name mentioned, but they season the freshness of their griefs with the salt of a Tear. And in this respect, the Severity and Imperiousness of some Mothers is much to be condemned, who as Queen Margaret of France maketh mention in her Memorials of her own Mother, do look upon them with so awfull a coun∣tenance, that they are glad (though innocent) to steal away from them for fear they have done something that might offend them. They never look up∣on their Children, nor speak unto them but with Authority, as if they were Tyrants over them, rather than Mo∣thers, not caring so much for their Chil∣drens love, as that they may he feared, reverenced and adored. And for this cause many of them do keep their Chil∣dren sparingly, and in want, and are ever threatning them with some small pittance of portion that they will leave them when they die.Parents should not be too rough with their children. And this severe way of Deportment (too frequent in England amongst many mothers) is to distrust their own proper, natural Au∣thority,
by getting unto themselves an Artificial one, and to cause them to grow in contempt with their own Chil∣dren, which is clean contrary to that which they pretend. It is therefore the Judgment of a Per∣son eminent for his Learning and his Wisdom, That Parents should receive their Children, as soon as they be ca∣pable, unto their Society, and admit them into their Councels, and to the Communication of their Designs, yea and consent to their honest-Recreati∣ons, and their Pastimes, that reverend Degree of Age, by which they are di∣stinguished, and that becoming Au∣thority, with which God and Nature hath indued them, being alwayes re∣served. Now if it so comes to passe that young Gentlewomen in the hours of their Imployment,How they are to be dealed with when faulty. do fail in the per∣formance of their tasks, they are so dis∣creetly to be dealt withall, as not to be inforced to have recourse to lies, and false Excuses to save themselves from the Rigour of Punishment; but they are to be used freely and liberally, with sweet and mild perswasions which in∣gender in their hearts the affections of Honour, and of shame; the one where∣of
is as a Spur to Good, and the other as the Rein of a Bridle to check, and to withdraw them from Evil. And it is farther to be observed, that what can∣not be effected with Reason, Wisdom and Diligence, shall never be done by force, or if it be done, it will be but to little purpose. I knew therefore a Tutour of eminent worth in the Uni∣versity of Oxford, who if he found his Pupill intractable, he would forbear all violent courses, and return him to his Parents from whence he received him to learn him some other Arts, and ano∣ther course of life, since Learning was so averse unto him. But whiles we here speak of using young Gentlewomen in their minority with tenderness and love, let no man think that we give the least approbation to any loose or flattering Indulgence to defend them in their sloth or vanity; for Youth (as the Wise man saith) must be held in with Discipline and O∣bedience. Now since that Education consisteth most in Instructions; Instruction is gained three wayes, the one by Pre∣cept,Examples to profit y. the second by Conference, and the third by Example. Now Examples are by the Living and by the Dead; by
the Living in their way of Discourse, and Commerce with them; and this is the most ready way of all, for it teach∣eth with most ease, and most delight: To teach by Precepts is a long way, because it is a painfull thing to under∣stand well, to retain well, to practise well: But Discourse and ImitationImitation. do teach above any Precept, and do in∣vite with more ardour, and do pro∣mise to our selves that Excellence which we learn to imitate; The Spirits and Manners of young Gentlewo∣men are apt to conforme themselves to the Dispositions of those persons with whom they commonly do con∣verse. The other way of profiting by Ex∣ample is taken from the Dead; and this Commerce with the Dead is by Books; the Gentlewomen who know how to make use of them, will receive thereby as much assistance, as Delight; for the company of good Books will discharge them of the burden of tedious idleness, and withdraw their minds from fond Imaginations. And this indeed to some Dispositi∣ons will appear a more gratefull way, than that of Commerce or Conversati∣on; for there are many young Gentle∣women
of so innate a Modesty, that untill they be very well acquainted do not desire a familiarity with any, be their Discourses never so attractive, or their parts so excellent; now a Book is alwayes a ready and a faithfull Compa∣nion. The Governess who is to teach, if she finds her young Schollar addicted to reading, is to ask her, what she thinks of such a Book, or such a Book; or if she finds her more addicted to compa∣ny and conversation, she is to demand of her, what she thinks of such a Gen∣tlewoman, or such a Gentleman, whose Example she conceives to be at∣tractive, and whose Virtues to be a Guide and a Guard unto her: And when she hath delivered her mind, the Governess is to desire her to give a Rea∣son for her saying, which will make her young Schollars more carefull of what they speak.Probation. And to give them better Incouragement therein, the Mi∣stress or Governess is not to neglect what answer they do make, but to commend it, and applaud, at least their good Essay and Indeavour. And this is a way, which if more used, would be more profitable, then at the first notion can be imagined; for (as my
Latine Authour saith) it is no bald Instruction. That which is most to be desired in young Gentle women, is good Manners,Good Manners. in which both Soul and Body have a part; The great business is to hinder the growth of evil manners, and to ingraft the Good: There can be no time too soon to obstrust the Birth of those corruptions which are growing even upon the purest Natures without a diligent circumspection. The first to be condemned,What evil things to be aban∣doned. is the speaking of an Untruth, especially, the standing in it, being spoken; this is a Vice belonging rather to slaves than to free born persons, and it is the Ar∣gument of a licentious, and of a fearfull mind. The second may be ranked rather amongst the number of Infirmities, than Vices, and it is an Over-modesty, when young Maids do seek to hide themselves from the observation of those, who peradventure have taken the pains on purpose to come to see them; or when they hold down their heads, and cannot indure the least Re∣proof without some manifest alteration of their countenance: Nature indeed bears a great sway in this, but is
must be corrected with Education and Discretion. The third is Obstinacy, which is a sullen fault indeed, and not to be excu∣sed, for it is not only unprofitable, but ugly and sordid; and in this let a young Maid be never flattered. The fourth is Sloth, by which she becomes not only burdensom to others, but to her self, by which she contracts diseases, and becomes heavy and dull both in Mind and Body. What good to be imbraced.The Seeds of Vertues and good Man∣ners (as the moral Philosophers affirm) are naturally in every Man and Wo∣man, but good Education will make them bring forth and multiply: The first that is to be improved is, the Fear of God,The Fear of God. to serve him at the least every Morning and every Evening, to trem∣ble under his Infinite and Incompre∣hensible Majesty, to know him in all his Attributes, and to be conformable to the Discipline of the Church. The second Virtue is Ingenuity, Candour, and Integrity, and an honest, and an honourable Mind in the meer consideration of Virtue it self. The third is Modesty, and a ready Accommodation to all kind of appro∣ved persons; and in Schools the good
Company of young Gentlewomen, and their mutual Conversation with one another, doth produce a sweet kind of Affability. The fourth is a reverend Esteem of their Parents, whose blessing on their knees they are to crave every Morning and every Evening, and whose rough∣est and hardest commands they are to obey, and mildly to endure the pettish Infirmities of their old Age, and to lend them their Assistance, if necessity shall require, and not to do any thing with∣out their advice and approbation. And thus much concerning the Or∣dering, and the Education of young Gentlewomen, which being the foun∣dation of all their Future Happiness, I have insisted something longer on it, than I promised. CHAP. II. Concerning their Ornaments and Apparel. AUgustus Caesar beholding his Daugh∣ter Julia too curiously dressed, viewed her a long time without speak∣ing one word unto her, signifying his discontentment by his silence; on the
next day perceiving her more modestly attired, he said unto her with a smiling countenance, This Habit doth better suit with the Daughter of Augustus. The Reply of the Princess was no less consi∣derable than was the Caution, and the Advertisement of the Emperor. The day before (said she) I was dressed for my Hus∣band, but to day for my Father. Surely, as the wiser sort are not to be offended, that women be constrain∣ed to please many, to keep but One; so, we must confess, that if they dress and attire themselves but to One, there cannot many be displeased at it; but certain it is, that in whatsoever sort young Gentlewomen be apparelled, they can hardly please all sorts of Per∣sons, but either the young or the old will find something to carp at. Habits as well as Words should be conforma∣ble to the Times. We see that men eve∣ry day do adorn their Seelings, they guild their Swords, they cover their Cloaths with gold Lace; and why should they forbid any new or costly Dresses unto young Ladies, when their purposes are not evil; why should that be denied to them which they permit in all other things. St. Jerome is not of this Stoical Humour, who writing to
Gaudentius concerning the Attires of young Patula, doth seem to excuse the innocent curiosity of many young La∣dies, who do cloath themselves accord∣ing to the Decency of their Condition: Their Sex (saith he) is curious in their Ornaments, and naturally they are addicted to sumptuous Apparel, insomuch that you shall see many most chast and virtuous Wo∣men, who yet attire themselves with elabo∣rate Artificiousness, for no other end at all, than for their own particular liking, by I know not what complacence, and innocent satisfaction. And this Inclination of theirs is so natural to them, that there have been some Women, who dying have caused their Ornaments to be laid in their Coffins, to carry that along with them into the other world, which they so dearly loved in this. But is it not a most shamefull thing to see that men in this Age are more addicted to these superfluities than wo∣men: What need I mention Hortensius the Roman Orator, who spent half the day in beholding and dressing himself, in stead of studying his Oration. Do not we live in an Age wherein men make profession of this vicious Curio∣sity, more than ever? Do they not equal, if not exceed, the pride of A∣naxagoras,
who took such pains to play the spruce Gallant, till at last they cal∣led him, Madam, at every word. These Ribbands of Affectation, and new, and strange Dressings adde nothing unto Beauty; when all is done that can be laid on the Face, or on the Back, they have nothing which you find not in Shops, they glory in a thing that is none of their own. He that shall mark them well, shall perceive that they are but walking Pictures, and that they de∣ceive the Eyes, like those guilded Ima∣ges of old, which are eaten with worms without, and are nothing but rottenness within. And thus much for the pride of men, who have farre lesse excuse for their Vanity than wo∣men. And surely, if the inconsiderate wo∣men, who wholly addict themselves unto Pride, and make it their business from Morning unto Night to be extra∣vagant, did but know what precious time they do lay forth in dedicating the first hours of the day to Pride and Fol∣ly, in crisping and curling their locks, in using new washes, and laying new complexion on their Cheeks, commit∣ting Idolatry on themselves by the flat∣tering Reflexion of a Glass, in compo∣sing
an adulterate Countenance to se∣duce the Fancy of their Beholders, and to delude them as well of their Reason, as of their strength, by their lascivious Allurements: Did they consider how they spend the Afternoon in needless Vi∣sits, immodest Objects, and light pre∣sentments, in running to Interludes, and other Recreations, which bring nothing but Repentance with them, they would turn to another Resolution; they would change themselves, and their Children should be so brought up, as that their Infancy should be seasoned with Principles of Piety; for there is nothing that makes more vain or wa∣vering than the want of a solid and well-grounded Education, which as it is the office of Parents to provide, so it is their Duty to suffer no temporal respects to decline them from it. That Lady is to be commended, who never eyed her Garment, but she watered it with a Tear, remembring what Necessity the ambitious Thoughts of her Grandmother Eve had brought her to. Novertheless young Ladies have in all Ages, a kind of liberty al∣lowed to them in their Apparel; and what is ridiculous in another, appears to be decent and commendable in them.
Justin reporteth that all things in Al∣cibiades were laudable; we may affirm the same of young Gentlewomen, there is a kind of Priviledge in Youth for the wearing of those Jewels and Diamonds, which Nature, (who doth nothing in vain) hath provided: And whatsoe∣ver the Stoicks may whisper to the contrary, the use of Apparel is to dig∣nifie the wearer, and adde more beauty to the Creature, provided that the Ap∣parel be not above the Degree of her that weareth it, nor doth exceed the Arithmetick of her Revenues. It was unto the Matrons that St. Peter left that Divine Precept, which indeed may ve∣ry well serve for the unmarried. Array your selves in comely apparel with shame∣fastness, and modesty, not with imbroider∣ed hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly Appa∣rel; but as becometh women that professe the fear of God: for even after this manner in time past did the holy women who trusted in God attire themselves. Indeed choicer Or∣naments can no Lady have to adorn her, nor is there any fashion that will better become her. Much may be argued against De∣licacy of Apparel. Soft Cloathes introduce soft minds. The servants of this world seek Honour, Delight and
Pleasure in their Attire; but the true Servants of Christ will be sure to be cloathed with the Garments of Inno∣cence. I find also in the Scripture that out∣landish fashions are reproved, as in the first of Zephany, where the Lord threat∣ens to visit the Princes, and the Kings Children, and all such that are cloathed with strange Apparel. But whiles in the lines foregoing, I have given some allowance o liberty to young Gentlewomen in their Habits; for it is impossible there should be Youth without some vanity, yet I know not how to excuse the vain Cu∣stom now so much in fashion, to deform the face with black Spots, under a pre∣tence to make it appear more beautifull: It is a Riddle as well in Nature as in Reason, that a Blemish should appear a Grace, and that a Deformity should adde unto a Beauty; I have seen a face so spotted with half Moons and Stars, that my young Lady might not only seem a stranger to others, but to her self also. There is a native modesty in the gallantry of Attire, as there is in the Gesture, and which doth more fully become, and would more absolutely accomplish a young Lady, than to co∣ver
the face with Love-spots, as if she would keep her self from the sight of her own Vanity. To attemper this Frenzy, I hold no Receit more sove∣reign than to enter into a serious Medi∣tation of our own Frailty: How is it that we disesteem our souls, preferring the flesh above them. A great absurdity it is, and ridiculous, for the Mistress to play the Handmaid, and for the Hand∣maid to act the Mistress, for a pure beauty to be beholding to a pitifull black spot to commend it. There can be neither Decency or Order, where the Family is managed so perversly. Long trains do sweep away long Acres; A forraign Tire-woman must have a constant pension to put the Love-be∣spotted Idol of the Face into a more dis∣figured fashion. Is it not pity that wo∣men should darken their Beauties with such vails of pieced and patched Defor∣mity. Certainly that Lady doth lay a great blemish on her better part, who ties her self to that formality, that she dares not put off the least spot that she wears in her face, least she should lose the vain opinion of being compleat: The Age labours of this disease, where the eye becomes a Determiner of our worth by the outward habit which we
wear: It reflects not of what is in us, but what is on us; you will say, She is not to be accounted a Court Visitant, who restrains her self either in her choice of Delicacy, or in the Variety of Habit. What then! What! Shall a vicious and an effeminate Age deprave us of our Judgment, or a corrupt time deprive us of our Reason? No, for La∣dies may be confident that they have more absolute perfections within them, than to be blemished with these imperfe∣ctions which too frequently they bear about them: Let Modesty cloath them, and let it be their chief Honour to make Civility their Director; this will more incomparably grace them than any phantastical Attire whatsoever, which though it begetteth Admiration, it end∣eth with Derision. I have read that the Moon beholding the glistering Robe of the Sun, would needs have a Gown of the same cloath of Gold made for her; but the Tailor more wise and more ho∣nest than commonly Tailors are, told her, It was impossible, for she was so full of Change, he should never fit her.
CHAP. III. Of the Hours and Times of Recreation and Pleasure assigned to young Ladies and Gentlewomen. PLeasure is a quality that is not great∣ly ambitious; It is accounted rich enough of it self without the addition of any thing to the reputation of it. The chief thing to be considered is, How young Gentlewomen should car∣ry and govern themselves in their plea∣sures which wisdom will teach them; And the chief Rule of Wisdom is to reject and condemn all pleasures that be vicious,The Rules for Recre∣ation. and to receive those that are lawfull, but yet with Rule and Mode∣ration: And this consisteth in three par∣ticulars. First, That it be without the Offence, Scandal, Damage, or Prejudice of their Associates, or any others. Secondly, That it be without any prejudice to themselves, their health, their reputation, their leisures, or their Functions. Thirdly, That it be with Modera∣tion. A sad thing it is when we make
pleasures our Business, and do inthrall our selves unto them; for Pleasure should be but an Accessary, a Recreati∣on for the Time, that we may more chearfully return to our labour; as sleep which strengthneth the Body, doth give us the ability with more strength and vigour to follow our Im∣ploiments: Young Ladies are to use it, but not to enjoy it; for this Moderati∣on and Rule in pleasures is an excellent and profitable thing according to the Laws of God, of Nature and of Rea∣son. The excess of Pleasure softneth and weakneth the vigour both of Soul and Body; It besotteth the best Com∣plexions; it doth banish and chase away the principal Virtues; and though we call it Pleasure, it will almost in a mo∣ment degenerate into that which is clean contrary to it, which is sorrow and repentance. The Recreations most proper unto Ladies are three, Musick, Limning and Dancing. Of Dancing I have made mention already. And although the Romans had no very good opinion of it, as may appear by Salust speaking of the Lady Sempronia, Saltabat meliùs quam honestam decuit, she danced better than became an honest Lady; yet the civili∣ty
of these times doth confess that it is a generous and a becoming property; neither is there any better way to put the Body into a gracefull Posture. Mu∣sickMusick. is no doubt an excellent quality; some of the ancient Philosophers have held, that Souls were made of Harmo∣ny, such an operation hath Musick that it hath struck Civility and candour into the most barbarous minds, and with∣out this quality, a Lady can hardly be said to be absolutely accomplished. Limning.Limning also is undoubtedly an ex∣cellent Recreation; and though there be many Artists that are admirable in it, and who do make a profession of it, yet it is a Recreation in which many noble Gentlemen beyond the Seas do exercise themselves, and many accom∣plished Ladies both beyond the Seas and in this Nation, do not only delight in it, but merit a singular applause for a rare dexterity in it. To these Recreations of Ladies, there are some who do adde the fourth, which is going to Stage-playes,Stage-playes. in which I leave young Gentlewomen (if they have the consent of their Gover∣nesses) to make use of their own liber∣ty, as they please; for though the Stage-playes amongst the preciser sort
do suffer much in their Reputation, and are by divers accounted worse than vanity, yet most certain it is, that by a wise use, and a right application of many such things that we may there hear and see, we may meet with ma∣ny excellent Precepts, for Instruction, and sundry great Examples for Cau∣tion, and divers notable passages, which (as I have said) being well ap∣plied, as what may not be perverted, will confer no small profit to the judici∣ous Hearers. And it is not unworthy of your Observation to consider, that the Reformer of the English Church, the most incomparable Edward the sixth, did so much approve of Stage-playes, that he appointed one who was a Courtier of a delicate Fancy to be the chief Disposer of the Playes, who by his Office was to take care to have them set forth in a sumptuous manner, as it became the presence of the King, before whom they were acted; which Office to this day retains the Name of The Master of the Revels. And Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, was plea∣sed to term these Playes, The harmless Spenders of Time, and conferred large Exhibitions on such as then were most remarkable both for writing and act∣ing;
neither did she hold it any dero∣gation to her Royal Person to give often Countenance to their Indeavours, the better to encourage them in their proceedings. But if the moderate use and Recourse which Gentlewomen make to Playes be to be excused, certainly the daily frequenting them is as much to be con∣demned. I have heard often of a Gentle∣woman, when I was a young man, who in her health being accustomed eve∣ry day to see one Play or other, was at the last struck with a grievous sickness, even unto death, during which time being exhorted by several Divines, who were sent for her to call upon God, she would not give the least ear unto them, but continuing in her raving fits, she per∣petually did cry out, O Jeronimo, Jero∣nimo, me thinks I see thee brave Jeronimo; neither could she be withdrawn from this extravagancy by all the perswasi∣ons of the Divines, but fixing her eyes intentively, as if she had seen Jeronimo acted, she died. This may serve for a Caution, but enough, if peradventure not too much of this subject.
CHAP. IV. Of the Behaviour of young Ladies and Gentlewomen. ZEuxis being to paint a perfect Beau∣ty, proposed to himself five of the most accomplished Ladies in all Greece, to take from every one of them those Charmes and Representations, which he conceived to be most power∣full: but to frame the Modell of a Wo∣man,What ne∣cessary in Behaviour whose Behaviour should be such as to please in all Companies, he had need of greater assistance; all that Nature affords, or Morality teacheth is too little for this End. In this Subject the fairest Ornaments are most necessa∣ry, and an Aggregation of all the best Qualities that can be desired, since they do all terminate and end in Conversati∣on as in their Center. To say then what seemeth to me to be at the first most necessary, I could content my self to wish in young Gen∣tlewomen those three perfections which Socrates desired in his Disciples, Discre∣tion, Silence, and Modesty; I would not have them think that I purpose to take away from them the use of Speech
in the stead of Ruling it, I should not do well to go about to frame a Conver∣sation of dumb persons, but to make a powerfull warre against all Noise and Clamour, a most dangerous Enemy in Humane Society; Silence gives I know not what grace to Speech it self, and there is nothing truer, than as Rests in Musick, so pauses in Discourse being well used, do make that more plainly ap∣pear, which is the best of all and the sweetest in it. Behaviour belongeth both to the Body and the Soul, and Society is the Comfort of the Living, Life without it is a kind of Death; no hour can be so tedious which Conversation and Dis∣course cannot pass over with delight. What a Desart is the World without Society and Behaviour? Gentlewo∣men who would be observed for their behaviour,Choice of Company. ought to beware whom they elect into the number of their Companions, for the World will be apt to judge of them according to the Company they do keep. Augustus Caesar discerned the Inclinations of his two Daughters Livia and Julia, by the Disposition of those who professed Courtship to them, for Ladies of Ho∣nour and of Eminence came to attend
upon Livia, and those who were more licentious on his Daughter Julia. Young Virgins (saith Plutarch) above all things are to consort with those whose lives were never tainted with any suspicion of Incontinence, and whose tongues were never stained with any immodest Language. Many Questions are oftentimes asked them by those that profess love unto them, which are not to be answered but by silence. To enter into discourse with stran∣gers doth argue Lightness and Indiscre∣tion: if I might advise,Rules for Good Be∣haviour. their Carriage in this Nature should not be too loose, nor too precise. The simpring Coun∣tenances, and such kind of Antick Ge∣stures, are more suitable to the Condi∣tion of Chamber-maids, than Gentle∣women. Resolution and Modesty at∣tended with Mildness do carry a con∣stant and a sweet Correspondency. It is too often seen that young Gentle∣women by Gifts are courted to inter∣change, and to return the Courtesie;A Caution in Presents Rings indeed and Ribbands are but Trifles, but believe me, they are not Trifles that are aimed at in such Ex∣changes: let them therefore be coun∣selled that they neither give nor receive any thing that afterwards may procure
their shame,A Caution for wri∣ting of Letters. nor write any thing to any that profess Love unto them, that may afterwards be a witness against them, nor give the least advantage to any that under the pretence of Love do endeavour to ensnare them. Al∣though their innocent credulity be as far from the conceit of Evil, as the wild heats of their lovers are from the thought of any Good, yet such Inter∣courses of Friendship are not to be ad∣mitted, lest by too much Familiarity an Entry be opened which may pro∣cure their Destruction. And above all they are not to entertain any Parly with any that are despicable in their Conditions,Not to en∣tertain a∣ny famili∣arity with Serving-men. such as are Servants to their own Parents or Kindred, or any other of such a sordid Relation, for by this means, to my knowledge, many a beautifull Gentlewoman, and as high in their Fortunes as they were Honou∣rable in their Birth, have stooped to so low a Contract, that forgetfull of themselves by the present Importuni∣ties of their over-blown Desires, and the ungovernance of Youth, they have become a perpetuall Torment of Shame and Poverty to themselves, and a la∣mentable Spectacle of Sorrow and Re∣proach unto the Families from whence
they were derived. It is dangerous therefore (as I have said) to admit of any such Persons of an inferiour Rank into a Parly with them. Virginity is an inclosed Garden, it should not ad∣mit of the least Violation, the very Report may cast a blemish on it. It was the Experience of an old Soul∣dier, that the Fort doth hold out the longest, which doth conceive it self to be the least secure, when indeed it is the most secure that can be. It is the greatest weakness for a Lady to pre∣sume on her own Strength; the readiest way to betray her self to Danger is to be negligent of Danger, and to invite it by being careless of it. How subject they are to fall into Temptation,Not to be too severe especially when they are left to be their own Guardians, daily Experience doth sufficiently discover: and they oftentimes have proved the weakest, who have been most confident of their own Strength; and were re∣solved to contemn or to deny all that should court them, and in their pub∣lick meeting have made it their choi∣cest merriment to give Love the af∣front, and to discourse of Affection with an Imperious Contempt, to laugh their amorous Suitors out of Counte∣nance.
But what hath been the event that hath attended their insulting spi∣rits,Too much confidence dangerous they have sported so long with Love till they have fallen in Love in earnest; a moment hath made them of Soveraigns, Captives, by inslaving them to that passion deservedly, which at the first they entertained so disdain∣fully. Presumption is a daring sin, and alwayes brings forth an untimely Birth. The way to prevent this is in the be∣haviour, to give not the least Occasion to the Tempter that shall endeavour to insnare them, nor to give way to the weakness of their own Desires.Not too much to affect to be seen in publick. How excellent had many Ladies been, and how impregnable had been their Cha∣stities, if they had not been possessed with such a dangerous Security, when they let open their Windows to betray themselves, when they leave their Chamber to walk, and on purpose; to be seen in publick, when they throw off their Vail of Circumspection to give attention to a vain wanton Story; when they consort with youth and bloud, and make them their chiefest Counsellors; then, and never till then, the Infection begins to be dispersed, when thus the Sick, and the Sound are permitted to
come together; let not therefore young Gentlewomen, such especially who are in the first Flower of their Youth and Beauty, hazard their liberty by tempt∣ing their Chastity. Apelles found fault with Protogenes that his hands were al∣wayes on the Board, and such licenti∣ous Amorists as these will be watching alwayes an opportunity to fall a Board, and there especially where they have the least to do. It is almost impossible for any Lady to come off fair from such foul fingers, the greater Care therefore, and the greater Circumspection ought to be used. Young Gentlewomen are to have a great Care to keep themselves from all Privacy, and Retiredness,Too much privacy in some cases dangerous unless it were with Good Books and Duties of Devotion; Diogenes when he found a young man walking alone, he demand∣ed of Him what he was doing, he re∣turned Answer that He was discoursing with Himself, Take Heed, (said he) that thou converse not with thine Enemy. And not much unlike to this was the Report of a young Girl, who was so lost in love, that it was truly said of Her, She minded her work least when she sate down to it and eyed her Sam∣pler.
Though some in their Emblems have represented Women by a Snail, because the Snail doth alwayes carry Her House about Her, as it ought to be the property of a good House-keeper, yet a Vertuous and discreet Gentlewo∣man by her Resort unto publick places,The true character of a true Gentle∣woman. may confer no less Benefit to such as see her Behaviour, than she doth profit to her Family over whom she is an Over∣seer; for many of them in publick pla∣ces have been observed to express such a well-becoming Garb, that every Acti∣on hath deserved, the applause and Imi∣tation of all that were in her Company, her Conceits were many, and temper∣ed without lightness, her Jests inno∣cent, and seasonable, without the least Capriciousness, Her Discourse free without niceness, her whole Carriage delightfull, and flowing with a seem∣ing carelesness; when the Indiscretion of others did make use of an Ocean of words but hardly of one Drop of Rea∣son, they speak much but express lit∣tle; they give too much, and too loose Reins to Liberty, making pleasure their Vocation, as if they were created for no other end, than to dedicate the first fruits of the Morning to their Looking-glass,The vani∣ty of some Ladies. and the Remainder of
it to the Exchange. The Artificiall Colour is no sooner laid on their Faces, but the Play-Bills for that Day must be brought unto her by her Pensioner whom she keeps in Constant Pay for that Purpose; Her Eye views it, and reviews it, and out of her Female Judgement, she makes choice of one which she is resolved to see, purposely to be seen; being come, much she ob∣serves not in it, only she desires to be observed at it, to be observed in one of the Boxes of the Play-house, where she is no sooner sate, but her Behavi∣our is such that you would believe, she was a Bee in a Box she makes such a Buzzing, and a rustling in it; but if they take not up the afternoon at the Play-house, then this Lady or that Lady is to be seen, or which is worse, such a Lord, and much of this proceeds from the evil Education of her Youth. The End of one of these Gentlewomen was not long since very Remarkable, when in her last Conflict with Nature, being earnestly perswaded to com∣mend her Soul to God, and to make her Salvation sure, she answered, She had made it as sure as Law could make it, and so she departed this World. That Behaviour in all persons is
most to be approved which is farthest off from Affectation.That Be∣haviour is best which is farthest off from Affectati∣on. Young People are to know that Apes in the Wilder∣nesse are catched by Imitation; if Gentlewomen would not be taken with Indiscretion they must do nothing ser∣vilely; there is nothing that detracteth more from true Gentility. It is Discre∣tion only that appropriates to every De∣gree a peculiar Distinction; many things there are which very handsomely will become the Mistresse, which will show very ugly or very ridiculously in her Maid, but in no Degree will that Behaviour seem comely which is brought in by Affectation, whether it be in City, Court, or Countrey. I know many Gentlewomen who endeavouring to cover some small In∣firmity, do lean so much on the other side of it, that they render it far more unsightly than it was before. You shall observe One to attempt to simper with her lips, that she may the better cover the Deformity, or the Greatness of her Teeth; Another con∣tracts with her Tailor to wear her Gown in such a manner, or such a careless looseness to hide from the Eye what she would not have observed in her Body;Affectati∣on ridicu∣lous and dangerous Another doth lay an azure
Complexion on her Veins, or doth imbolster her decayed Brests to pur∣chase her a Sweet-heart. But what an Affectation is this to gain a popular Estimation, when the Body is not a whit the straiter, nor the taller, nor the Tooth, nor the Hand will conti∣nue long the whiter. Many there are both young and old, both Male, and Female, who have suffered much in their Reputation, because too much addicted to this Di∣sease of Affectation. Sempronia though young, and continent, yet she was ac∣counted light by reason of her affected Gesture and Habit; And Pompey sir∣named the Great by reason of the Glory of his Atchievments, yet he was esteem∣ed to be vain, because he would al∣wayes scratch his head with one Finger. Wheresoever we turn our Eyes either in the Street, or on Books, we shall find Subject enough to entertain us with Variety of Phantasticall, and Af∣fected Humors; but Vertue admits of no such Affectation in her Gesture,Vertue ad∣mits of no Affectati∣on. or her Habit, which is proper, and not enforced, native, and not apishly in∣troduced. Therefore Gentlewomen, seeing nothing more befits you than what is your own, Be your own Crea∣tures,
and Despise all Formalities whatsoever. Resort not to the Tem∣ple to take a Pattern of any new Fashi∣on, Modesty blusheth at all servile Imitation, what you see in another that doth become her, may peradven∣ture become none at all, or at least none so well as her self, for you find often∣times by your own Experience, that what takes in one Complexion doth displease in another. The Ass in Aesops Fable seeing the Spaniel to leap and fawn on his Master, thought it would become him also to do the like, which he adventuring to put in pra∣ctice, was soundly beaten for his la∣bour. It is very easie to distinguish betwixt an enforced and an unaffected Behavi∣our, the first Blush will discover the One from the Other. We shall ob∣serve those who are tied to Affectati∣on, to look with a starched Counte∣nance, and to set themselves in any po∣sture which they think may Confer a Phantastick Grace on their Behaviour, and this they will perform so punctual∣ly, as if they had entred a Ceremoni∣ous, and a solemn Contract, with their Eye, Face, Hand, Foot, and every part, to hold constantly such a Dimen∣sion
to beget in the Beholder a more setled Admiration;Generosi∣ty abhor∣reth Affe∣ctation. whereas those who are of a free, generous, and Genu∣ine Disposition, do abhor to tie their Affections to such a servile Restraint. The Discreet Gentlewoman whose Honour is the freedome of her Behavi∣our, and whose Praise is to be Exem∣plar to others in Goodness, will so at∣tire, express, and behave themselves, that neither too much Curiosity can taxe them with Pride, nor too much Neglect (in what is requisite to adorn themselves) can upbraid them with Sordidness. And thus much concern∣ing Behaviour. CHAP. V. Of Beauty. THere is nothing that doth more set forth Behaviour, than Beauty, it therefore doth render it self most fit∣ly to be treated of in this place. They who do adore, or contemn Beauty, do ascribe too much or too lit∣tle to the Image of God;The Ex∣cellence of Beauty. it is undoubt∣edly one of the rarest Gifts which Hea∣ven hath afforded unto Earth: accor∣ding
to the Opinion of Plato, It is a humane Splendor, lovely in its own Nature, and which hath the Force to ravish the Spirit with the Eyes. Beauty of the Body and Beau∣ty of the Mind.The Judgement which we frame and collect to our selves of the Beauty of the Spirit, because it is lodged in a handsome Body, is not often, much amiss, and if it fall out to be otherwise, we then say that Nature hath told a Lie in such or such a Person, the Noble∣ness of her Spirit being not answerable to the handsomeness of her Body. This worthy Quality is worthy of Respect wheresoever there be eyes, or Reason; it hath no Enemies but the Blind and unsensible, all the World yeelding Homage to those to whom Nature hath given the preheminence over others. Now if the Beautifull do sometimes suffer themselves to be vanquished, this reflects not on the strength and power of their Beauty, but on the weakness of their Spirit. A place is no less impregnable because he makes a surrender of it who ought to have de∣fended it, the Fault is in the Captain, and not in the Citadell. And as Kings do laugh at the Complements of their Courtiers, because they observe
they do use them more for private In∣terest, than to testifie their Duty or Af∣fection; so should young Ladies laugh at the services of those Gallants, be∣cause with all their Courtship, and Submissions, they do but seek their own pleasure in it, and the ruine of those young Gentlewomen, who do li∣sten to them. Therefore those Ladies who imagine that the Number of their Servants do adde something to their Beauty,Rules for the Beau∣tifull. and thereby seem to take much satisfaction in their submissions and services, do give a great advantage to their Ene∣mies, and show they may be won at an easie rate, whilest there needs no more for them to become Masters of their Desires, than Praises, and Re∣spects. Some there are who make it a Scruple to praise Beauty,Beauty a Flower. because it so soon doth pass away; it is a Flower, they say, which fadeth so soon, as it is blown, a Flower which the Wind doth shake, the Sun doth wither, the Rain doth wash, a Flower that is so de∣licate, that without touching, or ha∣ving any Enemies, in a moment it finds its ruine in its own feebleness. But the fairest of Women may find
an excellent Remedy against Vanity,The best use to be made of Beauty. if being at sixteen years of Age they could represent unto themselves the de∣fects and Inconveniencies of old Age. How fair soever the Colours are which Art or Nature lends them, they would be ashamed as well as the Peacocks in beholding their feet so foul: could they at those years foresee so great a Change, and such wrinckled Ruines, certainly they would never afflict themselves for a thing which years do insensibly steal away from them, and which diminish∣eth every Moment in the Despite of Art. Nevertheless it is worth the Obser∣vation, that Cato had Beauty in so high an Estimation, as that he was heard to say publickly, It was no less a Crime to offend Beauty, than to rob a Temple: it is very probable that what he spake in this Nature, was in relation to the In∣nocent Beauties of such young Gentle∣women to whom this whole Discourse of Education is directed. Sulpitia amongst the Roman Ladies had such Beautifull eyes, that the Men of those Dayes could not behold her without a Will to adore her. It is re∣corded that the Neck and Bosome of Theodeta the Athenian was so pleasing,
that Socrates himself, did fall in Love with them;Beauty not to be beholding to Art. they are Draughts and Charms which are not to be sought by Artificiousness, nor possessed by Vani∣ty: Nature affords them to some Ladies on purpose to please the Eye, and to raise the Mind unto the Love of Him who is the Fountain of all Humane Per∣fection. All Counterfeit Beauties do fall shamefully in the sight of All Men, just like unto false Stars, which after they have deceived our Eyes for a Time, do show us by their Fall that we mistook a Vapour for a Star. Galen doth make mention of Phryne, who whenever she appeared she eclipsed the Lustre of all the Ladies of the As∣sembly, and filled them with Revenge and Shame; at the last they invented a Sport amongst themselves which eve∣ry one was to Command by turn, when it came to her turn to be Commandress, she told them that she would lay but an easie Charge upon them, which was that every one of them should wash their Face, and their Hands, which when they had done, (for they were bound unto obedience) they might easily discover the true Beauties from the Counterfeit, and there was hardly any one that could be known by their
former Countenance, their Faces were become quite others than they were. This pastime if it were put in pra∣ctice in our times, would no doubt be as ungratefull to many of our Ladies. I do the rather make mention of this rare Beauty, because that it was for her, that those famous Judges called the Areopagits, did lose the Name and Reputation of Judges not to be Cor∣rupted, because not believing her to be innocent, yet when they beheld her, they could not judge her to be faulty.Beauty blindeth Justice. Hipperides the Orator pleaded in vain against her, for as soon as she made her appearance, her Presence served as an Apology, and she needed not, but on∣ly to appear, to defend her self. The Beautifull ever gain their suit, and if Justice doth open her eyes to behold them, how poorly soever it is sollici∣ted, their Cause cannot go ill.
CHAP. VI. Of Wisedome requisite in young Ladies and Gentlewomen. BY Beauty Women are but hu∣mane, but by Wisedome,Wisdome more ne∣cessary than Beau∣ty. they are made almost divine. If Beauty win them Love, it is Wisedome that makes them worthy of Admiration, and Respect. This is the Vertue which is far more necessary than Beau∣ty, for it gives them more Authority, in regard that without it, all other beautifull qualities are without Orna∣ment, or at least without Order, like scattered Flowers which the Winds carry away Confusedly. And as Ar∣chitects have alwayes a Compass in their hands to measure all their works, so Women of whatsoever Condition or Age they are, should continually have the Rules of Prudence set before their Eyes, to make all their Actions reaso∣nable. Slanderers do accuse Women for want of Soundness in Discretion; they alledge they have no Apprehension, or knowledge, but for ordinary or evil Actions, and that, like Spiders, all
their Arts are poysoned, and that they never spin their webs but to catch Flies. But this is a falshood, a Calumniation more worthy of punishment than of Answer. It is a Tyranny, and a Cu∣stome no less unjust than old, to reject them from the publick Government,Women capable of the great∣est imploy∣ments. as if their Spirits were not as capable of Affairs of Importance, as the Spirits of Men. To give satisfaction to young Ladies (to whom these Instructions entirely do dedicate themselves) I will here insert some few Examples, which will testifie that the praises we give to Ladies are not without ground, and we have reason to maintain that they have often brought good Reme∣dies to the most desperate distresses of States, and Provinces. A rare Example of a dis∣creet young Gentle∣woman.At such time as the Sabins demand∣ed the Roman Damsels in marriage, with swords in their hands, to prose∣cute the Denial of them with Death, the Senate was much troubled how to give them an Answer, especially in such a Case where the refusall would occasion a Certain War, or their Con∣sent put the Estate of the Common∣wealth in Hazard, in regard that this Alliance which they demanded, was but a meer pretence to make them∣selves
Masters of Rome. Tutola being then not above sixteen years of Age, did present her self to give her Advice, and after she had observed a great irre∣solution in the Discourse and Debates of so many ancient and grave Senators, she proposed her Counsell, which was suddenly and generally approved. She remonstrated that it was necessary to yeeld to the Demand of the Latins in what they required, and to dress up their Handmaids as Spouses, to the end that the Sabins entertaining them∣selves in their pleasure, might be di∣verted from the Intention they had to make War upon them. And this took effect according to ex∣pectation, and these Bond-maids seeing their pretended Husbands laid in a sound sleep, did cunningly, according to their Instructions, steal away their Arms, and by a lighted Torch adver∣tised the Roman Souldiers to surprize their Enemies, who were unprepared to defend themselves. They could not sufficiently extoll the Courage, the Counsell, and affection of Tutola, who found the means to preserve the Com∣mon-wealth, whilest so many eminent Personages were puzzled in a great In∣certainty.
Whatsoever of Indiscretion is laid to the Charge of Women whether young or old, it Men would take the Advice of those whom God hath given to them for Helps in the Government of their Affairs,Men to take ad∣vice from women. it undoubtedly would redound much to their Advantage, and they would acknowledge they had done themselves no little wrong, to neglect and slight them in those Occasions where Prudence, and Direction were requisite. It is not unworthy your observation, that when Theseus was exposed to the Minotaure in the Labarinth, it was Ariadne that expedited the means for a happy Issue out of it: he had never dis∣entangled himself from those intricate windings, but by the thread which he received from this young Lady. This Labarinth is the Representative of dif∣ficult, and thorny affairs, Theseus doth personate Men that are perplexed with them, the thread is Wisedome, and Ariadne who gave it Him doth repre∣sent unto us a Discreet Woman, who ordinarily do lead men out of their Ex∣tremities, whence they could not otherwise have so readily come forth. In the like manner when Jason was to
serve as a Prey to those furious Bulls that kept the golden Fleece, it was Medaea that did inchant them,Their Dexterity to help in greatest Dangers. and made the passage free unto the Prince, to carry away that rich Spoil which none but he durst enterprize. By these Bulls we understand the Dangers and Obstacles, which would deprive us of the possession of the best things; By the Fleece, the Glories, and the Laurels which we obtain by our Atchievments, and by Medaea, a Lady of Wisdome and Knowledge, who without any Charm or Magick than that of Pru∣dence only, can relieve, and bring those safely off who resemble Jason, that is, who have more courage to enterprize Affairs, than they have gifts of Provi∣dence to come off with Safety. I have purposely here inserted this, that young Ladies may perceive they have not only a Capacity to understand that which is important in the Affairs of the World, but that which is sound, and comes up to the heighth of the pu∣rest wisdome. But it is not enough to prove that they are capable of Vertue, unless they are provided with means to keep it; after they have seen it is natu∣rall to them, they must see that it is necessary for them. There is nothing
then more certain, than that Wisedome, and Fear are alwayes inseparable, and as Rashness puts the most Confident in Danger, so Distrust doth put the weak∣est in Safety. Pallas who ought to serve as a Pat∣tern to Woman-kind,Ladies to stand up∣on their Guard. was feigned by the Poets to be alwayes armed, to show to those of her Sex, that it is re∣quisite for them to stand upon their Guard continually, and having so ma∣ny Enemies, to have alwayes some Defence in readiness. Women should tremble no less than the Covetous, at the shadow of every Reed, since they carry a Treasure which is more easie to lose, and more worthy to be kept: and surely whatsoever her merits are, she that is without Fear, is as a Town without a Wall, as easie to take, as it is hard to be kept. I understand not by this that Pru∣dence should alwayes keep us in a Fear. There is a way betwixt Fear and Con∣fidence, which this Vertue doth teach us, either to prevent, or to eschew the mischiefs which might happen to us. And truly, many there are who are too credulous, or too distrustfull, there need no imposed Fancies with which to affright them; their Fears are as idle as
their Hopes: and since Wisedome showeth the point of Mediocrity to other Vertues, so should it show in this, what the excess, or Defect is. But not to dissemble, Distrust is more of∣ten with Wisdome, than Credulity, and if it be not more reasonable, at the least, it is more secure. This Vertue consists no less in choo∣sing the Good, than in fearing the Evil, and yet we see there is nothing more Common in these Dayes than bad Elections, whether it be in Friendship, or in Fortune. This Fault is repaired by Wisdome, which is particularly em∣ployed in deliberating, and choosing. To speak the Truth, many have great need of this Vertue, nor should they wonder much if Repentance wait upon their Affections, whilest Knowledge,Why Re∣pentance followeth many friendships and Choice doth not accompany them; when they fail there is nothing but bruitish Affections, nothing but dan∣gerous Conversations, and uncertain Confidences. I know to whom I write, I would not therefore appear too difficult to be understood; but in all Occasions where Discretion is to be wished, there is a certain Consideration which exa∣mineth all the Circumstances of the
Design; and if Prudence be the Eye of the Soul, this Discretion is the apple of that Eye. CHAP. VII. Concerning the Honour, or Reputation of young Ladies and Gentlewomen. WE live in an Age of Pomp, and Ostentation, where the pra∣ctice of Morality is almost quite put down, and where the Vertues of the Times consist but in Excess, and Ex∣travagance.Young Ladies to be tender of their Honour. Howsoever young La∣dies are obliged to do all they can to take away the Subject of evil tongues, and to avoid scandall; but the wisest, and the most Vertuous do labour often∣times herein to little purpose, for do they what they can, there is no infalli∣ble Rule to save their Reputation; and since it depends so much upon the opi∣nion of others, there is more of For∣tune in it, than Discretion. We may not think that Innocence alone, and a good Carriage is sufficient for it, since our Saviour himself, who is the foun∣tain of all Goodness, and Wisdome, had his Renown questioned for a
Time, by the Malice, and Impostures of his Enemies, who would have him to pass for a Man that was addicted to licentiousness. This only Example shews sufficiently, that we must have something else besides a good Com∣portment to preserve our Reputa∣tion. Moreover, there is I know not what unhappiness in some persons, that doth expose them to the Tongues of the De∣tractors; and this more often happens to the Vertuous than to others,The best Ladies most sub∣ject to be censured. be∣cause their Denials do beget them Ene∣mies, and thereby they often put themselves in Danger (as Susanna) to be accused of a Crime they never would commit. There are also some Countenances, which do incite evil tongues to censure amiss, and the reason of it is, because there are a generation of sullen fools, who do conceive that a Woman can∣not laugh and not be vicious, and that there is no Innocency, but where they see a sadness, and a Melancholly. This is the Censure of the Ignorant, who imagine that Vertue should al∣wayes weep, and that of all spirits, the most pleasant is the most dangerous, as if there cannot be a pleasant humour
without an evil Conscience. But if Gentlewomen should now make it their business to contest with such Hy∣pocrites, they would find too many Enemies to deal with, and they should be surer of their Hatred than their amendment. Amongst the Romans, Claudia the Vestall Virgin was innocent,Chastity protected by a Won∣der. and yet she was accused for being Bankrupt in her Honour, only because she dressed her self with too much Curiosity: it was enough to cast her, that she took a little more pains, and Care in her Habit, and Discourse, than did well become a Religious Woman. To speak the truth, this was but a little Apparence to ground a Process, on, yet she never could have come off either with life or Honour, but by an imme∣diate Wonder, when she removed a Ship with her Girdle only, which many Men, and Engines could not stir. It is therefore to be wished, that those who do intrude themselves to judge of Dispositions, not knowing well their Natures, were to be chasti∣zed with the punishment of Midas, who preferred the rustick sound of the Bag-pipe of Pan, above the Harmony
of Apolloes Lute, giving his suffrage to that which made the loudest noise. The Judgement of many is not unlike to his, who esteem of things by the Co∣lour, and the look only, and are no less worthy than Midas was to wear long ears, as the token of their Stupi∣dity. There is a great deal of savage bruit∣ishness in such wild censures, and yet the World abounds with them, and these are they that give an ill Reputati∣on to those persons who deserve to have a good one. And yet they must not become viti∣ous for the ill opinion which the wicked World hath on them;A vertu∣ous use to be made by Ladies when cen∣sured. they should strive to live better to purchase a better Name, which though they have not the happiness to possess, they should not fail to have alwayes the Vertue to merit. The Testimony of a good Conscience is more valuable, than all their Censures: if there were no Ene∣mies to praise, or blame, the Vertu∣ous Ladies would alwayes find enough in their own Mirrour to satisfie them∣selves, and the soul ones to be afflicted. The Innocent should no more perplex themselves, when they are called or accounted guilty, than they should say
they are sick, when they are well. If all Actions should be examined, it would be found that they are all sub∣ject to Interpretation. Who can judge certainly (setting Christian Charity aside) of a Man who gives Alms in publick, whether it be for a good Ex∣ample, or for Vanity? Can they not say of one that is patient, that it is a sign of a dull tame spirit, as well as of a Vertuous one. May not those La∣dies who are serious, be accounted sullen as well as modest.Interpre∣tation the greatest Friend or Enemy. Interpretation doth all, and when things are indifferent, we speak of them according to opinion, and not according to their own Nature. The Wise therefore must seek Consola∣tion in their own Consciences, and when they have done all they can to de∣serve a good Reputation, they must resolve to neglect and not mind the Ill. CHAP. VIII. Of Learned Ladies and Gentlewomen. TO give an Encouragement to young Gentlewomen, who de∣sire to be absolute and accomplished in
all things, we shall in the first place af∣firm that their Complexions (accord∣ing to Physicians) being more delicate than ours, they are also thereby better disposed for study of the Arts, and Sci∣ences. We shall find in History, that the ancient Gaules reserving to them∣selves the atchievments of Arms, did leave unto their Wives the establish∣ment of the Laws, and the management of the Commonwealth, and whatsoever at home doth concern the glory of Peace. Let what will be objected against it, they are capable as well as men; we shall not go far for Exam∣ples: this Nation hath reason to con∣fess it with me, which was crowned with Honour, and Happiness, and li∣ved in its highest flourish under the Government of Queen Elizabeth;The In∣compara∣ble Exam∣ple of Q. Elizabeth. what Language was there so difficult in which she did not excell? Mr. Ascham who was one of her Instructors, hath left it recorded to the everlasting Glory of her Name, that she did read more Greek in one Day, than many great Doctors did read Latin in a whole Week. Undoubtedly there is no Defect in Women, for the attaining of the great∣est Knowledge that can be purchased by
Learning. Have we not Ladies as well in Countrey, as in Court, who can write upon the hardest, and most serious Subjects, and can speak to the purpose of the highest Mysteries of Re∣ligion, who know well all Histories both Prophane and Holy, who under∣stand the forreign Languages as well as their own, and whose entertainment is every way as solid, as it is acceptable. Have we not those Ladies who are ex∣perienced as well in forreign Langua∣ges as in their own, and do so ex∣cell in Knowledge, as it is much to be lamented, that the tyranny of Cu∣stome hath hindered many of them from publishing their Works, in which, in our Nation, that great Mir∣rour of her Sex, and of our Age, the Marchioness of Newcastle, is only hap∣py, by leaving the benefit of her Writings to Posterity. And although men are sparing, and very Backward to write of the praises of Women, they cannot choose but te∣stifie this Truth, that as Men have an Apollo for the Author of Sciences, so Women have their Minerva, who in∣vented the best and most profitable wayes for the advantage of Humane life. If I were unwilling to uphold a
Truth so interlaced with fictions, I might content my self to send them who make a doubt thereof, to the nine Muses of the Poets, to whom all the Ancients do attribute the Invention of the Arts. I shall only adde, that if the Oracle of Apollo had declared Socrates for the wisest of Men, Socrates himself confessed that his Wife Diotima had taught him all his Prudence.The rare Commen∣dation of Diotima. It is no small Prerogative for this Woman to have instructed a Philosopher, whose life was so full of Vertues, and whose Morality had more Relation to the Precepts of Christianity, than to any other. We see nothing of Women in Histories, which Experience doth not every day hold forth to those, who will judge of Women without pas∣sion. CHAP. IX. Of the Marriage of young Ladies and Gentlewomen. NOtwithstanding that Marriages have been said to be made in Hea∣ven, and established in Paradise, yet divers Objections have been made by
some Gallants against it. The first Objection Some dif∣ficulties in Marriage.As first (to which Nicholas Causinus seems to lean) it is looked upon as a Captivity, whereby one person is en∣thralled to the Cares and Humours of another: and if it so fall out, that either party hath mistaken in his or her Choice, and have met with a hard bar∣gain, his whole life is ever after most miserable; for what greater Injustice can there be, than for one hours Folly, for a fault Committed without malice, it being but a meer over-sight, yea ma∣ny times to obey the Counsels of ano∣ther, that any Man or Woman should be bound to an everlasting Torment. The se∣cond Ob∣jection. It effemi∣nates the Spirits.It is again alledged, that Marriage is the spoiling of rare and excellent Spi∣rits, insomuch the Flatteries to one another, the Affection towards Chil∣dren, the Care of Houshold Affairs, and the Improvement of their Fami∣lies, do abate and mollifie the vigour and strength of the most Heroicall Spi∣rits that are; and for the attestation of this, they do alledge Sampson, Solomon, and others. And therefore however the matter goes, we had not need to marry, for we see that those who have more Flesh than Spirit, who are strong
in Body, and but weak in Mind, do tye themselves to the Flesh, but such who have strong and powerfull Spirits, do not seem to be affected with Marri∣age at all. We find again by experience, that divers persons of Reverence do exclude themselves from Marriage, and the Reason is, because Marriage hindereth and averteth those high and beautifull elevations of the Soul, the Contem∣plation of things Celestiall and Divine, which is inconsistent with the daily mo∣lestations of Domesticall Affairs, for which Cause St. Paul preferreth the sin∣gle life before Marriage. Conveniency (they say) may well hold with Marri∣age, but Honesty and an obstinate Chastity is quite on the other side. It is again objected,Another Objection. that it is a great trouble to Devotion, and to Holy En∣terprizes, whereupon St. Augustine doth report, that having resolved with some of his Friends, (amongst whom some were married) to retire from the City, and Conversation in publick, the better to attend to the Study of Wis∣dome and Vertue, their purpose was quickly altered, by the Wives of those who were married. Whereupon, or upon some Consideration like unto it,
another wise Man said, That if Men could live without Women, they should be visited and accompanied by Angels. Marriage moreover is a hinderance to all such that delight to travell, to see the Condition and Government of For∣reign Countries, whether they learn to make themselves wise, or to teach wisdome unto others, and to publish what they know. Another Objection against Marriage.They alledge against Marriage, that it doth not only Corrupt and deject good and great Spirits, but it depriveth the publick of many singular Improve∣ments, which cannot manifest them∣selves sitting in the lap of a Woman, or dancing a little Baby in their Arms. Is it not a great loss (say they) that he who is able for his wisdome and policy to go∣vern a City, should spend all the talent of his Time in the Government of a Woman, and a few Children. And therefore it was well answered by an eminent Per∣sonage, that was sollicited to marry, That he was born to command Men, and not to subject himself unto a Woman; to counsell Kings, and Princes, and not lit∣tle Children.The An∣swer to the seve∣ral Obje∣ctions. But to this, and to whatsoever else of any Force, that can be objected against Marriage, it may be answered,
that the Nature of Man is not Capable of Perfection, or of any thing against which nothing may be objected. The best and most excellent Remedies af∣forded unto Man, are in some degree or other but sickly, and Mingled with many Inconveniences, and this is the best that could be devised for Mans Pre∣servation and Multiplication. And if there be such troubles in Marriage,Marriage is a School of Vertue. a Man may say that by reason of these thorns and Difficulties, Marriage is a School of Vertue, and by long use is become a Familiar and a Domesticall Exercise: whereupon Socrates a great Doctor of Wisdome, did once say unto one who did upbraid him, with the petulant Noise of one of his Wives, named Xantippe, That he did thereby learn within his own Doors, to be Constant and Patient every where else, and to esteem the Crosses of Fortune to be sweet and plea∣sant to him. It cannot be denied with St. Paul, but that he who can live unmar∣ried doth best, but yet for the Honour of Marriage, a Man may undeniably hold forth, that it was first Instituted by God himself in Paradise, before any other thing, and that in the state of Innocen∣cy, and Perfection. The Son of God did afterwards ap∣prove,
and honour Marriage with his Presence,Constitu∣ted in Pa∣radise, and afterwards honoured by the Son of God. and with the first Miracle that ever he wrought, which was done in the Favour of Marriage, and of Mar∣ried Men: moreover he hath honour∣ed it with this Priviledge, that it serv∣eth as a Figure of that great Union of his with his Church, and for that Cause it is called a Great Mystery. Without all question, Marriage is not a thing that is Indifferent; it is ei∣ther a great Good, or a great Evil, a great Content, or a great Trouble; it is either a Paradise, or a Hell; either a sweet and pleasant Way, or a rough, and a dangerous Walk. It Consisteth of many parts: there must be a meeting of many qualities; there are many Considerations to be had besides the parties married, for whatsoever a Man saith, he marrieth not only for himself; his Posterity, Family, Alliance, are interests in it, and all of them of great Importance. The praise of Marri∣age.Marriage is a step to Wisdome; a holy, and an inviolable band: if the Choice be good and well ordered, there is nothing in the World that is more beautifull. It is a sweet Society of life, full of Trust and Constancy, and an infinite number of profitable of∣fices,
and mutuall obligations. It is a fellowship not of not distempered Love, but Amity, for Love distem∣pered, and Amity, are as different, as the burning Heat of a Feaver, from the naturall Heat of a Sound Body. Marriage hath in it self Amity, Utility,What Mar∣riage con∣taineth in it self. Justice, Honour, Constancy, a plain pleasure, but firm, and solid, and more universall. Love is grounded upon pleasure only, and it is Ardent, and enflaming. Few Marriages suc∣ceed well, that derive their Beginnings from amorous Desires. Marriage hath more need of a nobler Foundation, and must walk more warily. This boiling Affection is worth nothing. In Marriage there are two things that are essentiall to it,What es∣sentiall in Marriage. and which at the first aspect do seem to be Contrary, although indeed they be not, that is to say, an Equality sociable, such as is amongst Fellows, and an Inequality, that is to say, Superiority and Inferio∣rity.In what the Equa∣lity doth consist. The Equality consisteth in a per∣fect, and an entire Community of all things, as Souls, Wills, Bodies, Goods, which are the Fundamentall Laws of Marriage, and in some places do ex∣tend even to Life, and Death, in such a manner that the Husband being dead,
the Death of the Wife must inconti∣nently follow. And this in those pla∣ces is practised by the publick Laws of the Countries, and oftentimes with so ardent an affection, that many Wives belonging to one Husband, will pub∣lickly contend for the Honour to go first to sleep with their Spouse. This Equality doth likewise consist in that Power, which they have in Common over their Family, whereby the Wife is called the Companion of her Husband, the Mistress of the House and Family, as the Husband is the Ma∣ster, and the Lord. But the Distinction of Superiority, and Inferiority, doth consist in this, that the Husband hath power over the Wife, and the Wife is subject to her Husband in all things.The Wife though the more no∣ble to be subject to her Hus∣band. Although the Wife be more noble, or more rich, yet she is subject to her Husband; and this is naturally grounded on the Strength, and Sufficiency of the one, and the Insufficiency of the other. A remar∣keable Ob∣servation.Man at the first was immediately made by God, according to his Image, and perfect, for Nature doth alwayes begin with things perfect. The Wo∣man was made in the second place af∣ter Man, of the Substance of Man, to
serve as an Aid, and to be as a Second to Man, who is her Head, and there∣fore she is the more imperfect. And this is the difference by order of Genera∣tion: the Woman moreover, was the first in Evil. The power of the Husband hath been in some places, as that of the Father over Life, and Death; and the Hus∣band amongst the Romans, had power to kill his Wife in four Cases, Adulte∣ry, Suborning of Children, Counter∣feiting false Keyes, and immoderate drinking of Wine. This Power, as also amongst the Grecians, and the an∣cient Gaules, was afterwards mode∣rated. The Wife is bound to hold the Con∣dition, follow the quality, Countrey,What the Wife is bound un∣to. Family, and Habitation of her Hus∣band. She is bound to accompany him in all things, in his Journeys, his Banishment, his Imprisonment, yea although he be condemned to be a wandering Person, a Vagabond, and a Fugitive. The Examples hereof are many, and singular; as of Sulpitia, who fol∣lowed her Husband Lentulus, being banished into Sicily; of Erithraa, who followed her Husband Phalaris; of Ip∣sicrates,
who followed her vanquished Husband Mithridates throughout all Extremities. Some adde to this, that Wives are to follow their Husbands even in the Warres, and into those Countries, where her Husband is sent with the publick Charge. Marriage in all Countries is not car∣ried after one and the same fashion, but according to the diversities of the Cli∣mates it is more strict, or more easie. Some Nations to make Marriage more free and fertile, have practised the li∣berty to take and leave Wives, as the Turks, Jews, and others: And where∣as they lay unto our charge, that this Christian Restraint is the cause of ma∣ny lascivious Acts and Adulteries; we may truely answer, that Christianity converseth not of Marriage by reasons purely humane and temporall, but it doth weigh it with reasons more high, and noble: And to say the Truth, A∣dulteries are as Common where Poly∣gamy,Poligamies and Repudiations are in force; witness the Jews, and King David him∣self, who for all the Wives that he had could not defend himself from it: and besides, Experience sheweth in the greatest part of Marriages, that this Constraint increaseth Love, especially
in honest and noble minds, who doe easily accommodate themselves when they find themselves in such asort link∣ed; And as for lascivious and idle per∣sons, it is the Immodesty of their man∣ners that makes them such which no li∣berty can amend. The use of Divorce is likewise dif∣ferent, for with some,Divorces. as with the He∣brews, Greeks and Armenians, the Cause of the Divorce is not expressed, and it is not lawfull to take a Wife that hath been once divorced, although it be lawfull to marry another. But by the Law of Mahomet, the Separation is made by the Judge, with knowledge taken of the Cause (except it be by mutuall consent) which must be Bar∣renness, Adultery, Incompatability of Humours, or an Enterprize on his or her part against the Life of each o∣ther. This latter way of Divorce which doth express the Cause, seemeth not to be as good as the former, for it disho∣noureth the parties, and doth discover many things which should be conceal∣ed; and if it doth so come to pass that the Cause be not sufficiently proved, and thereupon that they do still conti∣nue together, prodigious poysonings
and murders do ensue, as it was found to be most true at Rome, where a Wo∣man being apprehended for poysoning her Husband, accused others, and they also accused many more to the number of threescore and ten, which were all executed for the same offence. The Duty of the Hus∣band.In the next place we shall represent unto you what is the Duty of married parties; And the first is of the Hus∣band, to Instruct his Wife with mild∣ness in all things that belong unto her Duty, or whatsoever she is capable of, In the second place to nourish her, whe∣ther she brought any portion or no por∣tion with her. In the third, to cloath her, and love her, and defend her; But to hold her under as a servant (a fault too common in Forraign Countreys) or to make her as it were his Mistris, by subjecting himself too much unto her (a fault too common in the Eng∣lish Nation) are two Extreams that are vile and sordid. The Wife above all things to believe that her Husband is a wise Man.The Duties of the Wife are, first to have a sure, and setled Apprehension, that her Husband is a wise Man, for on that particular depends a great part of the Wives obedience, who will be apt to run into extravagancies when she is once possessed of the weakness of
her Husbands discretion; she is to give Honour, Reverence, and Respect unto her Husband, for so have the wisest Women that ever were esteemed of their Husbands: She that dischargeth this Duty, doth honour her self more than her Husband, and doing other∣wise, she wrongeth none but herself. Moreover, She is to give obedience in all just and lawfull things, and apply, and accommodate her self to his Hu∣mours, and Disposition. Thirdly, To provide for his Vi∣ands, either by her self or by some other. Fourthly, To keep the House, where∣upon the Wife is compared to the Tor∣tois. Some there are that give Instru∣ctions, that in her Husbands absence she ought to be Invisible, and not appear in her full splendour but when she comes near the Sun. Fifthly,Silence in married Women. She ought not to speak ma∣ny words but in her Husbands pre∣sence; and because such a silent Wo∣man is a rare thing and but seldome found, she is said in Ecclesiasticus, to be a precious gift of God. Lastly, She is to imploy her time in the practice and study of Huswifery, which is the most Honourable, and
Profitable Profession of a Gentlewo∣man: This is her chiefest quality, and which a Man of a mean Fortune should especially seek in his marriage; it is affirmed to be the only Dowry that serveth either to ruinate or to preserve Families. A mode∣ration to be had in pleasure.Moreover, in the private acquain∣tance, and use of Marriage, there must be a moderation; for the pleasure that is therein must be intermingled with some regard to the rules of Health, and of long Life, it must be a wise and a conscionable Delight. There can no certain Law or Rule be prescribed to it: Plutarch in the Life of Solon, would perswade young Women that thrice in a moneth is fair, but they have wished him hanged for his counsail. Good Hus∣wifery is a great Vertue.To govern a House is an excellent and a profitable imployment: there is nothing more beautifull than a Hous∣hold well and peaceably governed: it is a Profession that is not difficult, for she that is not capable of any thing else is capeable of this, but yet it is troublesome by reason of the multitude of Affairs, nevertheless it is a great happiness, and a good way to live at ease, to have one whom a man may trust, and on whom he may with con∣fidence
rely himself; to which purpose he must choose one true and loyall, and oblige her to do well by that confi∣dence which he putteth in her. The principall Precepts that belong to Frugality are these:Excellent Precepts of Fruga∣lity. First, To buy and sell all things at the best times and seasons. Secondly, To take an especiall care least the Goods in the House be spoil∣ed, or least they be miscarried: This doth properly belong to the Wife, to whom Aristotle doth give this authori∣ty and care, & she is to provide most prin∣cipally for these three things, Necessity, Cleanliness, and Order. A Feast must not be more costly, than cleanly; it ought not to exceed either in mirth, or cost. Again, A course is to be taken to moderate Charges, which is not done but by taking away superfluities; an Angell in a mans pocket will doe a Man more good than ten immoderately spent. And very good counsaile it it to make a great Shew with a small Charge, and above all not to suffer the Expence to grow above the Receit of the Income, and a great Care and Eye is to be had over the whole: It is a Proverb in France, That the Eye and Vi∣gilance
of the Master maketh the Horse fat.Another singular Precept. But above all, the Master, or Mi∣stris must have a great care to conceale their Ignorance and Insufficiency in the affairs of the House, for if the servants once find that their Masters look not to them, they will quickly make them to repent it. CHAP. X. Of the Vanity of some young Ladies and Gentlewomen. Vanity as an Origi∣nal Sin in many young La∣dies.THe love of Bravery is so thorowly ingrafted into some Gentlewo∣men, as that we may as easily take off their skin from their Bodies, as this Vanity from their Minds; it is the Originall Sin which many of that Sex do bring into this World from their Mothers Womb: there is no Baptism that can cleanse them from the tincture of this Infirmity, and he that shall go about to accuse, or condemn them for it, must expect to be so prosecuted, as to have an Action to be commenced in Law against him. If this were only amongst some La∣dies at the Court, peradventure it
might be something pardonable, but almost all Women are born with this passion, and so entirely they are addi∣cted to it, that it begets a Confusion in Habits;No Distin∣ction in Habits be∣twixt In∣feriours and Supe∣riours. there is almost no Distinctions in Orders, Citizens Wives and Daugh∣ters will be as Queens, and if great La∣dies will be as Queens, they must be∣come as Citizens Wives. Neverthe∣less the most envious to the Sex must acknowledge, that all Women have some Right to Comeliness, and a De∣cency in Garments, ever abiding with∣in the limits of Modesty, that so the most severe may not blame their super∣fluities, nor they who are more favou∣rable accuse their defects. It is too true that Women in their Habits,Womens Vanity have serv∣ed a long time for a Common-place to Preachers have already served very ma∣ny Ages, as a Common-place to the Preachers, they afford matter of Cen∣sure unto all, and oftentimes they are ridiculous to their own sex. It is the strongest Armour that La∣dies have from Nature, when they can mannage their Spirits with Discretion, and govern their Affairs by sweet and peaceable wayes, they then astonish the most Confident, disarm the stout∣est, and triumph over all opposition. It was with a mild Spirit that Esther chan∣ged
Ahashuerosh into a Lamb, and by which Abigail was more stronger than the Armies of David. A young Gentlewoman well accom∣plished is as a Starre with five Rayes, or as a Jewell with five precious Pearls, Devotion, Modesty, Chastity, Discre∣tion, Charity: Such Women are of an Heroicall Composition, they seem to have been moulded upon the Celestiall Globes by the hands of Angels, so sweet are their Deportments, so rare their Virtues, and their price so unvaluable: They are in their Houses as the Sun in his Orb: He that should attempt to represent their worth, should he draw out all the rich Our, and precious Stones which are in the Center of the Earth, he should rather find insuffici∣ency in his Enterprize, than want of Merit in the Subject. But all are not of the same Temper, for some there are (of whom already some mention hath been made) who must be dressed up like to so many Idols, their waiting Gentlewomen have more to do to attend their Beau∣ties, than the Vestall Virgins to main∣tain their sacred fires. In the morn∣ing they study their Glass, in the after∣noon they are taken up and down with
Visits, where their Discourse is so loud, that a few Women would suffice to make the Noise of a Mill. Others there are, who entertain themselves with trifles, with Songs, and Pam∣phlets, in which they are so well read, and would seem to be of so great an Ability, that they will give Laws to the Poets, and Writers themselves. Others are only taken up with their own Sensuality. There is a Frensie in the Pride of ma∣ny Gentlewomen:A Frenzy in the pride of many Wo∣men. He who would see the Stuffs taken up at the Mercers, to cloath a little Body of theirs, whereof the Worms will quickly make a Dung∣hill, would think they had undertaken to cover some creature of a most prodi∣gious Bulk. Should we reckon up all the Furniture of many Gentlewomen, as we see them lying on the Table, ha∣ving never beheld such Vanity before, we should think it Mercery enough to furnish a little City, rather than the Body of a little Lady. They are like those Birds who have almost no Bo∣dies, but are all Feathers; more busi∣ness it is to adorn one of them, than some do take who have a Common∣wealth to manage. What shall we say, when they begin
the adulteries of their Bodies, with the adulteries of their Face, which insen∣sibly is eaten into with painting and poyson, as if they would derive their Beauty from Destruction. Fashions are every day invented rather to sell naked Bodies,They go so naked as if they were ra∣ther to sell their Bo∣dies than to cover them. than to cover them. I know not what (saith one) may be re∣served for the eyes of a Chast Husband, when almost through all Markets where they go, the secret parts of his Wives Body are exposed, as if they were ready to be deliver∣ed to the best Bidders. Surely since Wo∣men are born with some supereminen∣cy of Body, and are the goodliest Crea∣tures in the World, why should they go to beg glory from the Corruption of the Earth, from Worms, from Patches, and sometimes from the rankest poison? And these new fashions of attiring the Body, as they are costly, so they are dangerous. What a wild affectati∣on is it in young Gentlewomen, to think a slender Wast to be the most ex∣quisite proportion, and by strait lacing of themselves, they would seem if pos∣sibly they could to be as slender in the Wast, (at the next Gambole,) as the May-pole is tall in its heighth. Al∣though they are big enough to be wiser, yet they never think themselves to be
fine enough in the Small, untill they can span their own Wasts. But what a desperate,To be over-strait¦ly laced most per∣rillous. what a wil∣full Inconvenience is this? By this means they reduce their Breasts into such pinching Extremities, that it doth suddenly engender in many a noisome Breath, and by shutting up themselves in a Whale-bone Prison, they open a door to Consumptions, and other perillous Inconveniencies. It seems this foolish Fashion was in the Time of Terence, as may appear in his Comedy called Eunuchus: Haud similis Virgo est Virginum nostra∣rum, quas matres student demissis humeris esse vincto pectore, ut graciles fiant. Si quae habitior est paulò, pugilem esse aiunt, deducunt cibum. This Maid is nothing near so pretty, As are the Lasses in our City. Whose Bodies are so closely lac'd, To make them have a handsome Wast. This foolish Custome is much pra∣ctised at Auspurge in Germany, as well as in England, and some neighbouring Nations that do affect Novelty. They are (he saith) strait laced, and slender, with shoulders pen'd in, lest being full bo∣died, they should be thought to be of too
masculine a Temper. And this may be one Cause why many are now troubled with the Epidemicall Disease, called in French the white Flowers, a Disease so unknown in former times, that An∣cient Women boast they never heard of it. Paraeus making mention that the Bo∣dies of Female young Children, are more moist,To be too strait laced is the oc∣casion of many Di∣seases. and more tender, than the Bodies of the Male, doth affirm, that thereupon they become often∣times more crooked, by the crooked posture of their Bodies, in carrying, sitting, stooping, or the like. More∣over he affirms, that Crookedness is seldome incident to the Countrey peo∣ple, but is for the most part incident to those who live in Cities, or the Habi∣tations of great persons; and this comes to pass, by the straitness of the Garments which they do wear, occa∣sioned by the folly of their Mothers, or Nurses, who while they strive to have their young Daughters Bodies so small in the middle, do pluck and draw their Bones awry, and make them Crooked, for the ligatures of the Back-bone being very tender, at that age, and soft and moist withall, the muscles or spondels do easily slip aside. Thus
Nurses whilest they too straitly do lace the Breasts, and Sides of Girls, on pur∣pose to make them slender, do cause the Brest-bone to cast it self aside, whereby one Shoulder doth often be∣come bigger, and fuller than another. From hence the said Children become Asthamatick, that is,It often∣times cau∣seth De∣formities. to have an evil Breath, the Lungs and Muscles which serve for breathing, being pressed to∣gether, and straitned. The same Errour is committed, if they lay their Children more frequent∣ly along upon their Sides, than upon their Backs, or if taking them up when they be awake, they take them by the Feet, and Legs, and never put their other hand under their Backs, never so much as thinking that Children grow most towards their Head. And I would to God (sayes my Author) that the Inconfideration and Imprudency of ma∣ny Mothers, did not unwittingly many times cause a Deformity in their Children, whilest they are in their womb; for not to mention those Impressions of Deformity, which depend upon Imagination, Affrights, or Blows, they are oftentimes occasioned by the ill placing of the Mothers Body as she is sitting, for hereupon not only the Body of the Mother, but the Body of the Child enclosed
in the womb, is oftentimes perverted and distorted.The care which Women great with Child should have. Therefore many Gentlewo∣men who all the time of their going with Child, do sit with their Legs across, or with Bodies bowed downwards to∣wards their Knees, or do wear long bel∣lied, and strait laced Garments, do bringforth Children awry, or distort∣ed in their Hands or Feet, because the Child can neither move freely, nor commodiously extend his mem∣bers. More cautious (according to Spige∣lius) and far more advised, are the Ve∣netian Dames, who never do lace them∣selves so straitly, and do account it an excellence of beautifull proportion, to be round and full bodied, to attain which comeliness, they use all the Art that possibly they can, and if they can∣not be corpulent by Nature, nor yet re∣ally be brought to it by Art, they will yet counterfeit such a fullness of Body, by the looser Garments they wear on them.
CHAP. XI. Of their knowledge in Spicery, &c. IT is a very commendable quality in Gentlewomen, whether young or ancient, to visit the sick, which that they might perform with as much Re∣putation as Charity, they should have some knowledge in Physick, and in the severall operations of Herbs and Spices. This indeed would be too great a task for our present Institution, but because we are to give an essay to all things, which belong to the education of young Ladies and Gentlewomen, we will touch a little upon this. And in the first place, because the Knowledge of the sundry sorts of Spi∣ces is very requisite, whether for per∣sons sick, or in health, we will begin with them. Pepper is a very hot and dry Spice,Pepper the Na∣ture of it. even to the fourth degree. Black Pep∣per is with us most in use; it heateth much, it cutteth tuff and gross flegm, it helpeth Concoction, and is good against Crudities, it is not to be small beaten, for fear of enflaming the
Bloud, it is more safely to be used in old Age, than with younger people, for whom the too frequent Use is ex∣ceeding hurtfull. Ginger the Nature of it.Ginger is the next, which is said to be hotter than Pepper, but it is so spo∣ken in this respect, not that Pepper is much cooler, but because the biting heat of Pepper is less durable, and is not of so terrestriall a substance. Dry Ginger is very hot, and though not so much in use to season ei∣ther Fish, or Flesh as Pepper, it is good to help Digestion, and to open obstru∣ctions, to discuss wind, and to expell it out of the Body. Green Ginger pre∣served in the Indies is not so hot, and it is good to eat fasting for a waterish or a windy stomack, the more moist and succulent it is, it is so much the better. That which is here prepared and pre∣served in Syrrup is not so good, and it is hardly to be concocted by a weak stomack, of which many Experiments are to be given. Cloves and how profitable.Cloves is a Spice brought from the East Indies; they comfort the Head, Heart, and Stomach, they help the eye-sight, and Concoction, and strengthen Nature, they are good against Faintings, and Swounings, and
against the Plague, or any other In∣fectious Disease, they are good against all fluxes of the Belly, proceeding of cold Humours, they strengthen the re∣tentive faculty, and make the breath sweet, but young people, and hot, and Cholerick Complexions are to be sparing in the use of them, as of all other sort of Spices. Nutmeg is the fruit of a tree growing in the East Indies,Nutmegs good, and for what. and it is covered with that Spice which we call Mace. Nutmeg is accounted hot and dry in the second degree, and are good for the same Causes for which the Cloves are commended. Nutmeg is very astrin∣gent, and good for Cold, Flegmatick bodies, and cold Diseases, and Fluxes. The Nutmeg being yet green, and co∣vered with a green Husk as the Wal∣nut, is preserved in the Indies as the Ginger, but it is not so hot nor dry∣ing; it is very comfortable for the Head, and Stomack. Mace covereth the Nutmeg,Mace in what De∣gree hot, and how comforta∣ble. as al∣ready is expressed, it doth partake of the same Nature with it, it doth strengthen the Animall parts, and it is good against Fluxes, and spitting of bloud. Cinnamon is the inward Rind, or
Bark of a Tree growing in the East In∣dies; it is hot and dry in the third De∣gree, and yet in regard of the tenuity of its parts, it is thought not to heat so much as some other Spices. This Spice both in regard of its fragrant Smell, and pleasantness to the Palate, may justly challenge the first place of Excellency; it comforteth the Spirits,Cinnamon and its pro¦perties. and doth open obstructions both of Men and Women, it furthereth the expulsion of the Birth, helpeth Concoction, and expelleth Urine: But the same Cauti∣ons in it, as in the Waters distilled from it, are to be observed, which have been mentioned in the former Spices. The praise of Saffron.Saffron though growing at home, is nothing inferiour to any of the for∣mer; it is hot in the second, and dry in the first Degree: It reviveth the vi∣tall Spirits, it is good against all ob∣structions, it is very good against the Jaundies, and the stuffing of the Pipes of the Lungs, it is good to further the monethly Courses, and to facilitate Birth; but if it be taken in too great abundance, it doth much offend the Head, and the Brain, and procureth oftentimes the Head-ach, and instead of facilitating the Birth, the excess
of it may procure abortion. We shall follow the trace of good husbandry, and from Saffron we shall descend to Honey, which is hot and dry not above the second degree at most. It is a soveraign Preserver from putrefaction. Cholerick consti∣tutions and young people are to be carefull, as in the others, so in this also, how they fall into an excess with it, and rather leave it to old age, which may more safely use the same. It is undoubtedly best for phlegmatick complexions, for in those of a hotter constitution, it is suddenly converted into Choler: It is farre better boyled, than raw, and is more nourishing and easier of digestion. The best Honey is very sweet,Garden Honey best, and how to be Clarifi∣ed. plea∣sant of smell, of a cleer, and yellowish colour, indifferent stiff, and firm, yeel∣ding but lettle scumme in the top when it is boyled. The Garden Honey is the best; it is clarified by adding a little water unto it, about the fourth part, and so scum it whiles any froth ariseth, or till the water be evaporated, which is easily known by the bubbles rising from the bottom; If you will have it more pure, put into every pound of Ho∣ney the white of an Egge, and after∣wards
scum it again in the boyling: Honey is good in divers pectorall In∣firmities, the Cough, shortness of Breath, the Pleurisie, &c. Although (as I have said) Honey moderately taken doth open obstru∣ctions, being of a cleansing faculty, yet immoderately taken, it doth engender them, and many other Diseases are procured arising from it. In the next we shall give you an ac∣count of Sugar, which being more plea∣sant to the palate, is become in these latter Ages of a farre higher esteem, and every where in frequent use, as well in Sickness as in Health: It is certain that the Antients had not the Know∣ledg of Sugar,Sugar un∣known to the Anci∣ents. so commonly as we have attained to it. They indeed knew Su∣gar Canes, and some Sugar they had, which naturally was congealed on those Canes like Salt; they had also a kind of liquid Sugar which they squee∣zed out of the Caries, and used it in the steed of Honey, but it doth no where appear that they had the Art of prepa∣ring it, as now it is in use. Sugar is nei∣ther so hot nor so dry as Honey.Brown Sugar the best. The coursest being the brownest is the most cleansing, and approacheth neerest to the nature of Honey. Sugar is good for
abstersions in Diseases of the Brests, and Lungs. That which we call Sugar-candy, being well refined by boyling, is for this purpose in the greatest request: And although that Sugar in it self be opening and cleansing,Sugar ta∣ken too much ve∣ry hurtful. yet being too much used, it produceth dangerous ef∣fects in the Body, as the Jaundies, Ca∣chexies, and Consumptions; it rot∣teth also the teeth, and maketh them to look black, and many times it cau∣seth a noysome and a distastfull breath: And to what may the geeat number of people that weekly die of the Consum∣ption weekly in the City of London be imputed, as many Physitians now li∣ving in it do affirm, but to the immo∣derate eating of Sugar plums, and such sort of Confections. There is one thing besides of which you are to take an especiall notice,Some hard Sugar very dangerous which is, that a great store of our finest Sugar, and which is most called for, is refined, and whitened by the means of the lee of lime, which how prejudi∣ciall it is to our health I leave to every one to judge. I should here give you an account of the skill in severall common Diseases, and of what Medicines are most effe∣ctuall for their recovery, in which our
accomplished young Gentlewomen ought to be instructed, but if I should be so precisely curious as to fall upon all particulars, I should make this little Book to swell into a volume; I shall therefore forbear the further discourse of Diseases, and having told you of the nature of severall sorts of Spices, I shall only acquaint you, that we have here at home in our own Gardens, and un∣der our own Hedges,Excellent Plants in our own Countrey as good as Spices. many excellent Aromaticall Plants, such as Rosemary, Lavander, Time, Savory, Sage, Mints, Pennyroyall, Bazill, sweet Cerfueil, Avens, Angelica, and many others, in∣somuch that some Galenists do won∣der, that being supplied at home with such excellent Simples, we should seek so eagerly for outlandish Spices, which by the difficulty of transportation, or by the carelesness of the Merchant, are often brought unto us rotten and worm eaten, or at least by their age have lost a great deal of their virtues. But before I take my Pen quite off from this paper, which was intended to represent the waves of Recovery of certain Diseases, I shall only acquaint you with a great Inconvenience, and practised by many, which is, they are unwilling that the sick person in the
time of sickness should often change his linnen, and I know not by what pre∣scription, they are very unwilling that a sick Maid or Woman should often change her head-clothes. The Nurse and the Neoterick may pretend what they please,A great Caution in sick per∣sons con∣cerning the chang∣ing of their Linnen. but the Rules of the most received Physitians are, that the sick should be often shifted, for it much dis∣courageth and dejecteth the sick person to lie in foul linnen. It is their common Objection, that in the first place by this means, the sick may catch cold, and secondly that it much weakneth them to be shifted. To this it is answered, that it is but the vain fear of some foolish old women, who fear where there is no cause of fear, for if it be in cold weather, it may by the means of fire be easily prevented: And as for the danger which many al∣ledge, that shifting of linnen doth weaken the sick, it is a very absurd Ob∣iection, and as frivalous as the former, for it is so farre from weakning the sick, that it is rather an apparent means to increase their strength. To make this the more easily un∣derstood, we are to take notice, that in the body of Man there are three seve∣rall Concoctions; the first in the Sto∣mack,
or Maw, commonly called Chyli∣fication, having for its excrement, the excrement it self which is thrown into the draught. A remar∣keable Ob∣servation.The second Concoction is in the Li∣ver, & hath for its excrement the Urine. The third is called Nutrition, and it is performed in the whole Body, and hath for its excrement certain fuligi∣nous vapours, which by insensible transpiration, do breathe out them∣selves by the pores of the body, and by the Sweat which is apparent to the eye; now in times of sickness, espe∣cially in all sorts of Feavers, this last ex∣crement doth most abound, and doth make foul the linnen in which the sick persons lie, that linnen especially which is next unto their skin; for which cause sick folk should have their linnen often shifted, especially when they do sweat much; for if they be not shifted this danger doth ensue, that the Sweat continuing about the body, will be drawn in again by the same way it went forth: for this must be well considered,The Arte∣ries of the Body have a double motion. that the Arteries of the Body have a double motion, one whereby they expell the excrements already named, and the other whereby they draw into the Body the ambient
Air to refresh the Bloud. Now what∣soever Air is next unto them, be it good or bad, they do draw it in: And therefore if this foul sweaty Linnen do lye about them, or upon them, un∣doubtedly the Arteries will draw in the noisome Airs of it, which will suffocate the naturall Heat, and by consequence prolong the disease. Laurentius Jubert in his Book entituled, Des Erreurs po∣pulaires, to confirm this Truth, doth give this Instance, Let any Person come newly out of a hot Bath, where great store of Dust is newly raised, and he shall pre∣sently feel a kind of pricking over his whole Body, which is nothing else but these atomes of Dusts drawn in by the Arteries. By this then it doth infallibly ap∣pear, that the skin ought to be cleansed from all Corruption, and the Pores and Passages to be kept open and clean, by removing whatsoever may obstruct the same. And this I have purposely in this place inserted, that young La∣dies and Gentlewomen may see how much they are oftentimes injured, by their Ignorant, and wilfull Nurses, that do attend them.
CHAP. XII. Of the Art of Candying, and Preserv∣ing; as also touching Preserves, and Pomanders, &c. THese are curiosities which are not only commendable, but required in young Ladies and Gentlewomen; to represent them at large would ask more Art, and Time, than I have ei∣ther the ability or the leisure to perform it; and besides there are already in Print, many excellent Books concern∣ing the same Subject, as The Queens Delight, for Candying, and Preserv∣ing: The Compleat Book, for dressing of Flesh, and Fish, as also for the or∣dering of Sauces, and the making of severall sorts of Paste: Also another Book entituled, Severall selected Expe∣riments; with many others.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Art of Distilling. IN the first place, the young Gentle∣woman is to be furnished with very good Stills, for the Distillations of all kind of Waters, which Stills must be either of Tin, or sweet Earth, and in them she shall distill all manner of Wa∣ters, meet for the Health of her Hous∣hold, as Sage-water, which is sove∣raign against all Rheums and Collicks, Angelica-water good against Infecti∣on, Radish-water good for the Stone, Vine-water for Itchings, water of Cloves for the pain of the Stomack, Eye-bright-water excellent for weak and dim Eyes.How to distill af∣ter what colour you please. And if you would have your distilled Water to look of such, or such a Colour, or of what Co∣lour you do please; First you must di∣still your Water in a Stillatory, and then put it in a Glass of great strength, and fill it as full as you can with those Flowers whose Colours you desire, and then stop it, and set it in the Stilla∣tory, and let it distill, and you shall have the Colour you distill.
There are six precious Waters, which it is said that the Famous Hippo∣crates made, and sent to a Queen some∣times living in England, which here for the Novelty thereof I will in∣sert. Take Fennell, Rue, Vervin, En∣dive, Bettony, Germander, Red Rose, Capillus Veneris, of each an ounce, stamp them, and keep them in White-wine a day, and a night, and distill Water of them, and divide it in three parts, the first part you shall put in a Glass by it self,A Water more pre∣cious than Gold. for it is more precious than Gold, the second part is said to be as precious as silver, and the third part as soveraign as Balm. This Water purgeth all gross humours, and is very excellent for the Eye-sight. The second is, Take a pound of Sal∣gemma, and lap it in a green Dock-leaf, and lay it in the fire till it wax white, then put it in a Glass against the Air one night, and in the morning it will be turned into a Water like to Christall; keep this Water well in a Glass, and put a drop thereof into the Eye, and it shall cleanse and make sharp the Eye-sight; it is good for any Evil at the Heart, for the Canker, and the Morphew.
The third is, Take the Roots of Fen∣nell, Parsley, Endive, and Bettony, of each an ounce; first wash them well in luke-warm water, and bray them well with White-wine a day, and a night, and then distill them into Water. This Water is most excellent for the Head and Eyes. The fourth is, Take seeds of Parsly, Achannes, Vervin, Carawayes, and Centory, of each ten drams; beat all these, and put them in warm water a day, and a night, and then put them into a Vessel to distill. This Water is most precious for all sore Eyes, and very good for the Health of the Body. Fifthly, Take Limmell of Gold,A very precious Water and the manner how to distill it. Silver, Lattin, Copper, Iron, Steel, and Lead, and Lethargy of Gold, and Silver: Take Calamint, and Colum∣bine, and steep all together, the first day in the Urine of a Man-Child, that is to say, a day and a night, the second day in White-wine, the third day in the Juyce of Fennell, the fourth day in the white of Eggs, the fifth day in Womans Milk, that nurseth a Man Child, the sixth day in red Wine, the seventh day in the whites of Eggs, and upon the eighth day put all these toge∣ther,
and distill the Water of them, and keep this Water in a Vessel of sil∣ver, there can be nothing too precious to contain it. It expelleth all Rheums, and all manner of sickness from the Eyes, it wears away the Pearl, the Pin and the Web, it draweth again the distorted Eye-lids unto their own place, it easeth the Ach of the Head, and maketh those that use it to look young even in old age. Sixthly, Take the Goldsmiths Stone, and put it into the fire, till it be red hot, and quench it in a pint of White-wine, and do so nine times, and afterwards grind it, and beat it small, and cleanse the Water as clean as you may, set it afterwards in the Sun, with Water of Fennell distilled, untill it pass over the Touch four or five inches, and when you will use it, stir it all together, and then take up a drop with a Feather, and put it on your Nail, and if it abide, it is very good, then put it into the place that runneth, and annoint the Head with it, if it aketh, and the Temples also: And this upon Experience hath done much good, and it is said to be the same, which many Mountebanks about this City of London do so much boast of.
But since the Art of Chymistry is so much in our dayes in request, there are many soveraign things conducible for the Health of Man, which by them are every day found out, and for your better satisfaction I must refer you to them. CHAP. XIV. Of Dayries, and the making of Butter and Cheese, and other things belong∣ing to Countrey-Gentlewomen. I Must now speak something of Day∣ries, for the better satisfaction of the Gentlewomen both in City, and Countrey, that so the one might the better understand the practice in the Countrey, and the other being delight∣ed with her own Experience, may give a full Consent to the Truth of what we shall deliver. In the first place,How to choose the Kine. the Kine must be of the best Choice, and Breed, that can possibly be procured, the larger the Cow is, the better she is, and a good Reason is given for it, for when she grows old, she may be fed, and made fat, and fit for the Shambles, and
good Beef is better Nourishment than Milk. The Marks of a good Cow.The Signs of a Cow that gives good Milk are a wreathed Horn, a thin Neck, and a large hairy Dewlap, a full Udder, and the Teats long and thick. The best Kine that are black, are said to come from Cheshire, Lancashire, Derbyshire, Yorkeshire; and the best Cows red, and which give of all the most nourishing Milk, do come from Gloucestershire, and Sommersetshire; the pied Kine come generally from Lincolnshire. Amongst these the good Huswife may take her Choice as she pleaseth; but above all things she must be sure, that the Bull be of as good a Breed, as the Kine themselves. And it is very good counsell, that if at any time you buy any Kine to encrease your Dairy, you must be carefull that they do not come from a Soyl, that is more fruitfull than your own, but that ra∣ther they come into a better Pasture, for then they will prosper, and thrive with you; when otherwise they will pine away, and fall into Diseases, as pissing of bloud, and other Inconve∣niencies. Those Kine are said to give most
Milk, which have but lately calved.When Kine do give most Milk. For a Cow to give two Gallons at a Meal is rare; there are many who give constantly a Gallon, and a half, but if a Cow gives at once but one Gallon at a time, and that constantly, she may pass very well for a good Milch Cow. The best time for a Cow to calve in,The best time for a Cow to calve. is the latter end of February, and in the Moneths of March, and April, for then the Grass is either coming on, or springeth up in its perfect good∣ness. The best and most approved hours for Milking,The best hours for Milking. are in the Spring and Sum∣mer, betwixt five and six in the morn∣ing, and about six of the Clock in the evening. And although some there are, who will have their Kine milked in the Summer-season, betwixt twelve and one, yet there is no profit that can arise from it. It is an old Proverb, That two good Meals are better than three bad ones: It is the worst point of Hus∣wifery that can be, to leave the Cow half milked; for besides the loss of the Milk, it is the only way to make the Cow dry, and altogether unprofitable to the Dairy. The Profits arising from Milk are
chiefly three,The Pro∣fits arising from Milk Cream, Butter, and Cheese: The Cream is the Heart and Strength of the Milk, which must be skimmed very cleanly, for this Clean∣liness is such an Ornament to a good Huswife, that if she wants any part thereof, she loseth both that, and all other good Names whatsoever. Cream is not to be kept above two dayes in the Summer, and not above four in the Winter, if you will alwayes be provided with the sweetest and the best Butter. To keep Cream at the most above three dayes in Summer, and above six in Winter, cannot be done without great prejudice. If after the Moneth of My, before you salt your Butter, you shall pre∣serve a lump thereof, and put it into an earthen Vessel, and set it into the Sun, during the space of that Moneth of May, it will be very good for all man∣ner of aches, strains, wounds, and other grievances. The best time for salting of Butter.The best time to pot up Butter, is in the Moneth of May, for then the Air is most temperate, and the Butter will take Salt best; howsoever it may be done at any time betwixt May, and the end of September. The third Profit which ariseth from
the Dairy is Cheese,Of the making of Cheese. of which there are three kinds, Morning-milk Cheese, Nettle-Cheese. The Morning-milk Cheese is for the most part the fattest, and the best Cheese that is ordinarily made in the Kingdome. The Nettle-Cheese is so called, because that Net∣tles when the Cheese is but newly made, are put upon it, which Nettles once in two dayes are to be renewed. The Floaten-milk Cheese is the worst of all Cheeses, and indeed so course, that I neither love to write of it, nor to feed of it. CHAP. XV. Of Diet. TEmperance which is a Regular or∣dering of the Diet, and a certain Moderation in our Meat, and Drink, is a Divine Vertue, and such as brings Strength, and Vigour, both to Mind, and Body. It will furnish young Gentlewomen,The be∣nefit of Tempe∣rance. and especially persons who addict themselves to Piety, with such a way and manner of Living, as with more ease, and chearfulness, and fervency,
they may the better apply themselves to Devotion, and to the faithfull ser∣vice of God. And the pious Professors of it do affirm, that it is not to be be∣lieved, with how great an Alacrity, and with what abundance of inward Consolation, those Men and Women who do apply themselves to Sobriety, may attend the service of God in pub∣lick, and in their private Devoti∣ons. It is true indeed that young Gentle∣women of themselves, are naturally enclined to this Vertue, and Custome besides doth greatly confirm it in them, insomuch that we shall hardly find any one Gentlewoman, who is given to Excess of Diet. But because it may af∣ford generall help unto all those, whose Employments consist as well in the labours of the Body, as in the Af∣fairs which pertain to the Mind and Understanding, I have determined for the publick Good of all, to explain my self a little more largely on this Subject. What Tem¦perance is.That is to be called, a Sober Life, and Diet, which prescribes Rules to be observed in Meat and Drink, so that a Man or Woman must neither eat nor drink any more, than the Constitution
of his Body allows, with reference to the Services of his Mind, and this is called, an Orderly, Regular, and a Temperate Life, or Diet. The Subject about which this Tem∣perance is chiefly conversant, is Meat and Drink, in which a constant Mea∣sure is to be observed. Now this Mea∣sure is very different, according to the diversity of Complexions in sundry persons, and according to the diversity of youth and strength in the Body, for one kind of proportion doth belong to youth, when it is in its full strength, and another to old age. The sick and the sound have likewise their severall Measures, and in regard of these seve∣rall Constitutions, the nature of the Stomack is very different. There are some Masters of Abstinence, who would have this Measure of food to be exactly proportionable, and they say, that such a Measure is exactly propor∣tionable, over which the Stomack hath such a mastery,Less Meat to be ta∣ken by young Gentlewo∣men and Students than o∣thers. as it can perfectly di∣gest it in the midst of any Employ∣ments, either of the Body or the Mind. It is to be observed, that a greater Measure is required in him, who exer∣ciseth the labour of the Body, than un∣to him who is altogether exercised in
Meditations and Prayers; for the Ex∣ercises of the Mind, do much hinder the Concoction of what is eaten, be∣cause in calling up the whole forces of the Soul, they do suspend the Powers, and Actions, of the inferiour faculties. And this may be proved by daily Ex∣perience;The Rea∣sons of it. for when we are wholly ta∣ken up with Meditation or Prayers, and when young Gentlewomen (for this Discourse must alwayes have a re∣ference to them) are busie in their Pe∣titions, for the enjoyment of such or such a Husband, or Friend, &c. they neither hear the Clock, nor take the least notice of any thing, that doth pre∣sent it self before their Eyes, so entire∣ly they are addicted to that Object, which the whole Faculties of their Souls are exercised upon: And by this means it comes to pass, (as some greatly learned have observed) that not only the Animall, but the Vitall Spirits themselves, are withdrawn from their proper services. Some men there are (and indeed this is very remarkeable) that will not be induced to believe,Excss the occasion of all Di∣seases. that Distilla∣tions, Coughs, Head-aches, pains of the Stomack, and other Infirmities, should proceed from the excess of Diet, but
they will lay the cause on Ventosities, ill Ayres, extraordinary Watchings, when the true cause doth lye only in Surfeits, in not observing a right order in their Meat and Drink Great is the Pow∣er of Order, and Disorder in the Go∣vernment of all Bodies as well Poli∣tick, as Individuall; And if the World doth consist of Order, and our Cor∣porall life doth depend on the Harmo∣ny of Humours, and Elements, it is no wonder at all that Order should preserve, and Disorder destroy. It is Order that crowns the Arts with Lau∣rels, and Armies with Victories, and confirmeth Families, Cities, and King∣doms in Peace; whereupon it rightly may be inferred, that an Orderly life is a most sure way, and ground of Health, and a long Life, and the true, and the only Medicine of many Diseases. The Rules to find out a true disco∣very,The cer∣tain Rules to know all Super∣fluities. and to avoid all superfluities and excesses in Diet, are these; If we take so much of the Creature as thereby to be disabled in the per∣formances of Holy Duties, and in the Duties of following our Vocations, it is then most evident that we do exceed the measure that Nature is contented with; for both Nature and Reason do
require, that the part of him in which the growth and conservation of his Bo∣dy doth consist, should be so ordered and cherished, that no offence should arise thereby unto the Animall, and the Reasonable part of the Soul, for the Vegetative part being the Inferiour, is ordered to the service of the Superiour, and is therefore to be an Assistance, and no way a hinderance unto the other in its higher function, and operation. Another Rule.When therefore to glut the Appetite, so much Food is taken in, as to hinder the clearer operation of the Fancy, the Understanding and the Memory, it is a certain sign that this due measure is exceeded. Now this Impediment and Offence, proceedeth from the abun∣dance of Vapours that are sent up into the Head out of this sick and nausea∣ting Stomack, which would arise more sparingly, did not the parts thereabouts sweat with too many Vapours. A remar∣keable Ob∣servation.But you are further to understand, that although those Vapours and Fumes do clowd, and overshadow the cleerer exercises of the Brain, yet often∣times they do proceed not only from the Meat immediatly taken before, which begins to boyl again in the Sto∣mrck and to Concoct, but also from the
abundance of Bloud, and other Hu∣mours which are in the Liver, the Spleen, and in the Veyns, which all of them are boyling in the Stomack (af∣ter manducation) and do abundantly send up their noysome and afflicting Fumes into the Brayn. Now a temperate Diet doth gradu∣ally diminish these Plethoraes and Ca∣chochymiaes, as the Physitians call them. This abundance of humors, and this ill moy∣sture, by the prescribed Rules, will wast away of themselves, by feeding on their own superfluities, when after a little Abstinence,The be∣nefit of Ab∣stinence. Nature shall perfectly go∣vern, and so order all the Humours, that no Disease shall arise by any impo∣sed crudities on the Body, nor any Im∣pediment follow that shall obstruct the superiour offices, and the faculties of the Soul. The second sign of the Excess in Diet will appear, when we find in our selves a certain kind of dullness, and heaviness in our Spirits, which before were quick and active; for Meat and Drink ought to refresh the strength and powers of the Body, which before began to languish. Many indeed there are who are much deceived in this particular, for
complaining of continuall weakness, and of faintness, they do perswade themselves,Variety of Food dan∣gerous. that this defect ariseth from the want of nourishment, and of the Spirits, whereupon to render the Remedy more prejudiciall to them, they seek out variety of higher food, when this weakness they complain of, doth not proceed from the want of Nu∣triment, but from the abundance of evil Humours, as may easily appear, both by the evil Constitutions of their Bodies, and more particularly, by the swelling of their Bellies. Now these bad Humours do obstruct the Muscles, and the Nerves, through which the Spirits have their course, and passage, and by this means it comes to pass, that the Animall Spirits cannot exer∣cise themselves, nor enjoy that free course, and passage, which they ought, for the Animall Spirits being the most generall, and immediate Instruments of the Soul, all the Vigour of the Soul in Sense, and Motion, is derived from them: And from hence proceeds that weakness, and that dulness of the Body, and in the Senses, the Animall Spirits be∣ing intercepted in their passage, by this excess of Humours. And this that great Master in
Naturall Philosophy Sir K. D. hath recorded to be certain;Superflu∣ous Hu∣mours to be abated by Absti∣nence. for when these Apophlegmatismataes are by Absti∣nence exhausted, the Body becomes more chearfull, and more active. Wherefore if a Man or Woman desire to be lively, and ready to Exercise, these superfluous Humours are to be lessened, by the abatement of Diet, that so the Spirits may have the freer passage, through all the parts of the Body. It is nevertheless to be observ∣ed, that we are not immediately to pass from a disordered kind of life, to a more strict, and a preciser method, but it is to be performed by degrees, and by small abatements, to abstract from that excessive quantity, where∣unto we have been accustomed, untill at the last we do arrive unto that just measure, which doth not oppress the Body, nor offend the faculties, nor operations of the Soul, for all sudden Changes,All sudden changes of the Body are perril∣lous. especially (as in this case) they are remarkeable, and are prejudi∣ciall unto Nature. And it is my opini∣on, that Bodies inured to Galens Botani∣call Physick, are not, unless in some desperate exigencies, to be tampered withal by the Chymist, for it cannot but be very dangerous, to be driven off
forcibly from that, which our Bodies have been for a long time accustomed unto, for that which is against a long and an inveterate custome, is hardly to be undergone. But I will return, from whence per∣adventure I have too long diaressed. The best Relection that young Gentle∣women can take in the Morning,The praise of Pana∣daes. is the Panada, called by the Italians Pana∣tella: I need not speak much in the commendations of it, because it is eve∣ry where used both in England, and be∣yond the Seas, and the Ingredients therein being various, according to the emergent conditions of those per∣sons who do take it. Of all this is the least subject to putrefaction, and breeds the best bloud. But amongst all sorts of Food which is prejudiciall to Health, we ought most to refrain (although peradven∣ture most pleasing to the Palate) from fat Meats,Fat Meats to be a∣vo ded. which do make loose the Stomack, and do much weaken the astrictive, and the retentive faculty of it, insomuch that other sorts of Meat, are much hindered by it in their Con∣coction, and are caused to slip out of the Stomack undigested, and as it were half raw. Moreover these fat Meats do
send up many fumes into the Head, whereupon there ensueth a dizziness in the Brain, attended with Coughs, and those wheezings, and other Infirmities in the Lungs, which the Physicians call Asthmata. And to conclude all, these fat Meats unless they be very well con∣cocted by a good Stomack, and a deli∣berate length of time, do turn into evil Humours, and are the Originals of Feavers, by an exuberancy of Flegm, and Choler.The Ex∣cess of salt Meats pre∣judiciall. Salt Meats also in the least excess are prejudiciall: The bene∣fit of a temperate Diet is, that it doth free a Man from all manner of Diseases. Physicians do affirm, that Crudities are the Nurseries of all those Diseases, wherewith Men are ordinarily vexed: Now that which we call Crudities,What Crudities are in them∣selves. is the imperfect Concoction of Food; for when the Stomack either through the excess of Meat, or for the variety taken at one Meal, or some other evil quali∣ty, doth imperfectly digest what it hath received, the juyce of the Meat so taken is said to be crude, that is to say, raw, or to have a Crudity in it, which is the occasion of many Inconveni∣encies. For in the first place,The Dan∣gers of Cruditie. they do fill the Brain with many flegmatick Excre∣ments,
and over-heats the Bowels, whereupon many obstructions ae bred in the narrow passages of them. More∣over these Crudities do corrupt the tem∣per of the whole Body, and stuff the Veins with putrid Humours, from whence proceed many grievous Disea∣ses; for when the first Chylus is crude, and what we eat is malignantly concocted, it is impossible that any good bloud can be bred in the second Chylus of the Liver, for the second Concoction can never amend the first. Again, These Crudities are the cause, that the Veins through the whole Bo∣dy, are replenished with foul and with impure Bloud, and mingled with ma∣ny Humours, which do break forth in∣to desperate Diseases. The way to prevent or take a∣way Cru∣dities.Now these Inconveniencies are ta∣ken away, by a sober course of Diet; for when there is no more received in∣to the Stomack, than what it is well able to concoct, the Chylus is made good, and agreeable to Nature, and from a good Chylus, or a good Concoction, good Bloud is bred, and from good Bloud, there followeth good Nourish∣ment, and a good temper in, and throughout the Body. By this means the putrefaction of
the Humours in the Veins, is avoided, as likewise all obstructions in the in∣ward parts, together with those super∣fluous vapours, which do so often molest the Head and inward parts, and all the Joynts o the whole Body, and the Health of the whole Man is hereby preserved, for Health consisteth in these two things; first,The two most re∣markeable particulars in which Health consisteth. in the due pro∣portion, and symmetry of the Hu∣mours, both in respect of quantity, and quality; and secondly, in a cer∣tain kind of spungy Dispositions throughout the whole Body, having no let nor Impediment by any Obstru∣ctions, so that the Spirits, and the Bloud, have their free passage, and recourse, through all and every part. But there is another advantage, which is received by a temperate Diet; for it doth not only preserve from those Diseases, which are occasioned by Crudities, and Corruptions of Hu∣mours within the Body, but it doth also much avail in outward Causes; for they who have their Bodies free, and clear,A tempe∣rate Diet good for all out∣ward Ma∣ladies. and the Humours well tem∣pered, they are not so desperately hurt by wounds, dislocations, or breaking of Bones, or heats, or colds, as other
persons are, who are full of evil Hu∣mours; and if at any times they are af∣flicted with any such Infirmity, they are much sooner, and more easily cu∣red, for in persons who do so well or∣der themselves, there is no Flux at all of any evil Humour, or at least very little to that part so affected: Now the Flux of Humours doth very much hin∣der the cure, and causeth pain, and Inflammations. It doth also very much fortifie against the Plague,Good a∣gainst the Plague. for the poyson thereof is much better resisted, if the Body be clear, and free. Besides it mitigateth incurable Di∣seases; and this is seen by daily Expe∣rience, for there are many who have Ulcers in their Lungs, hardness in their Liver, and the Stone in their Reins, or Bladder, which, although in∣curable, yet by the help of good Diet, do prolong their Lives a great time. We may adde to this,Many sin∣gular ad∣vantages by a good Diet to be received. That it makes men lively and ready for all Imploy∣ments; it maintains the Senses in their Integrity, and Vigour; it mitigates the Passions, and Affections; it preser∣veth the Memory; it helpeth the Wit and Understanding; it quencheth and allayeth the heat of Lust; it maketh
Men to live a long time, and in the end to die without pain; it is not of any Grief, or Trouble; whereas Intempe∣rance produceth many great and grie∣vous Diseases. Since therefore a Temperate life is so happy and so pleasant a thing, what shall we do, but embrace it with open Arms. A Regular life is better than a Physitian, for every Man by long ex∣perience may know the Qualities of his own Body, and what hidden Pro∣perties it hath; what Meat, and what Drink agreeth with it best, which things by the Doctor cannot so easily be known, especially since there is a greater diversity of Tempers, than of Faces, and the Urine, as Galen himself confesseth, and a great many Doctors of Physick after him (some few Diseases only excepted) is but meretricious. I have been longer on this Tract of Temperance than at the first I inten∣ded, not so much for the use of young Ladies, who for the most part are not subject to the least Excess, unless it be of the Macaroon, or the Sugar-plum, and for which they are too often punished, by the discomplexion, and pain of their Teeth, or the licourishness of them, but to prescribe Rules of Health to the
greatest number of Men, whose extra∣vagant Appetites are too much addict∣ed unto Riot, and Intemperance. CHAP. XVI. Of Raysing of Pasts. THere are many Qualities which al∣though they are not so proper unto Ladies, yet they are very commendable in them, in which number is this piece of Cookery, to have a good hand in the Pastry; and because I must confess my Ignorance herein, I shall referre them to those Books which are the best that are extant on this subject, as The Accomplisht Cook Sect. 11. and Rabishaes Cookery Book 14. Markhams Way to get Wealth Book 2d. CHAP. XVII. Of Chirurgery. IT is every day confirmed by the Ex∣perience both of City, and Countrey, that many Ladies and Gentlewomen have a very rare hand in the curing of
Contusions, green Wounds, and many Sores, and other Evils which are daily incident unto Men, and Women, in which, I know not by what happiness, they oftentimes exceed the cunning of the Chirurgions themselves, whether their Integrity reflecteth more on the wayes of Honour than of Profit, or whether by a secret complacence, the Cure affecteth the one more than the other, and the soft hand of the Lady is almost as prevalent as the Plaister it self; or whether the Gentlewoman be∣ing for the most part on her knees to dress the Sores of her Patient, her Cha∣rity, and her Humility be as acceptable before GOD, as the Pain and the Dan∣ger of her Patient is importunate with her, and by this her silent Oratory, a more speedy, and a more gratefull way of recovery is effected. The same may be said of their administrations of Physick. Nevertheless we deny not but that Physitians and Chirurgions are very ne∣cessary, and greatly to be esteemed for the knowing and curing of Diseases, and other Maladies which Men are subject to, for if a Friend who comes to con∣dole us in our sickness performs a thing that is acceptable to us, how much more dearly should the Physitian, and
the Chirurgion be respected, who not only come as Friends to visit us, but as Benefactors to restore us. The most remarkeable Books for Physick and Chirurgery which I shall commend to Gentlewomen, for their Improvement in the knowledge of Chirurgery are, The Queen's Closet, The Countess of Kents Secrets, Dr. Burges his Vade Mecum, &c. CHAP. XVIII. Of New Fashions. SEcond Cogitations are alwayes the best; if I have been a little too rigid in the Treatise before, concerning Ap∣parell, I shall indeavour to make a∣mends for it, it being the business of this Pen, to inform and delight young Ladies and Gentlewomen, rather than discourage or affright them. If Man at the first was left to be his own Taylor, and had the Universe to supply him with Stuff, and Trimming, and did make up his Cloathes, as he himself thought convenient, it is ap∣parent that the following of Fashions is left at liberty,Fashions left to li∣berty. and amongst wise Men it ought not to be taxed, unless it be in∣convenient
or ridiculous. Every Mans or Womans Palate may be as well confined to one kind of Meats, as their Fancies to one kind of Fashion: It is not only lawfull for a Man or Woman to vary in their Ap∣parell, but even to please themselves in that Variety, since in it self, one is as lawfull as the other; a little Skirt which was in fashion the last year, is as legitimate as the large deep one now in use; and the Hat with a high Crown is even as unreproveable, as that with a narrow Brim, and which sits close to the Head: Nature is the Mistress of Variety, she made all things for Strength, Use, and Ornament, and it is Neglect, and indeed, a sloth that con∣verts all things into a Weakness, and a loathed Deformity. We need no more but sit still, and Diseases will arise only for want of Exercise. Though we hear nothing of Apparel, till Sinne sent Man to seek for it, yet since it is a Covering for Shame, there is certainly something of Decency in it. 'Tis generally believed, if Adam had not fallen he had no need of Garments, his Innocence was his cloathing: It is true that after his fall he made himself a Covering of Fig-leaves, and whether
he lighted upon it by accident, as the next at hand, and the readiest, or whether it was taken for a present ne∣cessity, there being no better to be found, we have not leasure here to di∣spute; but sure it is that it was a Gar∣ment so uneasie, and so unfitting for him, that GOD himself out of pitty to his Creature, did put him into a more durable, a more warm, and defensive Cloathing, than what his own igno∣rant wretchedness had lighted on. And indeed we find it naturall to wear Ap∣parrell, there being no People, or Na∣tion so extreamly savage, but they have something about them to cover their shame: Nor can any Men be so unreasonable or so prophane, to com∣plain of Providence, because that Man came naked into the World; for see∣ing he was Lord of all, and was endued with wisdome to make use of all, there was no need to bring him cloathed on the Stage of the World, as other Creatures were, who have no abilities to help themselves. We see in Birds, that the parts most to be concealed, are covered with Feathers, and in Beasts; with a Tayl. It was Sin that first brought Man to stand in need of a Co∣vering, who is so ashamed of the cause,
that ever since he doth what he can, to find out wayes to cover his sin. We read that GOD himself com∣manded the Garments of his High-Priest, to be glorious, and beautifull; not only to be rich in the outward ma∣terials, and curious in the workman∣ship, but orient in the Colours, and re∣fulgent with Jewels: And whether it were learned from the Jews, or the Heathen had it naturally of themselves, it is most certain that their Priests were more magnificent in their pomp, and in their Robes, than others were though of the highest Dignity. From which premisses this Doctrine may be raised, that good Cloaths are not displeasing unto Heaven:Good cloths not displea∣sing to God. Many Reasons may be given for this, and good Uses may be made, which for brevity sake I omit. We look almost with admiration on the Peacocks starry Train, and what a way Nature hath provided in that Creature to spread it, and to have it seen. Apparrell no doubt is an orna∣ment, and yet they are not right that in their habits are too sordid, or too singular; the one argueth too sullen, and the other too light a Disposition. Howsoever as the World goes, a La∣dy doth not lose in her Reputation, by
being cloathed a little above her rank, rather than altogether beneath it. The Lapidary that is to set a Jewel, doth give it all the best advantages that possibly he can think on, and the richer it is, the greater is his endeavour and his care to grace it in the lustre. Although a Dia∣mond will glitter, and cast abroad its rayes when it is never so plainly set, yet we think that neither the Cut, or the Water can make it sparkle too much. It is not only convenient, but necessary, that upon occasion young Ladies be braver than ordinary, as up∣on their addresses to Persons of Emi∣nency, upon causes of publick Joy, and on solemn and sacred Meetings. Socra∣tes, an austere Philosopher, being one day demanded, what was the reason he was so extraordinarily fine in his long Cassock, and his new Shoes, made an∣swer, That he might appear handsome to the handsome. We ought in our Cloaths, to conform our selves to those with whom we do converse. We find in the Epistle of St. James, that the gold Ring and the costly Apparrell found more respect, than the Man that was not so richly arrayed. We do guess at the goodness of the pasture, by the grass which we see upon the ground.
Young Gentlewomen in their habits should conform themselves unto cu∣stome, and to the Fashion that is decent and generall, to the occasion, and to their own condition: That is best which best suits to every ones calling, and the quality they live in: and be∣cause most Men, and Women judge by apparencies, it is behovefull to pro∣vide for a good estimation even from cloathes, and from the outside. If there were not a due respect to be had according to ranks, and qualities, what use would there be of the scarlet Dye, what use of Pearls, or Jewels, what use of Silk, and softer raiment? they would be accounted as superfluities, and be rather burdens, than benefits to the World. It is a Principle in Philo∣sophy, that Nature doth nothing in vain: Certainly it was not without some great design, that Nature should pro∣vide such great riches, and that she should be so carefull to conceal them from the sight, as much as the possessi∣on of the vulgar. The Scarlet colours, the Purple, the Silks, the Furrs, the Ermins and Beavers, the Pearls and Diamonds, do justly find wearers whom they well become; yet in Ap∣parrell a gallant carelesness doth far ex∣ceed
any affectation whatsoever: Too curious a Dress doth proclaim unto the World that we dwell too much on out∣sides.Three Uses to be made of Cloaths There are three good Uses which we may lawfully make of Ap∣parrell: to hide the shame of naked∣ness, to preserve from cold, and to adorn the Body; the worst task we can put it to is to engender pride. When Demonax saw a young Gallant in brave Apparrell, and to put on an extrava∣gant Insolence with his Feather, and his new Fashions, he whispered these words into his ear, Those Silks, and fine Cloaths you boast of, were spun by a Worm, and worn by a Beast, before they came on your back, and yet the Worm continues still a Worm, and the Beast a Beast, and the Bird in whose Tail was the Feather in your Hat, is a Fowl still. There are some persons who although never so gorge∣ously attired, yet no Cloaths can hide them from the Fool or the Clown, whilest others do give a grace to any thing they wear; and this may partly perswade us, that comely Apparrell is far better than costly, or conceited. A Lady may be allowed to please her fancy in her habit, provided it doth not disparage her Judgement. She that will be singular in her Apparrell,
had need of something in her extra∣ordinary, that might weigh down her affectation. CHAP. XIX. Of Business or Employment in which Ladies and young Gentlewomen may be concerned. LAdies for the most part are of a ten∣der Constitution, and there be many of them that have so great an aversion to the performance of any Bu∣siness, that carries difficulty with it, that you may sooner perswade a Cat to leap into the water, than procure them to enter upon any thing that is trouble∣some or unpleasing. And these for the most part are Gentlewomen who have passed their youth undiscipli'nd, and have been bred up in such a Deli∣cacy, that they know no other business but their pleasures, and are impatient of any thing that looks like a hinder∣ance to it. And by this means it often comes to pass, that the management of the affairs doth descend into inferiour hands, and that for want of skill all the wheels of Family-government are out
of order: Certainly those are the active Spirits that give Laws to the idle and voluptuous.Business the heart and com∣fort of hu∣mane life. Business is the Salt of hu∣mane life, which not only gives a grate∣full relish to it, but withall it doth dry up those Crudities which otherwise would prove offensive; it preserves from purrefaction, and doth chase away those blowing flyes that would corrupt it: He that with a Sythe should mow the empty Air shall be sooner weary, than he who sweats with toyl to cut the standing Corn. And the bet∣ter to perform business, they should first be throughly acquainted with what it is they go about, for they shall be sub∣ject to go astray if they have no certain guide ro direct them; and if they want temper, they shall be sure not to want trouble; no storm can shake the frame of that Mind that is builded upon Tem∣perance; it placeth us out of the reach of others, and bringeth others to be sub∣jected to, and to be within the compass of our own power. Let every one be sure to drive his own business, rather than to let it drive him; when we are once brought to be necessitated, we are become slaves to our own affairs, they do master us which should be com∣manded by us. But in thy right or∣dering
of affairs, a speciall eye is to be had to Circumstances, for Circumstan∣ces many times are more than that which is the Main, and those must carefully be laid hold on as they do offer themselves to occasion. There is as great a difference betwixt industry and neglect, as there is be∣twixt a Garden curiously kept, and the Field of a Sluggard Which Solomon ma∣keth mention of; the one is cloathed with beauty, and a chearfull loveliness, and the other with brambles and thorns; take the weeders away from the Gar∣den, and a very little time will change it into a Wilderness.Every young La∣dy to be like a Watch. Every young La∣dy should think her self to be like the Watch she carrieth in her Pocket, if evening and morning it be not wound up with circumspection, it becomes either false, or unprofitable, it either goeth not to direct, or it serveth to mislead; the least neglect will lead them aside to improficiency or of∣fence. How fair and fresh soever the soul be, yet in our flesh here in this life it liveth in smoak, and dust, and if daily it be not brushed and cleansed, it quick∣ly will discolour. Diligence alone is a good Patrimony, but neglect consu∣meth
the greatest Fortune; the one is active, it preserveth, and gathereth, and the other like Death is the dissoluti∣on of all. But that the honour of In∣dustry may the more appear, we shall in the next place represent unto you the ill consequences of the Vice of Sloth∣fulness. CHAP. XX. Of Idleness, and how much to be avoid∣ed by young Ladies and Gentlewomen. I Believe it is too true, that young Ladies oftentimes learn to do ill, by doing what is next unto it, and that is Nothing. How bright doth the soul grow with use, and negotiation; in what a heighth of constant happiness doth that Family flourish, where the Mistress of it steereth in an ordered course?The dan∣gerous ef∣fects of Idleness. Idleness is the most corrupting fly that can blow in any humane Mind; it not only stupifieth the Minds of Vir∣gins, but groweth also upon their Bo∣dies, and their Bloud, and betrayeth them to Discomplexion, and Sickness, and to many Infirmities. Industry is never wholly unhealthfull, or unfruit∣full;
if it be not attended with health and joy, it will banish want and po∣verty. There is a good Angel al∣wayes waiting upon Diligence, which carrieth a Lawrell in her hand to crown her. What an unworthy memory did that Lady leave behind her, of whom we find nothing else recorded but only that she lived, and died. Every one should smell of that which he is busied in, as those who stir amongst perfumes, and spices shall, when they are gone have still a gratefull odour with them. It is none of the meanest happinesses to have a Mind that loveth to be exercised in Vertues: Vertue is the only and the absolute improvement of the soul, and there is no creature so ruinous, or so wretched, as the idle person. CHAP. XXI. What Pleasures, and how far to be used by young Ladies and Gentlewomen. PLeasure undoubtedly is lawfull in it self,Pleasure lawfull in it self. and GOD at the first did or∣dain it for use. If it be taken as it was at first provided, it will be taken with∣out a sting, but when we exceed either
in the measure, or the manner, we pollute the purer stream, and drink our own destruction. That either Men or Women should let loose the reins to all the corrupt and mistaken pleasures of this life, was never licen∣sed by any of the wiser sort of the Hea∣then. Young Ladies and others may rejoyce, and delight themselves in all that GOD gives them for pleasure, but yet they must use this delight with such a moderation, with such a prudence, and so much warrantableness, that they may be able to give an account thereof to GOD, who in his bounty hath given such pleasures to them. And above all, those pleasures are most to be com∣mended, which on all sides are so legi∣timated, that they leave in the consci∣ence no private check behind them, to upbraid the sense for the unlawfull using of them. He that plungeth himself in a puddle, doth but engage himself to an after-washing to get his filth away; and who is so mad to feast on that, which he knows would make him sick if he eats it. Almighty GOD would ne∣ver have allowed to Man or Woman the desire of pleasure, and the faculties to enjoy it, if he had not meant that in decency they should make use of them.
Actions that are so naturall in them∣selves, are not unlawfull, but as they are found to run into excess, and to be attended with unlawfull Circumstan∣ces. St. Paul saith in one of his Epistles, that all things were lawfull to him, but all things were not expedient: All things in themselves, as they were pure naturall Acts, and indifferent, neither good nor bad in the commitment, were law∣full, but being chased about, and poun∣ced with the settings off, and the pou∣derings of excess, they were not expe∣dient for him. There is so much cor∣ruption adhering to their use, by ex∣ceeding the measure, mistaking the manner, misplacing the time, that al∣though they be lawfull in themselves, yet if they be circumstanced amiss, they are not expedient. It is not a sin to be honestly rich, nor a vice chastly to en∣joy the Rites of Marriage; the unli∣censed pleasures are those that leave a smart behind them. We may prove also from the sundry variety of delights which GOD hath created in the World, that the use of them is lawfull, for GOD would never have made them so distinct in their kinds, not so many in their numbers, if it had been wholly unlawfull for
Man, or Woman to use them. All the severall casts of food were intended to please the pallate, as well as meerly to content our hunger. Of all the beautifull fruit in Paradise, there was but one Tree only that was exempted. I conclude therefore that Men or Wo∣men,Pleasure how to be used. as well young as old, may en∣joy themselves in those felicities and de∣lights, which they have a well grounded inclination unto, provided they ought so to use them, as not to be enthralled in the guilt of them, but they may be well able to acquit themselves upon the ac∣count for using them. Whatsoever they do, they ought before the Act to examine the sequell, if that be clear, the present enjoyment will be ease, and content; but to rush inconsiderate∣ly upon pleasures that must end in re∣pentance, doth not suit with that wis∣dome which all ought to be endued withall.
CHAP. XXII. Of Silence requisite to young Ladies and Gentlewmen. I Have oftentimes observed in some Gentlewomen such an unlucky kind of disposition, and such an envious pride, that they cannot endure that any but themselves should be set forth, as excellent, insomuch that when they hear one justly praised, they will either seek to extenuate her Vertues, or if like a clear light they be truly eminent, they will wound them by detracting from them; or if their tongue cannot condemn them, they will be sure to leave them in a suspected ill by Si∣lence. They should think that the applaud∣ing of Vertue would win them far more honour, than the seeking slily to dispa∣rage it. If we knew Vices in Men or Women, we cannot show our selves in a nobler Vertue, than in our charity to conceal them. When friends part, they should lock up one anothers se∣crets, and interchange the Keyes. She that pretending to Vertue, is busie in
the stains and blemishes of others, is like to him that seeks lost gold in ashes, in unsetling, and blowing them about, he hides that more which he better might have found with stillness. The true Vertue of Silence.The true Vertue of Silence cannot be too much commended. It is such a quality that I want words to express its worth: I cannot well tell which I should most commend to Gentlewo∣men, either Speech or Silence, since the one of them doth too much, and the other too little; Speech enricheth, and corrupteth, but Silence is poor, but honest. I am not so much against Discourse, as vain pratling, which consumes time, and profiteth no body. Speech indeed is one of the blessings of Nature, but to ride still on the top of it is too vehement. They that use it are at great pains in feeding hungry ears, and to speak properly are the very Bel∣lows to kindle laughter; and they are not only guilty of this fault, but they are unsafe and dangerous, their words discovering their mind, and negligent∣ly betraying to every eye the sight of their heart. When I hear one of these common speakers, I let his words pass without any more attention, than I bestow upon a Clock when I care not
for the hour of the day; but he that sollicits my ears but seldome, I receive his pleasure with pleasure, and wil∣lingly grant him a room in my me∣mory. The first word in the School of Cle∣anthes that great Philosopher, was Si∣lence; and the first word of Command amongst Souldiers in the Feild now adayes, is Silence. A talkative Man or Woman is like an unbraced Drum, which beats a wise Man out of his wits. Some are blabbs of secrets, and these are traitors to Society, they are vessels unfit for use for they be bored in their bottomes. Others there are who will boast of the favours they have received, and by this means they often bring goodness into suspition; they both lose love, and injure fame. Some have va∣riety of Stories, even to the tiring of their hearers, and these for the most part are the grave sort of the follies of our Age; their ungoverned tongues do stray into a waste of words, and so give us cause to condemn their memo∣ries, which do retain so much of their youth. A Gentlewoman that is silent, be∣sides the advantage she hath of the tal∣ker, in receiving all she hath without
paying back any thing for the receiving of it, doth by eschewing and loathing the profuse vanity of the others words, become not only more silent her self, but if she be vertuous, more secret also. Secrecy is of two kinds,Secrecy of two kinds. of our Friends, and of our own; that of our Friends, Religion commandeth us to keep; that of our own, Discretion. For the secrecy belonging to our selves, there have been some Men and Wo∣men who have not been so secret,A just check to some pre¦tending to Silence. but foolishly have divulged, that if the linnen which they do wear next unto their Bodies, should be privy to their Determinations, they would burn that linnen. This Silence is a meer bab∣ling, and argues no discretion but ex∣travagance. Many States have used to punish the laying open of Secrets, with the loss of their tongues, which was a very just Law, and a sure one, for no example prevails with a born tatler, but the for∣feit of his tatling Organ. I wonder that the Turks do not generally deprive their slaves of their tongues, as of their stones: methinks they should be as jea∣lous of their secrets, as they are of their lusts. Certainly all people that are subject to this flux of words, are very
dangerous. I never knew tatling a safeguard, but only by the Geese that preserved the Capitoll; they are all to be shunned, their conversation being more unsafe, than the fellowship of the most malicious, for words are more pernicious than blows; there is no Fen∣cer that can find a Ward for them. I shall conclude this Chapter with that of a famous Writer, There is a Time when nothing, there is a Time when something, but there is no Time when all things are to be revealed. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Advantages which Ladies and Gentlewomen have by their honourable Descent, over others that are of a plebeian Race. MOst certain it is that by our own Virtues or Vices we often differ from our Progenitors, howsoever through successive Generations the Bloud most commonly doth hold its tincture. In a Noble Family for the most part the Stream doth still hold Noble; and we observe that Offices of Trust and Places of Command, are
setled on the Heirs of some deserving Families, as presuming they will merit to preserve, what their Ancestors at first by their merits did acquire. A noble young Lady having some Tem∣ptations presented to her, which are unworthy of her, will consider with her self before she gives assent, Is this according to the Laws and Rules of Honour? according to the Example of so many excellent Ladies, from whom I am descended, and to whom by the Interests of Duty, or Consan∣guinity, I do owe the greatest oblia∣tions? Is it according to the Rules of Piety? Is it attended with such Regu∣larity and Order, that I find nothing unseemly, nothing inordinate in it? And thus weighing the lawfulness of the Act, before she gives way unto it, she preserves her self in the honour of her primitive Integrity, and prevents all dangers that threaten to undermine it. She that discharges her duty to God, and her Parents, cannot but be eminent in all the rest of her Conversa∣tion;In what the true foundati∣on of Ho∣nour is laid. the foundation of Honour, and Greatness, is laid in obedience, and respect to them; and thus being sea∣soned with the principles of Honour, she is beyond the standard of ordinary
Women, and liveth in a higher, and a more noble Region. And not to speak of the Helps of Fortune, which give  great advantage, it is most cer∣tain, that Earth cannot present us with any thing more glorious, than such noble young Gentlewomen, when they are illustrated with the Rayes of Vertue. In a beautifull Body the Temper and the Delicacy of the Spirit doth conclude it admirable; if there were not something more than ordina∣ry that lyes couched in the practice of Honour, Nature would never have planted such a transcendent desire of it in generous, and enlarged Souls. The Ladies that are of the highest merit in themselves, do insist least up∣on their Ancestry, for they very well know who vaunteth vainly of his Pe∣degree, commendeth not what is his own, but what is anothers, and that the best way to keep their Ancestors Vertues in memory, is to adde unto them, and to illustrate them by some actions of their own. When Posterity can boast of nothing but their Fore∣fathers merits, they subsist just like Fe∣lons, by the protection of that Altar, from whence they are no sooner pulled, but they fall to death, and shame.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Women in generall, amongst whom young Ladies and Gentlewomen may find many excellent Examples to di∣rect them. EVery man is so much the better, by how much he comes nearer un∣to GOD. Man is nothing more like him than in being mercifull, yet Wo∣men in generall are far more mercifull than Men, it being a Sex where pity and compassion are more eminently re∣markeable: And as they are the more compassionate, so they are the more temperate. It is heat that transports Man to immoderation and fury; 'tis that which forceth him to such a sa∣vage and libidinous violence. Wo∣men are naturally the more modest, and Modesty is the seat and dwelling place of Vertue. Whence proceed all bloudy Villanies, but from an unblush∣ing Impudence? It may be thought that if Adam and Eve had both continu∣ed in their estate of Innocence, that Eve had never been in that subjection, but had enjoyed a continuance of her
former estate, which had nothing but blessedness in it. If it be argued from the words of the Text, that the Male is there placed before the Female, and therefore the more worthy; it may be answered, we find there that the Even∣ing and the Morning made the Day, yet from thence we do not conclude, that the Evening is better, or more worthy than the Morning. That Adam was made the Governour of Eve, may rather be thought to be the punish∣ment of her sin, than the prerogative of his own worth, All do acknow∣ledge that her Body was more admira∣ble, and more beautifull than Adams; more full of Curiosity and Wonder, and shall we be so prophane to think, that GOD would put a worse Soul into a better Body? It is a principle in Phi∣losophy, that the Manners of the Mind do follow the Temper of the Body, by which (without being much behol∣ding to any Logick) we may easily conclude, that the comeliest outsides are for the most part the most vertuous within. The Dispositions of Women in generall, are of a more tractable temper, than the harder mettall of Men; it is their easie Natures that hath caused Men to accuse them of
Fear, and Inconstancy, and to be sometimes extream in their passions; when if we should but take the pains to examine their Inclinations, we may peradventure find it to be as innocent, as their accusers do render it faulty, and to be worthy of excuse, if not of commendation. They are not com∣monly of so light a Temper, as to suf∣fer themselves to be carried beyond the bounds of Reason. But I must submit my self to some Qualifications, for I should not set up a School of Vertue, but of Vice, if I should seek to justifie Women in all things. The Garlands of true praise are only due unto the pious, and those of a generous descent, and those who are the most generous, are the most pit∣tifull. They know it is more glorious to vanquish their own passion, than their Detractors, and that to give life when they may take it away, is as it were to raise the dead without the working of a Miracle. Nothing doth more misbecome that Sex, than Choler. I have often seen a fair Woman melancholy, yet I never heard that any hath seen a fair furious one. They had need indeed of some Philosophy, to assist them in the con∣quest
of their other passions, but to de∣fend themselves from this, it is enough for them to make use of their Glass on∣ly, for in the heighth of their passion let them but look therein, and it may be a good means for them to correct themselves as to that passion, for the time to come. Women in generall are like unto that Herb of which Plutarch maketh mention, they being well pre∣pared become a soveraign Antidote, but growing too luxuriant, and run∣ning into seed, they degenerate into the rankest poyson. I might here propound unto them many remarkeable Examples, which may serve to enflame them to the love of Vertue, and of their own Honour, as of Penelope, Portia, Paulina, and others, who being Heathens, their Examples should be of a greater force; for if per∣sons living without the knowledge of the true GOD, and assisted with no other Helps but those of Nature only, and of Reason, have made no delays to walk in the rough and narrow paths of Vertue, and without any fear of the thorns, have with their own hands put away whatsoever might make their passage difficult, what should not the Ladies do of our Time, to whom GOD
himself hath given Directions to guide them in their way, whom he hath as∣sisted with his Graces for the exercise and performance of all Duties, and whose performances he hath promised to reward with Joyes upon Joyes, and every Joy environed with Eternity. CHAP. XXV. Of Modesty. OCcasion and our Nature are like two inordinate Lovers, they seldome meet but they do sin together; never∣theless if they do meet, and the Heart consenteth not, some great Scholars are in doubt, whether the offence be punishable, though the act be commit∣ted: Who wilfully doth any thing evil is a wicked Man, but he that doth it out of ne∣cessity is t altogether evil. They do adde, that even actuall sins have so far their dependency on the Hearts appro∣bation, as that alone can viciate or ex∣cuse the act. But I am of opinion, that there is no Man but is faulty in all his actions be they what they will, at least by some circumstances, though peradventure sometimes excusable in
others that seem to be of more im∣portance, For if we shall calculate aright, Man is his own Devil, and of∣tentimes doth tempt himself: So prone are we to evil, that it is not one of the least Instructions that doth advise us to beware of our selves. Now an excellent Virtue to restrain or check a Man or Woman from run∣ning into Vice, is Modesty. I am per∣swaded many Women had been bad, that are not so, if they had not been bridled by a bashful Nature. There are divers that have a Heart for Vice, that have not a Face accordingly. Mo∣desty chides young Maids from bold Company; it restrains them from sor∣did enterprizes; it teacheth them to love vertue only; it aweth the unci∣vil Tongue, and chains up the licenti∣ous hand. Surely the Graces sojourn with a blushing Virgin. It is record∣ed that the Daughter of Aristotle being asked which was the best Colour, made answer, That which Modesty pro∣duced in ingenious Spirits. Certainly the Heart of the blushing Lady is near∣er Heaven, than the Forehead of the brazen Rauntress; for it is the off∣spring of Humility, and when that leaves a scarlet tincture behind it,
Vertue is alwayes upon that Varnish. It was Liviaes Modesty with which Augustus was affected. A Spirit mo∣desty bold is like the Wind, to purge the Worlds bad Air. To blush at Vice is to let the World know, that the Heart within hath an inclination to Vertue. But when Spirits do begin to degenerate into sloth and wanton∣ness, they are apt to fall from one Infir∣mity unto another, and at the last (transported, I know not with what boldness) they do leap into the highest Impudence. To give a check unto such young Blouds, who weigh not the danger untill they are fallen into the snare, and who then to expediate themselves from the suspition, and the guilt of one sin, do commonly commit a greater, and do proceed from the acts of Lust to the acts of Murther; I am enjoyned in this place, for the Information of all young Maids that are ignorant of it, and for a terrour to all those who to excuse their Honour, are obstinately resolved to commit a Murther, to give them a sight of this ensuing Act of Parliament.
An Act to prevent the destroying and mur∣thering of Bastard Children. VVHereas many leud Women that have been delivered of Bastard Chidren, to avoid their shame, and to esc pe puishment, do secret∣ly bury or conceal the Death of heir Children, and after, if he Child be found dead the said Women do alleadge that the said Child was born dead, whereas it faileth ou sometimes, (although hardly it is to be proved) that the said Child or Children were murthered by the said Women their leud Mothers, or by their assent, or procurement, For the preventing therefore of this great Mischief, be it enacted by the Authority of his present Parliament, That if any Woman (af∣ter one Moeth next ensuing the end of this Sssn of Parliament) be delivered of any Is∣sue of her Body, Male or Female, which being born alive should by the Laws of this Realm be a Bastard, and that she endeavour privately, ei∣ther by drowing or scret brying thereof, or any other way, either by her self, or the procu∣ring of others, so to conceal the Death thereof, as that it may not come to light whether it were born alive or not, but be concealed, in every such Case the said Mother so offending shall suf∣fer Death, as in case f Murther, except such Mother can make proof by one Witness at the least that the Child (whose Death was by her so intended to be concealed) was born dead. And to make the Sentence of this Act yet more severe; It is most certain that a Woman in the City of Chester
was delivered of a Child, which she laid in an Orchard, and covered it with leaves; it so fell out that a Kite seeking for her prey, discovered it, and struck so violently at it, that the Child died thereof: We do find here that the Mother was not the immediate cause of the Death of her Child, but the Kite; nevertheless when she was arraigned at the Assizes following, she was con∣demned, and executed. In this Case (so strict was the Jury) that the will was taken for the deed: And I do find the Case in Print to be thus reported and printed, Car elle avoit un intent par ces voyes pour le tuer; for by this way she had an intent to have destroyed it. Not out of any Design of my own have I inserted this Act of Parliament, for it is not agreeable to the candour and simplicity of this Pen, nor to the tempers of young Ladies, whose inno∣cence needs not any such terrour of Ex∣amples to preserve their Chastities.
CHAP. XXVI. Of immodest Songs, and vain Ballads, and other idle Pamphlets, which make young People immodest, and with which they are oftentimes too inordinately af∣fected. I Have already made mention of the nobler sort of Pamphlets,Of Songs and Bal∣lads. and how far they are to be admitted. Young Gentlewomen must not make pastimes to become their exercises, nor turn their most serious times into hours of recreation, and vain delight: There is nothing that is made only for plea∣sure. Creatures that are the most glo∣rious are the most active: The Sun, the glory of the Universe, by whose light beauty is known to be beautifull, doth never stand still, nor hath ever made a halt, but once by a great Wonder, in the dayes of Joshua. His setting in one Hemisphere is his rising in another. Business is as well the content and com∣fort, as the enriching of Mankind. Undoubtedly the Gentlewoman that finds a way to preserve her self from idleness, doth go to bed with a far more satisfied conscience, than she who
spends all her time in sloth, and va∣nity. Books of recreation should be only used in the hours of recreation, and so should Stage-playes, and all other Sub∣jects of harmless wit. For whilest Books containing ho∣nourable and noble Subjects,Reading requisite for young Gentle∣women. may be permitted to young Gentlewomen, to entertain the hours of their greatest leasures, there is no toleration given for the reading of wanton and licenti∣ous Pamphlets. Some Stoicks indeed there are, who will not allow any Books to Womankind; they will be content that young Gentlewomen communicate with learned persons, but yet I know not by what severe ni∣cety, they would keep them from read∣ing their Works, like to the professors of the Religion beyond the Seas, they are well pleased the people should know that there is a Bible, but they must have a great care not to look into it. But to speak the truth, what can be desired for the ornament of the Mind, which is not contained in Books, where Vertue is to be seen under all kind of visages, and Truth discovered in what manner soever they desire it: They may behold it with all its force in the
Philosophers; with all its purity in the Historians; with all its beauty and its dresses in Oratours, and Poets. In this pleasing variety, all humours and conditions may find wherewith to con∣tent themselves, and wherewithall to be instructed. Here it is that Truth is not altered through passions; here it is that she speaks as much without fear, as without interest, and trembles not at her entry into Palaces, nor in the presence of Monarchs. And for this cause it is that Reading is very requisite for Women,And for what cause. whether young, or old. They have no less need of dumb Teachers than Princes; for Beauty as well as Royalty, are con∣stantly attended with more flatterers, than instructors. To discover, and acknowledge their faults, it is necessary that sometimes they learn of the dead, what the living dare not tell them. It is in Books only where they may discover the imperfections of their Minds, as they find the imperfections of their Faces in their Glasses. Here they find Judges that cannot be cor∣rupted either with Love or Hate; the fair and the foul are both treated alike, having to do with Arbitratours who have no other eyes, but only to put a
difference betwixt Vertue, and Vice. But as I have already admonished; since all Books are not Excellent, and there are some which justly do deserve not to see the light, unless it be the light of the fire; there is I must confess, no less difficulty for Gentlewomen to choose good Books, in which they may employ themselves alone, than to choose good Spirits, to entertain themselves in company. And here I cannot chuse but blame the Tyranny of some Governesses,The Ty∣ranny in some School-Mistresses justly re∣prehend∣ed. and Mistresses of Schools, who think no Books to be approved, but those only which please there own fancy. As the value of Coins depends on the Ordi∣nances of Princes, so the worth of Books, and purity of Language, de∣pend only upon the price of their ima∣gination. The best Scholars cannot avoid their censure, if they submit not to their Judgement. All the practice, and all the approbation, are in their hands. Their allowance must be sought for to have it take, and there is no other glory, but what they distri∣bute. Although Men of the best rank do differ in their Judgement from them, yet they are but shallow fel∣lows, for all the Reasons they can al∣leadge
to maintain the contrary, and must be so reputed in the opinion of their Schools. By this Errour it often comes to pass,Why good Books are oftentimes condemn∣ed by some Wo∣men. that good Books (in their Schools especially) do tast no no better at the first, because these petty if not pretty Impostours do cry them down, and do labour to obscure their worth. They conceit, that having bla∣med the Works of others, it will adde unto their Glory, and that all other women for the time to come will alto∣gether rely on their Judgment, as a Rule infallible. But as Vertue at the last in the despight of all her Accusers, so these Books will shine in their full Merit, in despight of the Ignorant, and the Envious, and Reputation which for a time is hindred by their Malice, will dilate it self with a greater Glory. Experience doth let us see, we are not. to follow there Advice, because they speak not of Books according to Truth, nor sometimes according to their own Opinion, but according to the Interest they propose unto themselves: by which young Gentlewomen may see, that they are not so farre to ascribe to the Judgment of others, as quite to re∣nounce their own, and that they have no Reason to trust altogether to such ill Guides.
More Cau∣tions for young Gentle∣women in reading of Books.Howsoever I would not have young Gentlewomen to take the pains to read all Books, or to affect the multitude of them: I am altogether of the contrary opinion, and do believe that it is no less unprofitable than fastidious, to read all sort of Books that shall present themselves unto their hands, unless they shall Peradventure do as the Tra∣vailer, who having passed through divers Countreys where he made no stay, but only taken a survey of them, did at the last make choice of some one of the richest of them to inhabit in: for why should young Gentlewomen take the pains to seek that in many which they may find in one: as if the Sun had need of the Starres to give light, or as if it had not light enough of its own to illuminate the world. Quantity is not the measure, one sole Book when it is good may serve for a great Library: To which purpose St Jerom writing to Fulvia hath a sin∣gular expression; As you would sell (saith he) many Pearls to purchase One which had the Brauty and the Price of all others, so you should renounce all sorts of Books, to devote your self wholly to One, where you may find whatsoever is needfull to instruct you, and to give you contentment.
And indeed to read few, so they be pleasing and profitable, is not to dimi∣nish the fruit, but rather to augment it: It is not to be less knowing, but to be the less troubled; for as they who do eat continually, do gather together a mass of Crudities, so such who will be reading in every Book that possibly they can get,The dan∣ger of read∣ing many Books. must needs be clogged with a great confusion. And as excess of Meats do weaken the naturall heat, so the excess of Reading doth diminish the light and the vigour of the Mind. It is not necessary then to read many Books, but to read the best, and espe∣cially never to be curious of such, whereby we cannot learn any thing, without the danger of becoming viti∣ous. And here I needs must encoun∣ter with two great Errours, the one proceeding from Fear, and the other from Boldness. Some Mothers of Children, and others there are, who make a great scruple, that their Chil∣dren should read the Books of the Hea∣then, such as Seneca, Plutarch, and others, in English, and yet they will give them full leave to read any lying Pamphlet. There are some again, who make a conscience to read the Books of the Apoerypha, though full of good
Precepts, yet the History of Parismus, or Ornatus and Artesia, must be com∣mended and read by them. But not to dissemble: This scruple of theirs proceedeth from their Igno∣rance,Ignorance proceed∣ing from Fear and Boldness. and they tremble (as the Scri∣pture hath it) where there is no cause of fear: For since GOD commanded the Hebrews to take away the Vessels of Aegypt, and to consecrate them to the service of the Tabernacle; why should we not take good Precepts from any Pagan Author, so we do it on purpose to employ them to the Glory of GOD, and to the Instructions of our own Con∣sciences. The Israelites took only away the Treasure of the Aegyptians, but left them their Idols; so we taking the Science of Pagans, do not take with them their Errour, and Idolatry. What hurt is it to steal divine Riches from a Heathen Author, to put them to a better use. And if peradventure they do meet with any evil things in them, they must behave themselves in reading of them, as the Jews in marrying with Strangers, whose Nails they pared, and whose Hair they cut: That is, they are to prune whatsoever is super∣fluous, or may offend their belief.
But of the looser Pamphlets we must speak in another manner, since there is nothing in them but what is evil, and dangerous. There is only a shew of evil in the Books of many of the an∣cient Philosophers, and but a shew on∣ly of good in the licentious Pamphlets; so as taking away the mask, and search∣ing deeper into it, we find nothing but Vice in the one, and Vertue in the other. Perhaps my Judgement herein will offend many, to whom Falshood seems more specious than Truth, who can take no pleasure but in that which is unprofitable, and who believe they cannot pass the time but in losing it. Prudence doth teach us to separate Vertue from Vice, and not to fly them both at once: And when the corrupti∣on which many Pamphlets, and idle Songs and Ballads bring with them,Idle Songs and Ballads forbidden. is truly laid to heart, there is no sober Spirit but will hold himself guilty, if he should forbear to shew those snares to those young Spirits, who do not dread the danger. And to speak first of Pamphlets; what contentment can there be in a counterfeit Pamphlet, which is not found in History? Are there not suc∣cesses,
and events fair enough? Can there be a greater pleasure, than to be present at the Birth, and Ruine of Mo∣narchies, and Empires, and in the com∣pass of an hour,The praise of Histo∣ries. to see what hath passed many Ages? Is it not an honest and a witty way, to shorten time when it seemeth long, by fetching it again when it is slipt away, and to find recreation against cares, and memory against ob∣livion? What cause that young Gen∣tlewomen may not refresh themselves, without danger of debauchment? And suppose we sometimes find some good Instructions in Pamphlets, what need is there we follow the Ex∣ample of that, which we know to be imaginary, and how shall we imitate Examples that we know to be false; as if we would take lights from Stars in a Picture, in stead of using of those which the Heavens do discover to our view. The like may be said of Ballads, and wanton Songs: For grant that there may be some pleasure in them: is there not also a great deal of idle and licentious fancy?Wisdome will re∣nounce a little plea∣sure for a great deal of danger. Wisedome will al∣wayes abandon that which delights, for that which hurts; it will renounce a little pleasure, for a great deal of dan∣ger. To take pleasure in an idle Song,
without staining ones self with the ob∣scenity of it, is a thing almost impossible; for wickednes enters insensibly into the soul, and what care soever we take to guard our selves, it is almost impossible but to be tainted with this alluring poy∣son. It is remarkeable, that what Spi∣rit, or what Innocence soever we have, our Bodies even without our assent, will take and taste of the qualities which we feed upon: So our Spirits, whether we will or not, will put upon them, I know not what of the Books we read. Our Humour will be altered ere we be aware; we shall laugh with those that laugh, we shall entertain wanton suggestions at every passage we read of the Libertines, and we shall be sad with the melancholy; inso∣much that we have seen persons whol∣ly changed, after the reading of certain Books. And the Reason is not hard to find: For since some Mothers cannot fix their eyes on certain Pictures, without leaving the complexion or some marks in their Infants; why should not we believe, but that the lasciviousness con∣tained in these Ballads, may have the same effect in our imagination, and do alwayes leave behind them some im∣pressions
in our Spirits. And although we know they are but fictions, yet nevertheless they truly move,Our incli∣nation to Evil is ve∣ry power∣full. being read. The inclination we have to Evil is so powerfull, that it takes strength through Examples, and will be contented with false ones, when it cannot meet with true; so the Ivy doth mount up on a Tree which is hol∣low, as on that which is perfect, and doth lean no less on a withered Tree, than on a green one. Our corrupt Natures, and our unruly Appetites, do strongly sway us to that which is forbidden, and a false History is enough to carry us more boldly to any wicked enterprize. And as the Birds pecked the Grapes which Zeuxis painted; so passion doth take fire with the Loves, which these Ballads do decipher. The reading of many wanton things do heat by little, and little; it insensi∣bly takes away the repugnancy and the horrour we have to Evil, and we ac∣quaint our selves so thorowly with the image of Vice, as we afterwards fear it not when we do meet with Vice it self. When once shame is lost, we are in great danger to lose that which is not preserved but by it. If Waters vio∣lently break forth, when the Dam is
broken up, and the Trenches which kept them in, are cut, Affections in the same manner will break out with all manner of liberty, when this honest Fear is lost, which doth suppress them. This Licentiousness is not bred in a moment; and it is true,Licenti∣ousness was not bred in a moment. that even by reading of wanton Songs and Ballads, we do not arrive to the heighth of Vice, at one, and the same instant. The con∣tagion in Songs and loose Pamphlets, do seize on the heart by degrees; it worketh on the minds of young per∣sons, as seed in the earth; it at the first doth begin but to shew the head, but afterwards it grows up every day more powerfully than another. But this is not all; for after that these Pamphlets, and Songs of wan∣tonness, have made young Maidens bold, it afterwards doth make them to practise what they read, or sing; then they labour to find out subtleties, to carry them on to what so much they do desire, and do learn not only the Evil which they should not know, but even the fairest way to commit the same. And to speak the truth, what likeli∣hood is there for them to be familiar with such alluring Books, and Songs, and not put their innocency it self in
danger. In those vain Pamphlets, they do read how this Virgin leaves her Countrey, and her Parents, to run after that Stranger; another is in love in a moment, when she reads that she hath received Letters from such and such a Gallant, and how they have ap∣pointed private places where to meet together. These are but cunning Les∣sons, to learn young Maids to sin more wittily; and there is no Man can com∣prehend with what reason, nay with what probability, such perillous Books, and Sonnets, may be justified. On the contrary, if the Lacedaemoni∣ans did forbid plays, because adulteries were exhibited; why should such Pamphlets amongst us be permitted, where such dishonest actions, lascivi∣ous examples, and extravagant passi∣ons, are maintained? Shall we dare to read in Books, what the Pagans pro∣hibited to be acted on their Theaters? Shall it be said that Christians have less love for Vertue, than the Infidels. And yet some there are, who will accuse me of too much severity, in ta∣king away this too much accustomed delight, which many young Women have in reading vain Pamphlets, and singing vainer Ballads; they will la∣ment
no less for depriving them of these vicious Books, than did those Women who sate weeping for Tham∣muz. Falshood hath a great deal more power than Truth. Young Maids more willingly do read those Books, which do corrupt good manners, than those Books which do teach them; and there are more Ladies who learn by heart the Tales of Parismus, or Ama∣dis de Gaule, than the Histories of sa∣ving Truth. They take less pleasure at a Sermon, than a Comedy, and had rather hear Jack Pudding, than a Preach∣er. And this made Strato to complain, that he had fewer Scholars than Mene∣demus, because there are more who haunt the School of Voluptuousness, than that of Vertue, and we love them better who flatter us, and make us laugh, than those who make us sad, and humble. And not to dissemble,The for∣bidding of idle Books makes young people more curi∣ous to read them. it is a great calamity to see now adayes, that it is even to make us more eager, and it doth put an edge upon our curiosity, to read a Book that is forbidden. It seems the same Spirit who deceived our great Grandmother Eve, by sedu∣cing her to lose the sweetness of the fruit of Knowledge, inspires no less too ma∣ny
with the same liberty, promising that their eyes shall be opened to see admirable things, and that they are denied the reading of such wanton Books, only out of pure envy. This Errour corrupteth a great number, whom flatterers do perswade, that as feeble Spirits are every where in dan∣ger, even amidst good things, so pure and vertuous Spirits are in no danger at all, even in the midst of bad things. I am of another opinion, and must re∣present to young Gentlewomen, that be they of what Spirit soever, they are alwayes obliged to fly danger; and I believe there are very few who have so much heat or force, as to feed on poy∣son, and to live on that which is the de∣struction of others. I allow no more of Poets than of Pamphlets, when there is hurt in them. Wheresoever I find Vice, my intention is to fight against it, and I shall alwayes blame those idle Books, which serve but as a School to learn sin with more dexterity.
CHAP. XXVI. Of Memory, and how much conducible it is. MEmory is as well the ornament, as the benefit of all persons, both young and old. Experience is the Mother of the Arts; Memory is the Parent of Experience. Memory by Philosophers is placed in the hinder part of the Head, as Fancy is in the former part thereof. The Art of Memory (though held forth by many as an excellent help) is rather an advantage to the professour of it, for his private profit, than to bring any benefit to those who are to learn it. And to speak the truth, there is so great a difficulty to place such, and so many words, into such, and such Cells of the Brain, that it appears ra∣ther to vex, than any wayes to benefit the Memory: And some letter'd Men, who have attempted this way to im∣prove their Memories, have confessed as much. The best Rules therefore to preserve that in our Memory, which we desire to be remembred, are briefly these: The first is not to overburthen the
Memory,Rules for Memory. for I have read that Memo∣ry is like a Purse, which if it be so full that the strings cannot be drawn to∣gether, all will drop out of it. The next is to fasten that with often repetition, which we desire to remem∣ber. Severall discourses on other Sub∣jects will cause that to be lost, which we desire most to remember: There∣fore in relation to it, it was well said, That it is best over night to knock the Nail in, & to clintch it on the morning following. The third is to put that which we would remember, into a handsome method, and so to place it, that ac∣cording to some Alphabeticall order, on the name of that thing to be remem∣bred, after a little ponderation, it may promptly come again unto our Memory. The last and the best is not too much to trust the Memory, but to have some Book to put us in remembrance of what is already done, or what accor∣ding to promise, or design, is of any importance to be done. Good things, as the memory of good Men, ought to be had in perpetuall remembrance: As for bad, we may say as Themistocles to one who would have taught him the Art of Memory, That he had rather he
should teach him the Art of Forgetfulness. Moderate Diet and good Air pre∣serve the Memory. There are excel∣lent good Remedies for the preserving of the Memory, whether in dry or moist Constitutions, for which I shall refer you to Dr. Jacob Mosan his Gene∣rall Practice of Physick, who hath writ∣ten at large on this Subject. CHAP. XXVII. Of Disobedience to Parents. THe Laws Divine, Natural, and Ci∣vil, do streightly oblige Children to the Honour, and the Duty which they are to give unto their Parents; It by the Instinct of Nature doth belong unto them, as the beam belongeth to the Sun, or the River to its Fountain, or the Branch unto the Tree. Nor from the Stork alone are Crea∣tures, not indued with Reason, taught this Principle of Love and Duty. The Lions whelps who are untractable in their rage and ravening, do cheerfully go a hunting to provide prey for their Sires worn out with age; and these Inclinations are found in Birds of Ra∣pine,
who pull the prey one from ano∣ther to feed those who did beget them. And Humane Laws give many excel∣lent Precepts of the Piety of the Children to their Parents. If we may beleeve the History of the Persians, recorded by Ae∣lian, we shall observe, that there have been some found amongst them, who have made voluntary wounds, and cut deep gashes in their own Bodies, where∣in to bury some part of the Bodies of their Parents reduced to ashes. A thing truely wonderfull, and which condem∣neth the Ingratitude of those Children, who will not vouchsafe to preserve the Memory of their Fathers in their Hearts, much less their Ashes in their Bodies. By the Laws of GOD, Children are taught to prosecute their Parents with Love, Reverence, Obedience, and Suc∣cour. The Name of a Father is as a Rock, whereon all the waves of Passion should split asunder. A barbarous thing it is to see Chil∣dren despise their Parents because fallen into Poverty. For such a wicked Con∣tempt, some Parents transported with fury, have inflicted severities on their Children even dreadfull to those that read them; and others unpunished for
their Contempt, have thrust those alive into their graves who did give them life. Children ought to succour their Pa∣rents in their necessities, according to their abilities, which if they have not, they are to support and assist them with Prayers: and on the other side, Fathers and Mothers are taught to give due Respects unto their Children with all Affection. CHAP. XXIX. Of Sleep, or Rest. OUr Task being now almost brought to an end, and our Pen beginning to rest, we will in this place speak something of Rest, and what Rest is to be given to young Gentlewo∣men,What hours of Sleep to be given to young Gentle∣women. for the better preserving of their Health. The moderation of Sleeping and Waking is very necessary, and when either exceedeth, the Body is much en∣dammaged, & Health much hindered. Immoderate Watching drieth up, and doth exhaust, and weaken the Bo∣dy, and the Spirits, and therefore it doth not only procure Diseases, but in many Diseases it is very dangerous. But Rest or Sleep produceth contra∣ry
effects: For although the excess thereof doth make the Body heavy, and by moistening of it too much, doth oppress and suffocate the naturall heat, and engender abundance of Ex∣crements, yet moderately used bene∣fiteth both the Body and the Spirits; for by this means all Concoction of Food received in the Stomack,The bene∣fit of Sleep. and all the parts of the Body, is best perform∣ed. Sleep moisteneth and nourisheth the Body; it maketh it fat, and expel∣leth all corrupt Humours either by Sweat or Urine; it perfecteth what is not fully concocted, and maketh it profitable for the nourishment of the Body; it mitigateth and qualifieth Choler; it cooleth the Body; it is the quickening of the weak and weary Members; it is finally so needfull to Nature, that without Sleep it cannot be upheld. To rise betimes in the Morning is for a good End; for it tendeth to the Health of the Body; but to rise be∣times in the Morning to address them∣selves to the Temple of God, as many young Gentlewomen do in London, is of remarkeable advantage to the Health both of Soul, and Body, and effectual∣ly conduceth to the best End of all. FINIS.
HAving treated of the Education, and Behaviour of young Gentlewomen, it will not be unnecessary to shew here the severall seasons in the Year, as to all manner of Flesh, Fish, and other things, to be provided in good Families, in the best man∣ner, both for use and ornament, as also for the orderly placing of every Dish of Meat; and finding some difficulty in it, I have taken the advice of many experienced persons, that are well acquainted with the severall seasons, and the ordering of all abovesaid, in the best man∣ner: whereupon I have been desired to draw a Bill of Fare, for every Moneth in the Year, wherein all former Books of Cookery have been much defective, which accordingly I have done, it being of great use in Families, especially for the younger sort. A Bill of Fare for every Moneth in the Year. January. 1. BRawn. 2. A boyl'd Capon, with Oisters and Sawsages. 3. A Surline or Ribbs of rost∣ed Beef. 4. A rosted Goose. 5. Minc'd Pies. 6. A rosted Turkey. 7. A marrw Pie. 8. A made Dish, or a bread Pudding. 9. A rosted Capon. 10. Larks, Partridges, or Woodcocks, which may best be provided. 11. Lamb. 12. A Tart of Wardens, or Quinces.
13. Tame Pigeons. 14. A dried Neats Tongue. 15. Anchovies. February. 1. A Hen and Bacon, or a Calves Head hatched. 2. Rosted Beef, or Veal. 3. A minc'd Pie, or a Lamb Pie. 4. A rosted Goose, or wild Ducks. 5. A made Dish. 6. A Turkey. 7. Collops and Eggs. 8. Capon and Tarts. 9. A Skirrot Pie. 10. Fri'd Oysters. 11. Rabit, Chickins, or tame Pigeons. March. 1. Boyl'd Chickins. 2. A dish of stu'd Oysters. 3. A Grand Sallet. 4. A rosted Brest or Line of Veal. 5. A Pigeon, or Chicken Pie. 6. A dish of Soles or Smelts. 7. A dish of young Rabits. 8. Custard, Capon, and Tart. April. 1. Veal and Bacon, or Pullet and Bacon. 2. Green Geese. 3. Rosted Veal, rosted with a Pudding in it. 4. Spring or Lumber Pie. 5. A Tansie. 6. Rabits and Tarts. 7. You may adde Salmon and Lobsters. 8. Prauns, or Sparagrass. May. 1. Boyl'd Chickins. 2. Rosted Veal. 3. A Lamb Pie or Pasty. 4. Rosted Capons. 5. Rabits. 6. Westfalia Bacon, and Tarts. 7. Sturgeon, Salmon, and Lob∣sters. 8. A dish of Sparagrass. 9. A Tansie. June. 1. A Leg of Mutton, or Pige∣ons, or Neats Tongue with Colliflowers. 2. Stu'd Rabits. 3. A fore-quarter of Lamb. 4. A Chickin Pie. 5. A dish of Pease. 6. A rosted Capon. 7. A Gooseberry Tart. 8. A dish of Strawberries. July. 1. A Westfalia Ham of Bacon, with Pigeons. 2. A Brest of Veal rosted. 3. A Venison Pasty. 4. Rosted Capons. 5. A Codling Tart. 6. Lobsters and Salmon. 7. Hartechokes, or a Har∣techoke Pie. 8. Rosted Chickins. 9. Dried Neats Tongues. 10. Salt Sallet, Caviere, An∣jovies.
August. 1. An Olean or Grand boyl'd Meat, or Friccasie. 2. A rosted Hanch of Veni∣son. 3. A Pig. 4. A Pigeon Pie. 5. A dish of cram'd Chickins. 6. A Tart. 7. Some Creams or Fruit. September. 1. A Capon and white Broth. 2. A Grand Sallet. 3. A Neats Tongue and Ud∣der rosted. 4. A pouder'd Goose. 5. A rosted Turkey. 6. A Potata Pie, or Chickin Pie. 7. A made Dish. 8. Rosted Partridges. 9. Larks and Chickins. 10. A dish of Tarts or Fruit. October. 1. Boy'ld Capons with Saw∣sages. 2. Bacon and Oysters. 3. Rosted Beef. 4. A rosted Goose. 5. A Grand Sallet. 6. A rosted Turkey. 7. Tongue and Udder. 8. A Warden Pie, or Tart. 9. Custards. 10. Rosted Capons. November. 1. Pullets and Oysters. 2. A dish of stu'd Oysters. 3. A Neck of Mutton, and a Neck or Chine of Veal or Mutton rosted, and in one Dish. 4. Minc'd Pies. 5. A Warden Pie. 6. A rosted Capon. 7. A Turkey: Tart and Custard. December. 1. A Coller of Brawn. 2. A Lambs Head and white Broth. 3. A Neats Tongue and Ud∣der rosted. 4. A minc'd Pie. 5. A Venison or Lamb Pasty. 6. A rosted Capon. 7. A made Dish. 8. Cram'd Chickins 9. A Quince Pie. 10. Wild Ducks. 11. Warden Pies and Cu∣stards. A Bill of Fare for a Fish Dinner: Also a Bill of Fare for Fish Dayes. 1. A Barrell of Oysters. 2. A Pole of Ling. 3. A dish of green Fish but∣ter'd with Eggs. 4. A dish of butter'd Prauns, or Craw Fish. 5. A Pike boyl'd. 6. A Carp stu'd, and stu'd Oysters.
7. A pair of Soles fri'd. 8. A rosted Spitchcock. 9. A Dish of Smelts. 10. Salmon, Sturgeon, and Lob∣sters. 11. A Skirrot or Potatoe Pie. 12. A Carp or Eele Pie. Note that Oysters be in season all the Winter, and so many Moneths as the Letter R is in the Moneth; and are com∣mendable raw, stu'd, fri'd, or bak'd in Pies, and may be added to many boyl'd Dishes of Butchers Meat, and Fowl. A Bill of Fare or Entertainment in October, November, or December. 1. BRawn. 2. Grand boyl'd Meat. 3. A Turbet hot, or Carps with Eeles or Oysters. 4. Pullets boyl'd. 5. A Bisk of Fish. 6. A Grand Sallet. 7. A Chine of Beef, Mutton and Veal. 8. A Venison Pasty. 9. A Turkey rosted. 10. Chewetts. 11. Minc'd Pies. 12. Hare Tongue and Ud∣der rosted. 13. A made Dish. 14. A pouder'd Goose. 15. Fresh Salmon. 16. A Quince Pie. 17. A Westphalia Ham of Bacon. Second Course. 1. A Pike boyl'd. 2. Pheasants rosted, three in a dish. 18. Cold Bak'd Meats. 19. Capons rosted. 20. A Custard. 3. Jelly. 4. Cocks and Partridges three in a Dish. 5. An Oyster Pie. 6. Plovers, six in a Dish. 7. A Lumber and Potatoe Pie. 8. A preserv'd Tart. 9. Six Snipes and eighteen Larks in a Dish rosted. 10. Lobsters. 11. Dri'd Tongues with Salt Sallets. 12. Sturgeon. 13. Marchpane.
A COLLECTION OF Many Select, and Excellent PROVERBS Out of Severall Languages, Most usefull in all Discourses, and for the government of Life, In such an Exact Alphabeticall Method, and Manner, as hath not heretofore been Printed. By Robert Codrington Master of Arts. A word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prov. 25.11. A word spoken in season how good is it? Prov. 15.3. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Lee at the Sign of the Turks Head in Fleetstreet, 1664.
The Variety of many Choice and Excel∣lent Proverbs, not only English, but of all other Languages, in that Method and Order that hath not heretofore been extant. A A Poet maketh but bad Verses in adversity. A Man is not so soon he aled as hurt. A Man may cause his own Dog to bite him. A piece of a Kid is worth two of a Cat. A close Mouth catcheth no Flies. A Mouse in time may bite in two a double Cable. A good Tale ill told is marred in the telling. A Pound of Care will not pay an Ounce of Debt. An unbidden Guest knoweth not where to sit. A young Man old maketh an old Man young. A scabby Horse is good enough for a scabby Squire. A Bow long bent waxeth weak. A Friend is never known untill the time of need. A hard fought Feild where all are killed. A Honey Tongue, a Heart of Gall. A Hook well lost to get a Salmon. A Mad that giveth yeeldeth. A good Lawyer, but an evil Neighbour. A Churle seldome careth for a Gentleman. A little thing forborn groweth heavy. All things are soon prepared in a well ordered House. A dry Cough is the Trumpeter of Death. A Maid that laughs is half taken.
A great Dowry is a Bed full of Brabbles. A word to the wise if well observed is of great use. A rich Widow, a quiet House. A cool Mouth, and warm Feet, live long. An early riser hath care of something. A hundred Tailors, a hundred Millers, and a hun∣dred Weavers, make three hundred Thieves. A good thing is soon snatch'd up. A Friend in the way is better than a penny in the Purse. A Maid oft seen, A Gown oft worn, are disesteem'd, and held in scorn. A thing being once well done, what needs addi∣tion? A Man must praise the Sea, and keep himself on Land. All Keys hang not on one Girdle. At three words he is on the top of the House. All her Dishes are chasing Dishes. A good Winter bringeth a good Summer. A Man may lose his Goods for want of demanding them. A fool demandeth much, but he is a greater fool that giveth it. Anger dieth quickly with a good Man. A good name keeps his own lustre in the dark. An ingratefull Man is the worst of Men. A fair Woman, and a slash'd Gown, find alwayes some Nail in the way. An Egge is better to day than a Pullet to morrow A Suit in Law and an Urinall bring a Man t the Hospitall. A long nos'd Man is seldome a Cuckold. A good Sallet is the beginning of an ill Supper. An old Mans best praise is his prayer. A snarling Cur hath a scurvy Coat. A full Purse will make the mouth to speak. A good Custome must root out that which an evil hath brought in.
All is not lost that is in danger. All are not thieves that Dogs bark at. A Tree is known by the Fruits, and not by the Leaves. A Drunkard is not Master either of his Soul or Body. As a Man is befriended, so the Law is ended. A good Horse draweth his Master and himself on of the Mire. A good Forecaster is better than a bad Worker. An evil Chance never comes alone. An empty Purse filleth the Face full of wrinkles. A Man must sell his Ware according to the rates of the Market. A knotty piece of Timber must have square Wedges. A Man must not make a Wolf a Shepherd. A Man never surfets with overmuch Honesty. A Wife is a fine thing; it is House-keeping is the Shrew. A little Body doth oftentimes harbour a great Heart. A Man must not look for a golden life in an iron Age. A valiant Man esteemeth every place to be his own Countrey. A Man may love his House although he rideth not on the Ridge of it. A Man is a Man though he hath but his Hose on his Head. An old Cat laps as much Milk as a young. As t as a Pudding for a Friers mouth. A young Saint may prove an old Devil. A Womans counsell is often good. A good Heart may do well any where. A Scepter is one thing, and a Ladle another. A Bean in liberty is better than a Comfit in prison. A green wound is soon healed. A married Man must turn his Staff into a Stake,
viz. he must keep at home. A fool and his money is soon parted. A Friend is not so soon gotten as lost. A grunting Horse and a groaning Wife never fails their Master. A white Wall is a fools Paper. A handfull of good life is better than a bushell of learning. A good bargain is a pick-Purse. A fat House-keeper makes lean Executors. A good paymaster starts not at assurances. A Woman and a Glass are ever in danger. A long tongue is sign of a short hand. A rugged Stone grows smooth from hand to hand Although the Sun shine, yet leave not your Cloak at home. All things have their place, knew we how to place them. An evil Workman quarrels with his tools. A great Ship doth ask deep waters. All Feet tread not in one Shooe. A Fool may throw a Stone into a Well, which a hundred wise Men can never pull out. B BEtter the last smile than the first laughter. Between promising and performing a Man may marry his Daughter. Better be wise than strong. Beware of a reconciled Enemy. Better half a Loaf than no Bread. Bought Wit is best. Better late than never. Better to have a Child with a snotty Nose, than to have no Nose at all. By Wisdome cometh Peace, and by Peace Plenty. Battels cost Blows on both sides. Beware the Geese when the Fox preacheth.
Black will take no other Hue. By scratching and biting Dogs and Cats come together. Better play for nothing than work for nothing. Better to have one Eye than to be blind altoge∣ther. Better to buy than to borrow. Better to bow than break. Beggars may sing before a King. Better my Hog dirty home than no Hog at all. Better sometime a scolding Wife than no Wife at all, for her Children may be quiet. Better an Egge to day than a Hen to morrow. Better to be still single than ill married. Better to go about than to fall in the Ditch. Breed up a Crow and she will peck out thy eyes. Before thou marry, be sure of a House wherein to tarry. Beauty is but a Blossome. Beauty is no Inheritance. Building and marrying of Children are great Wasters. Brabling Dogs never want sore ears. Better that the Feet slip than the Tongue. Better a bare Foot than no Foot at all. Bare-footed Men need not tread on thorns. Be the Mastiff gentle, yet bite him not by the lip. Buy at a Fair, but sell at home. Better to ride on an Ass that carries me, than on an Ass that throws me. By Suppers and Surfets more have been killed than Galen ever cured. Be not a Baker if your Head be of Butter. Being on the Sea sail, being on Land settle. Building is a sweet Impoverishing. Bear with Evil, and expect Good. Bells call others into the Church, but enter not themselves into it. Before you make a Friend, eat a Bushell of Salt with him.
Beauty draws more than Oxen. Bold is the Mouse that nestleth in the Cats Ear. Be what thou wouldst seem to be. By doing nothing we learn to do ill. Better it is (especially as the World now goes) to build two Chimneys, than to maintain one. Between two Stools we fall to the Ground. Bashfullness is an Enemy to Poverty. Be not too hasty to out-bid another. Beauty and Folly are often match'd together. Bashfullness doth moderate Desires. Beware what, and to whom you speak. Better to be beaten than be in bad Company. Breeding, not Birth, makes a Man. Better be a Coward, than too desperately to be fool-hardy. Better to be unborn, than untaught. Bad Cloath it is that will take no Colour. Better to see a Clout, than a hole out. Beggars would eat Larks, if wishes were Thrushes. Better safely to descend, than to ascend too rashly. Better to have a defect in one Eye, than not to see at all. Better it is to pitty, than tor evenge. Bad is the Cause which none dares speak in. Better a Louse in the Pot, than no Flesh. Bought Wit is best. Better to spare at the brim, than at the bottome. Better an old Mans Darling, than a young Mans Wonderling. Bate me an Ace key Boulton. Better die a beggar, than live a beggar. Remember the golden Mean. C CRaft bringeth nothing home. Charity and Industry do take all things doubtfull in the best construction. Crosses are Ladders that do lead to Heaven.
Claw a Churl by the Breech, and he will foul your hand. Cavils will enter in at any hole, if it find none, it will make one. Children are their Parents Riches. Children are certain Cares, but uncertain Com∣forts. Cloudy Mornings turn to clear Evenings. Courting and woeing bring dallying and doing. Close is my Shirt, but closer my Skin. Cunning is no Burthen. Children and Fools cannot lye. Change of Women makes lean Knaves. Can a Jackanapes be merry when the Clog is at his heel. Corn in good years is Hay, in ill years Straw is Corn. Credit lost is like a Venice Glass broke. Change of Weather is the discourse of Fools. Choose Bread with eyes, and Cheese without eyes Christmas though long desired passeth away in one day. Craft is Bastard Policy. Corn is cleansed with Wind, and the Soul with Chastenings. Crooked Logs make straight Fires. Could all Fools be without Bables, we should want Fuell. Chickens are bred up in the Countrey, but the City eats them. Correct a Child behind, and not before. Call me not an Olive till you see me ripe, and ga∣thered. Counsell breaks not the Head. Cold Weather and Knaves come out of the North Comparisons are odious. Courtesie on one side only doth never last long. Choose a Horse made, and a Wife to make. Courts have no Almanacks.
Cold, and comfortless. Custome is another Nature. Cruelty is a Tyrant that is alwayes attended with fear. Confession of a Fault makes half amends for it. Children are poor Mens Riches. Contentment is Treasure enough, nor needs he more who is contented with what he hath. Carrion Crows bewail the dead Sheep, and then they eat them. Common Beauties find more Lovers than Hus∣bands. Cholerick Men never want Woe. Constancy hath one foot on Land, and another on Sea. Condemned although every where it be for Falshood, yet Astrology may be true, though the Astrologers can never find it. Chiefest of Diseases that raigneth this year is Folly. Curst Kine have short Horns. Counsels in Wine do seldome prosper. Children when they are little make Parents fools, when they are great they make them mad. D DEsires are nourished by Delays. Dinners cannot be long where Dainties are but short. Dogs that bark at distance, bite not at hand. Do what thou oughtest, and come what can. Defer nor till to morrow, if it may be done to day. Deeds are Fruits, Words are but Leaves. Deeds are Male, and Words are but Female. Do as the Friar speaks, not as he doth. Delays are the death of Suitors. Diseases are the Interests of Pleasures. Dogs wag their Tails not so much in love to you, as of your Bread.
Dally not with Money, or with Women. Debters are liars. Discreet Women have neither eyes, nor ears. Disgraces are like Cherries, one draws in another. Dry bread at home is better than rost-meat abroad. Divine Grace was never slow. Death keeps no Kalender. Dogs are fine in the Field. Deaf Men go away with the injury. Desert and Reward do seldome keep company together. Beware of Impatience, for fair words do cool more than a Caldron of Water. E Eaten Bread is forgot. Ever drunk, ever dry. Every Man basteth the fat Hog. Evil gotten, evil spent. Essex Stiles, Kentish Miles, Norfolk Wiles, many Men beguiles. Every Man cannot hit the Nail on the head. Every Miller draweth water to his own Mill. Every Man is best known to himself. Ever spare, and ever bare. Early to bed, and early to rise, makes a Man healthfull, wealthy, and wise. Every Mans Nose will not make a Shooing-horn. Every Man can rule a Shrew but he that hath her. Every Man after his Fashion. Every Ass thinks himself worthy to stand with the Kings Horses. Every thing is good in its season. Either live, or die with Honour. Envy never enricheth any one. Excusing is oftentimes accusing.
Evil that cometh out of thy mouth, flyeth into thy bosome. Every Bird thinks his own Nest is the best. Every Path hath a puddle. Every thing is of use to a House-keeper. Every one stretcheth his Legs according Coverlet. Ease and Wine make many a bad Husband. Eschew the Pleasure that bites to morrow. Expect not fair Weather in Winter on one Nights Ice. Every first service the Child doth his Father, is to make him fondly foolish Every Bees Honey is sweet. Empty Vessels sound most. Every one puts his fault on the Times. Every one hath a Fool in his Sleeve. F Fall not out with a Friend for a Trifle. Forgive any one sooner than thy self. Fools make Feasts, and wise Men eat them. Foecasting is as good as working. Fortune is willing to help those who are willing to help themselves. For that which thou canst do thy self, rely not on another. Fish are thrown away that are cast into dry Ponds Fools tye knots, and wise Men loosen them. Feasting is the Physicians Harvest. Fortune hateth the slothfull. Fly Pleasure, and it will follow thee. Faint Heart never won fair Lady. Fools lade the Water, and wise Men catch the Fish. Forsake not the Market for the Tole. Fools set Stools for wise Men to stumble at. Frost and Fraud have alwayes foul ends.
Foul Water will quench Fire, as soon as fair. First Deserve, and then Desire. Few Words to the wise are sufficient. Fair Words hurt not the Mouth. Fair Words deceive Fools. Fields have Eyes, and Woods have Ears. Foxes if sleeping have nothing fall into their Mouthes. Foxes when they cannot reach the Grapes, say they are not ripe. Fine Dressing is a soul House swept before the Doors. Fear keeps the Garden better than the Gardener. Fly the Pleasure that bites soon afterwards. Far shooting never killed Bird. Fair is not fair, but that which pleaseth. For want of a Nail the Shoe is lost, For want of a Shoe the Horse is lost, For want of a Horse the Rider is lost. Folly grows without watering. Foolish Tongues talk by the dozen. February makes a Bridge, and March breaks it. Fools bite one another, but wise Men do agree. G GIfts blind the Eyes. Gifts enter without knocking. Good riding at two Anchors, if one fail the other will hold. Great Barkers are no Biters. GOD giveth Corn, and the Devil marres the Sack. Great Boast, and small Roast. GOD comes at last when we think he is furthest off. Give a scolding Wife Rope enough. Get thy Spindle and Distaff ready, and GOD will send thee Flax. Great Cry, and a little Wool, when the Hog was shear'd.
Good Counsell will do sometimes more than a thousand Men. Grace and Goodness maketh a Man. Good is good, but Better carrieth it. Good to be merry at Meat. Good it is to have company in trouble. Good Ware maketh a quick Market. Good cheap is dear, for it tempteth a Man to buy what he wanteth not. Great Men are great Idols. Good to prevent an Evil in the beginning. Good Manners are durable, but Beauty is perishing God cometh with Woollen Feet, but striketh with Iron Hands. Great Care is great Merchandizing. Good Watch prevents misfortune. Good Harvests make men prodigall, bad ones, provident. Great Matters are not compassed in a moment. Give a Dog rost-Meat, and beat him with the Spit. GOD hath often great share in a little House. GOD healeth, and the Physician hath the thanks. Giving to the poor doth enrich a Mans store. Gossips and Frogs they drink and talk. Go not for every grief to the Physician, nor for every quarrell to the Lawyer, nor for every thirst to the Pint-Pot. GOD deprives him of Bread, who likes not of the Drink. Gluttony and Tipling kills more than the Sword. Great Trees are good for nothing but shade. Giving is dead now-adayes, and Restoring is very sick. Good and quickly seldome meet. Give losers leave to talk. GOD provideth for him that trusteth in him. Give not St Peter so much, as to leave St Paul no∣thing. GOD keep me from four Houses, an Usurers, a
Tavern, a Spittle, and a Prison. GOD, our Parents, and our Master, can never be requited. Goods are theirs that enjoy them. Green Wood makes a hot fire. Good to begin well, better to end well. H HE that goeth softly, goeth safely. He that hath but one Eye must take heed how he loseth it. He picked this Sallet out of more Gardens than one. He liveth long that liveth well. He is more bold than wise. He hath nothing that is not contented. He that chastiseth one, amendeth many. He that deceiveth another, is often deceived him∣self. He loseth his thanks, that promiseth, and delay∣eth. He that converseth not with Men, knoweth no∣thing. He covereth me with his Wings, and bites me with his Bill. He that is suffered to do more than is fitting, will do more than is lawfull. He freely may receive courtesies that knows how to requite them. He wrongeth good Men that favoureth bad Men. He is not wise who knows not how to be a fool. He cryes Wine and sells Vinegar. He is as sure as March in Lent. He is blind enough who sees not through the holes of a Sieve. He who doth a serious business in hast rides post upon an Ass. He that speaks me fair, and loves me not, I will
speak him fair, and trust him not. He that liveth in hope, danceth without a Min∣strell. He that runs in the night, stumbleth. Hastily come, hastily go. He harpeth on that String, which will make no good musick. He that hath a good Neighbour, hath a good Morrow. He that fills his brain with Wine, can put nothing else in it. He spares no words who brings good news. He is an ill Husband that is not missed. He keeps a stir, but is no Constable. He hath lest his Purse in his other Hose. He is a bad Musician can sing but one Song. He who sheweth his Purse, longs to be rid of it. He promiseth like a Merchant, but payeth like a Man of Warre. He will not make Fish of one, and Flesh of another. He is better with a Rake, than with a Fork. He who hath a good Harvest, may be content to have some Thistles. He that makes himself a Sheep, the Wolf will eat him. Happy Man be his Dole. He that will live in peace, and rest, must hear, and see, and say the best. He can pipe but ill who wants an upper Lip. He that will have a Hare to breakfast, must hunt over-night. He that lyes with his Wife in the Market-place, shall have many teachers. He needs must swim that is held up by the Chin. He loveth Mutton well, that soketh his bread in the Wool. He spent Michaelmas Rent in Midsummer Moon. He that is afraid of every Grass, must not piss in a fair Meadow.
He that goes to sleep with Dogs, shall rise with Fleas. He is noble who hath noble conditions. Have a care to gain, for there will come a time to spend. He that falleth, and amendeth, recommendeth himself to GOD. He sleeps our his Eyes, and Profit. Honour and Ease are seldome bedfellows. He is liveless that is faultless. Husbands are in Heaven whose Wives chide not. He outshot him in his own Bow. Harm watch, harm catch. He is wise that is honest. His Belly is too strong for his Purse. His Will is the cause of his own Woe. Heresie and Frenzy go together. He that licks Honey from Thorns, pays too dear for it. He that is not circumspect wanteth no trouble. He that overmuch studieth his own contentment, ever wanteth it. He that is angry is seldome at ease. Hunger breaks through stone Walls. He doth an excellent dayes work, who ridds himself of a Fool. Handsome Apparrell makes Fools pass for wise Men. He that will not be saved needs no Preaching. He loseth nothing that keepeth GOD for his friend. He that gives discreetly, gaineth directly. He that gives quickly, giveth twice. He hath not lost all who hath one throw to cast. He that cannot pay, let him pray. He that hath a fellow-ruler, hath an over-ruler. He that waiteth on anothers Mans Trencher, maketh many a late Dinner. He that fights with silver Arms, is sure to over∣come.
He laughs ill that laughs himself to death. He may bear all his Friends on his back. He is wise that can keep himself warm. He is a Cipher amongst Numbers. He putteth his hand betwixt two Grindstones. He that doth well wearieth not himself. He that goeth not in company knoweth nothing. He who liveth wickedly can hardly die honestly. He sheweth all his Wit at once. He may change his hair but not his hearr. He that will not be counselled cannot be helped. Half a Loaf is better than no bread at all. He that hath Time, and looks for Time, loseth Time. He that is man'd with Boyes, and hors'd with Colts, will have his Meat eaten, and his Work undone. He may ill run that cannot go. He runneth far that never returns again. He that goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing. How can the Foal amble, when the Horse and Mare trot. He hath sneezed thrice, turn him out of the Ho∣spitall. He may mend but not grow worse. He playeth best who winneth. He shall never buy what is good, who is afraid to ask the price. Honours change Manners. Half an Acre is good Land. Honest Men marry soon, wise Men not at all. He that will take the Bird must not skare it away. He that will learn to pray heartily, let him go to Sea. He that gives thee a Capon, give him the Leg, and the Wing. Happy is he who doth chasten himself. Hell is full of good meanings, and wishings. He who lyes long a bed his State feels it.
He who looks not before finds himself behind. He that burns his House, doth warm himself for once. He wrongs not an old Man who steals his Supper from him. He that strikes with his Tongue, must ward with his Head. He that makes his Bed ill, lyes there. He that labours, and thrives, spins Gold. He that takes not up a Pin slights his Wife. He that hath lost his credit is dead to the World He that will deceive the Fox must rise betimes. He that falls into the Dirt, the longer he stayeth there, the fouler he is. He that is not handsome at twenty, nor strong at thirty, nor rich at forty, nor wise at fifty, will ne∣ver be handsome, strong, rich, nor wise. He that doth what he will, doth not what he ought. He that sings on Friday, will weep on Sunday. He that seeketh trouble never misseth it. He who hath a Head of Wax must not walk in the Sun. He that makes a good Warre, makes a good Peace. He that hath one Hog makes him fat, and he who hath but one Son makes him a fool. He that hath love in his brest hath spurs in his side. Health and Money go far. He that hath little is the less dirty. He that lets his Wife go to every Feast, and his Horse drink at every Water, shall neither have good Wife, nor good Horse. He that makes a thing too fine, doth break it. Health without Money is half an Ague. Help thy self, and GOD will help thee. He commands enough that obeyeth a wise Man. He that hopeth not for good, feareth not evil. He that bloweth in the dust, fills his eyes with it.
He that liveth not well one year, sorroweth for it seven years after. He that hath a Wife and Children, wanteth not business. He that pittyeth another, remembreth himself. He that marryeth for Wealth doth sell his liberty. He that is thrown would ever wrastle. He that serves well needs not fear to ask his wa∣ges. He goes not out of his way that goes to a good Inne. He looks not well to himself that looks not ever to himself. He that endureth is not overcome. He that gives away all from himself before he dies, provides to suffer. He that will enter into Paradise, must have a good Key. He quitteth his place well that leaveth his friend there. Half the World knows not how the other half lyes. He that contemplates hath a day without night. He is not a Merchant bare, that hath Money, worth, or Ware. I IDleness turneth the edge of Wit. Justice is the best Keeper of Kings. If thou hast not a Capon feed on an Onion. In vain he craves advice that will not follow it. In a hundred pound of Law, there is not a half penny weight of Love. It is the part of a fool to say, I had not thought on it. It is no medling with ones betters. Ill Will never speaks well. Ill Company brings many a Man to the Gallows. It is not how long we live, but how well we live.
It is a bad Cause that none dares speak in. It is a sore fought Field where none escape unkil'd. It is better never to begin than never to make an end. In the deepest Water is the best Fishing. In fullness is forgetfulness. Idleness the Mother of all Evil. It is never a bad Day that hath a good Night. If a Man will have his business well done, he must do it himself. It is good to keep a Hatch before the Door. It is a hard Winter when one Wolf eateth another. Intemperance is a Cur-throat. It is a Vertue to abstain from Pleasures. It is too late to spare when the bottome is bare. In a calm Sea every Man may be a Pilot. Innocency bringeth a defence with it. It is good striving to be best. I will not take from my lest side to give to my right. It is easie to bowl down the Hill. It is a Vertue to hate Vice. It is easie to rob an Orchard when none keep it. It is better to kiss a Knave than to be troubled with him. It is better to be a Shrew than a Sheep. It is ill setting Spurs to a flying Horse. It is hard to wive and thrive both in a year, If thy Friend deceive thee, be no Enemy, but cease to be a Friend. Industry is Fortunes right hand, and Frugality her left. It is possible for a Ram to kill a Butcher. Ignorant Modesty is better than a learned Curio∣sity. It is not the Cats fault if the Mistress of the house be a fool. Idleness is the Key of Beggary. In the labourers house Hunger looks in, but dares not enter.
If thou wilt know the value of an Angel, go and borrow one. It is not the gay Coat that makes the Gentleman. It is not good waking of Care when it is asleep. If fools went not to the Market, bad Ware would never be sold. It is a strange Beast without Head, or Tayl. I wept when I was born, and every day shows why. Jest not with the Eye, or with Religion. If the old Dog barks, he gives counsell. Into a Mouth shut Flyes do never fly. If you would know secrets, look them in grief, or pleasure. If Folly were grief every house would weep. If you could run as you drink, you might catch a Hare. In time comes he whom GOD doth send. In choosing a Wife, and buying a Sword, we ought not to trust another. If all fools did wear white Caps, the whole World would seem a flock of Geese. It is a poor Stake that cannot stand one year in the ground. In every Art it is good to have a Master. If the Mother had not been in the Oven, she had never sought the Daughter there. If things were to be done twice, all would be wise It is a poor Sport that is not worth a Candle. If thou thy self canst do it, attend no others helping hand. In a Retreat the lame are foremost. It is a wicked thing to make a dearth ones Garner. It is taken for a disgrace to call the ordinary Ci∣tizens now adayes Goodman or Goodwife, but if they had any cause for it, they need not so to be offended at it. In our Childhood we were Fools, in our Man∣hood we are Servants to Care, and in our old
Age we are but Porters to Diseases. It is a rank courtesie when a Man is forced to give thanks for his own again. It is a running plague to a Horse when a hasty Ass rides him. If every one would mend but one, we should have the Golden Age again. K Know when to spend and when to spare is great wisdome. Keep thy Feet dry, thy Mouth moist. Kindness will creep where it cannot go. Keep counsell first thy self. Keep the Wolf from the door. Kindle not a fire that cannot be extinguished. King Harry lov'd a Man. Kill a Man with a Cushion. Keep good Men company and you shall be of the number. Knowledge is folly except grace guide it. Knotty pieces of Timber must have sharp Wedges. L Lightly got, and quickly spent. Leave is light. Like the Flounder out of the frying Pan into the fire. Long absent, and soon forgotten. Let Charity measure all your actions. Let the Letter stay for the Post, not the Post for the Letter. Like to like, and Nan for Nicholas. Let us be merry, the Devil is dead, I, but his Son is still living. Little Pitchers have great ears. Lack is an hell.
Learning is the Eye of the Mind. Let Patience grow in your Garden. Lessen Charge, and save Cost. Like Question, like Answer. Let not thy hand write, nor thy tongue speak, what thy head shall smart for. Liberty hatcheth all Vice. Like ill Weather, Sorrow comes unsent for. London-Bridge was made for wise Men to go over, and for fools to go under. Lick Honey with your little Finger. Let him that is cold blow the Fire. Like Author, like Book. Love and Knowledge live not alwayes together. Let no Womans painting breed thy Stomacks fainting. Love doth much, but Money doth more. Love cometh in at the Window, but goeth out at the Door. Love me little, and love me long. Like Carpenter, like Chips. Look not too high lest a Chip fall in thy Eye. Learned Men carry their best treasures about them. Love lives in Cottages as well as in Courts. Love is potent, but Money is omnipotent. Let him speak fairly that cannot spend freely. Let not him that fears Feathers come amongst wild Fowl. Love and a Cough cannot be hid. Love your Neighbour, but pull not down your Hedge. Live so well that you may not be ashamed to die. Little sticks kindle the Fire, but great ones put it out. Life without a Friend, is Death with a witness. Little Wealth, little Care. Love rules his Kingdome without a Sword. Love being jealous makes a good Eye look asquint.
Love asks Faith, and Faith asks Firmness. Little Dogs start the Hare, but the great ones catch it. Life is half spent before we know what it is. M Many talk of Robin Hood that never shot in his Bow. Married Men need not many Eyes. Many Kinsfolk, few Friends. Many things grow in the Garden which were never sowed. Many do kiss Hands which they would wish to see cut off. Measure thrice what thou buyest, and cut it but once. Mettall is dangerous in a blind Horse. My Son put Money in thy Purse, and then keep it. Mercy is a Salve for every Sore. Memory, Judgement, and Action, work great things. Misery must be the Mother when one Beggar be∣gets another. Much would still have more. Mind that which you must live by. Many a good Cow hath an ill Calf. Men will strain hard for profit. Malice hurts it self most of all. Meer Affection is blind Reason. Many Ventures make a full Fraught. Many without punishment, but none without fault. Money is often lost for want of Money. My old Mare should have a new Crupper. Men know where they were born, but not where they shall die. Marriage and want of Sleep tame both Man, and Beast.
Many speak much that cannot speak well. Much Meat, much Malady. Many strokes fell down an Oak. Money doth either serve as a Slave, or command as a Master. Miseries come by Pounds, but go away by Ounces. Men who are weak in Body had need be witty. Manners make often Fortunes. Marry your Son when you will, but your Daugh∣ter when you can. Mills and Wives are ever wanting. Musick helps not the Tooth-ach. More have repented of Speech than Silence. Mend your Cloathes, and you may hold out this Year. N Neither be daunted with poverty, nor lifted up with riches. No Penny, no Pater noster. No Man loves his Fetters though made of Gold. No Butter will stick on his Bread. Need hath no Law. No Dearth but what is bred in the Horses Man∣ger. Nothing is unpossible to a willing mind. None know so well where the Shooe wringeth, but he that weareth it. No Men know better what is good, but they who have endured evil. No Silver, no Servant. No Day passeth without some grief. No altogether Jack out of doors, although no Gentleman. No Man can be learned without Industry. No Man ever lost his Credit but he that had it not. Need maketh the old Wife trot. No Man can follow a Business so well as he to
whom it doth belong. New Meat begetteth a new Appetite. New Kings, new Laws. Never too late to be good. Never had an ill Workman good Tools. Noble Housekeepers need no Doors. None is a fool alwayes, every one sometimes. No Lock will hold against the power of Gold. Noble Plants suit not with a stubborn Soyl. Nothing drieth sooner than a Tear. None is born a Master. No sooner is a Temple built to God, but the De∣vil builds a Chappell hard by. None is so wise but the fool overtakes him. No Profit to Honour, no Honour to Religion. No Man can flea a Stone. Neither praise, nor dispraise thy self, thy Actions serve the turn. Nature draws more than ten Teems. None know the weight of anothers burthen. No Alchimy to saving. O. Old sinnes breed new shame. Of honey and gall in Love there is store. Opportunity makes a Thief. Old friends, and old wine are best. One hand washeth another, and both wash the face. One good forewit is worth two afterwits. One may sooner fall than rise. One never loseth by doing good turns. One poor Ass cannot carry two burdens. One eye of the Masters seeth more than ten of the servants. Old Age attended with Virtue is a Crown of Glory. Once a use, and ever a custome.
Of a good beginning comes a good ending. Of evil grain, no good seed can come. One, and none, is all one. One shrewd turn followeth another. One can never make a strait Arrow of a Sows tayl. Of a Mole-hill he maketh a Mountain. Old men and Travailers may lye by authority. Old sinnes, new repentance. Out of debt, and our of danger. One pair of heels is worth two pair of hands. One of the four and twenty parts of a Knave, is to stay long in an arrant. One evil weed marreth a whole pot of pottage. Old fish, and young flesh. One Swallow makes no summer. One beats the bush, and another catcheth the Bird. One sound blow will serve to undoe us all. One stroake fells not an Oake. Our own actions are our best security, not other mens judgement. On painting and fighting look aloof. One Flower makes no Garland. One Enemy is too much. One Fool makes a hundred. One slumber invites another. On a good bargain think twice. Of fair things the Moneth of May is fair. Old men when they scorn young make much of death. One Barber shaveth not so close but another finds work. One Father is more than one hundred School-masters. P. Patience is a remedy for every grief. Paper and Ink cost money. Pain is forgotten when gain followeth.
Penny wise, and Pound foolish. Proffered service stinketh. Prove thy Friend before thou needest him. Praise a fair Day at night. Pride will catch a fall. Pride goeth before and shame followeth after. Peevish pitty spoils a City. Prayer and Provinder never hinder a journey. Plain dealing is a Jewel Policy with her long nails hath almost scratcht out the eyes of Religion. Poverty parteth good fellowship. Proud is the Horse that will not carry his own provinder. Pleasure the rarer used the more commendable. Painfullness is something eased by hoping for rest. Patience in poverty is all a poor mans remedy. Patience by force, is a medicine for a mad Dogge. Plain dealing is more praised than practised. Providence is better than rent. Pull down your hat on the winds side. Prettiness dies quickly. Poverty is the mother of health. Pardon all but thy self. Poverty is no sin. Promising is the Eve of giving. Patch and long slit, build and soon flit. Poverty causeth base things. Put God before thee, and thou needest not care who cometh behind thee. Q Quietness is a great treasure. Quench not the Spirit. Quit all to follow truth. R Reason cannot shew it self more reasonable, than
to leave reasoning in things above Reason. Religion, Reputation, and the Eye, are three things that ought not to be touched. Reckon right and February hath one and thirty dayes. Reove an old Tree, and it will wither to death. Running Water is better than standing. Raw Veal, and Chickin, make fat Churchyards. Repentance costeth dear. Repentance is the Laundress of the Conscience. Riches encrease by Discretion. Revenge is womanish. S Sammon and Sermon have their season in Lent. Severity in a good Man is justice. Shew me thy Wife, and I will tell thee what a Husband hou art. Sometimes severity is better than gentleness. Sound love and true is never forgotten. Some may better steal a Horse, than another look over the hedge. Sometimes words hurt more than swords. Slander leaves a score behind it. Silence doth seldome harm. Six feet of earth make all Men equall. Subtilty is better than force. Some amiss is well enough. Small rain layeth great winds. Stretch your arms no further than your sleeve will reach. Safe conquest without bloudshed is the greatest. So we get the chink, we will bear with the stink. Some thinking to redeem their shame, redouble it. Save a thief from the gallows, and he will cut thy throat. Such a one hath a good wit, if a wise man had the keeping of it.
Soft and fair goes far. Sift him grain by grain, and you will find him chaff. Shamefull craving must have shamefull denying. Saying and doing are two things. Seldome comes a better. Seldome seen, and soon forgotten. Shame in a kindred cannot be avoided. Sope is lost on the head of an Ass. Shame take him that shame thinketh. Spare to speak, and spare to speed. Speak fair, and think what you will. Such a welcome, such a farewell. Self do, self have. Souldiers in Peace are like Chimneys in Summer. She that is fair hath half her portion. Soon enough is well enough. Sloth turneth the edg of the wit. Sometimes the best gain is to lose. Say no ill of the Year till it be past. Since you know all, and I nothing, tell me what I dreamed last night. Sit in your place, and none can make you rise. Step after step, the Ladder is ascended. Shew me a Lyar, and I will shew thee a Thief. Some make a conscience of spitting in the Church, yet rob the Altar. Sweet discourse makes short dayes and nights. Service is no inheritance. Ships fear fire more than water. Silks and Sattins put out the fire in the Chimney. Scratching and eating wants but a beginning. T. Take time while time serveth. Take heed of Enemies reconcil'd, and of Meat twice boyl'd. Take heed you find not that you do not seek. Threatned folks live long.
There is no woe to want. The Groat is ill saved that shames the Master. The Wife and the Sword may be shewed, but not lent. The foremost Dog catcheth the Hare. The King of Good-fellows is appointed for the Queen of Beggars. The sluggard is cloathed in raggs. The low stake standeth the longest. The highest Rocks are most apt to be checked by thunder. The Keyes do not all hang at one mans girdle. They must hunger in Frost that will not labour in Heat. The more thy years, the nearer thy grave. There is falshood in fellowship. Three may keep counsaile if two be away. Three to one may put a Straw in a mans ar— or backside; or do any base thing to him. Time lost cannot be recovered. Truth shames the Devil. 'Tis better to sit still than rise to fall. The Postern door makes thief and whore. Two, and One, and By and By, is an Hour and a Half. Two false Knaves need no Broker. Two Hands in a Dish, but one in a Purse. The Horse next the Mill carryeth all the Grist. The Counsaile which thou wouldest have another to keep, first keep it thy self. 'Tis ill healing an old sore. Thy Cap hath more ease than thy Head. That which will be a sharp Thorn, pricketh be∣times. They agree like Bells, they want nothing but hanging up. To lose a Goose, and get a Feather. The fairer the Hostess, the fouler the reckoning. The envious Man shall never want woe.
The Hare runneth well, but the Dog that catcheth her better. There is no weather ill, when the wind is still. The Man hath no more, than he hath need of. There is no Man but needs his Neighbour at one time, or other. To moderate the Appetite is a vertue, to let it loose is a vice. The pleasures of the mighty are the tears of the poor. To promise, and give nothing, is to comfort a fool. That which cannot be cured, must with patience be endured. The Bee often spoils her own Honey. There are many witty Men, yet their brain can∣not fill their belly. The worst Feaver is that of the Tongue. The Chamber of sickness is the Chappell of devo∣tion. The sweetest Wine maketh the sowerest Vinegar. True pitty is tryed in time of misery. The Speech is the picture of the Mind. Time cureth every Disease. Trade is the mother of Money. Think not better of thy self, than the whole Pa∣rish besides. The Sheep without the Shepherd is in danger of the Wolf. They win by wearing out their enemies. The Law must rule us, not we the Law. To live sparingly bringeth a Man to be rich. The workmanship is better than the stuff. To kill a Man with a Cushion. Things hardly attained are long retained. To every Bird his own nest is best. The Nightingale and the Cuckow sing both in a Moneth. The high way is never about. Though he is bitten, he is not eaten.
The worst part is within. The day discovers what harm the night hath done. Time is Tom tell troth. Truth finds foes where it maketh none. To deceive the deceiver is no deceit. The best Ground is the dirtiest. The Lion is not so furious as he is painted. The Gull is alwayes seen against a tempest. The hoarse Crow croaketh before rain. The evil that cometh out of thy bowels falleth in∣to thy bosome. Take time while time serveth. The sins of offenders are the strength of tyrants. Think of ease, but work on. 'Tis more painfull to do nothing, than something. The Tongue breaketh bone, though it self hath none. The greatest Clarks are not the wisest Men. 'Tis better to be spoken of ill by one before all, than by all before one. The greatest wealth is contentment with a little. Truth and Oyl are ever above. The absent Party is ever faulty. Thou art wise enough if thou canst keep thee warm. The shooe will hold with the soal. The envious Man for the most part drinketh his own poyson. To leap over the hedge before you come at the stile. Too much breaks the bag. There is not so great a floud, but there is as low an ebb. That which doth blossome in the Spring, will bring fruit in the Autumn. The beggar will sing before a thief. The taste of the Kitchin is better than the smell of it.
The evening red, and morning grey, is the sign of a fair day. The young Cock crows as he hears the old. The Ape so long clippeth her young, till at the last she killeth them. Tell me with whom thou goest, and I will tell thee what thou dost. The confession of a fault is half amends. There is no curing a grief concealed. There is no Lock but a golden Key will open it. The light is naught for sore eyes. To him that hath lost his taste, sweet is sower. The blind Mans Wife needs no paining. The cunning Wife makes her Husband her Apron The Cross is the ladder of Heaven. Two hungry meals make the third a glutton. The Dog hath barked at me, but not bit me. The best Horse needs breathing. The aptest youth needs teaching. The good will is all. That which is evil is soon learned. The way to Heaven is not spread with rushes, but set with thorns. The smoak of a Mans own house is better than the fire of anothers. There is a great deal saved, where little is to be spnt. The Merchant that loseth, cannot laugh. The ill impression either by nature, or by cu∣stome, is seldome worn out. The greatest burdens are not the gainfullest. The hungry belly wanteth ears. The hungry poor Man is half a Beads-man. The last Suitor wins the Maid. They love too much that die for love. Though he be little, he can tipple. To no purpose he undertakes a business, that knows not the substance of it. The truest jests sound worth in guilty ears.
The Cat is hungry when a Crust contents her. The liquorish Cat hath many a rap. Two Dogs never agree about one bone. The slothfull Knave will thrive no where. The shadow of an advised Grandsire, is better than the sword of an adventurous fool. The first blow doth not fell the tree. That which is easily done, is soon believed. Too much scratching pains, too much talking plagues. The Feet, and Head kept warm, no matter for the rest. The Devil is not alwayes at ones door. That mourning is well bestowed which helps the mourner. The stillest waters, and humours, are alwayes the worst. The tide will fetch away what the ebb brings. To him who is hungry any bread is pleasant. The abundance of money ruines youth. The skillfullest wanting money is but scorned. The Ass that brayeth most, eateth least. The rusty sword, and the empty purse, do plead performance of Covenants. The Foxes tail will serve to piece out the Lions skin. The Ape sometimes makes use of the Cats foot, to get the Chestnut out of the fire. There belong more to marriage than four bare legs in a bed. The Pot that goes often to the Well comes broken home at last. That penny is well spent which saves a groat. The Priest forgets that ever he was Clark. There is craft in dawbing. 'Tis hard to make a silk purse of a Sows ear. They had need of a blessing that kneel to a Thistle The words that be fair hurt not the mouth. Tme lost can never be recovered.
'Tis good striving to be best. 'Tis better never to begin, than never to make an end. The more noble, the more humble. They pull with long ropes, who wait for the deaths of others. The Wolf knows what the ill Beast thinks. They who remove stones, bruise their fingers. The gentle Hawk half mans her self. The greatest stroak makes not the sweetest mu∣sick. The Lions skin is never cheap. The foot on the Cradle, and the hand on the Di∣staff, is the sign of a good Housewife. The full belly never fights, nor flyes well. To a gratefull Man give money when he asketh. Though the Mastiff be gentle, yet bite him not by the lip. Though a lye be well drest, 'tis easily overcome. Though old, and wise, yet still advise. The wrongs of a Husband, or Master, are not re∣proached. The best remedy against an ill Man, is much ground betwixt both. The Mill cannot gind with the water that is past To woe is a pleasure in a young Man, a fault in an old Man. To buy dear is not bounty. The Smith and his penny both are black. They that know one another, salute afar off. The danger past, and God forgotten. The miserable Man makes a penny of a farthing, and the liberall of a farthing six pence. The Honey is sweet, but the Bee stings. The ill that comes out of our mouth, falls into our bosome. The hearts Letter is read in the eyes. The naughty Child is better sick than well. The thorn comes forth with his point forwards.
They steal the Hog, and give away the feet or alms. The fault of the Horse is put on the addle. The Corn in winter hides it self in snow, as an old Man in furrs. The Body is but the socket ef the Soul. The Jews spend at Easter, the Moors at Marriages, and the Christians in suits of Law. The wise hand doth not all the foolish mouth speaketh. The more that Women look in their glasses, the less they look to their Houses. The worst of Law is that oe Suit breeds twenty. The worst People have most Laws. The evil wound is cured but not the evil Name. There are more men threatned, than struck. The hard gives no moe than he that hath no∣thing. The Beast that goes alwayes never wants blows. The Fox knows much, but he that catcheth him knows more. Thee is more talk than trouble. The Fool asks much, but he is more fool that graunts it. There would be no Great Ones if there were no Little Ones. There were no ill language if it were not ill taken. The groundsell speakes not, save what it heard of the hinges The best Mirrour is an old Friend. That is not good Language which all understand not. The Child sayes nothing but what it heard by the fire. The Tongue talks at the Heads Cost. Though you rise never so early, the Sun will rise at his own time, and not till then. The Nurses tongue is priviledged to talk.
The fault is as great as he that is faulty. The mornings Sun never lasts a day. To a crazy Ship all winds are contrary. The Horse thinks one thing, and he that saddles him another. Thou hast Death in thy House, and bewaylest thou anothers? The comforters head never aketh. This World is nothing, except it tend to another. The buyer needs a hundred eyes, the seller not one. The way to make a Woman-fool, is to commend her beauty. The Dog that licketh ashes, trust him not with meal. The charges of building, and making of Gardens are unknown. Trust not one nights Ice. To gain teacheth how to spend. The Dog gnaws the bone, because he cannot swallow it. The greatest step is that out of doors. The first degree of folly is to think ones self wise, the second to profess it, the third to despise counsell. The first service a Child doth his Father, is to make him foolish The resolved mind hath no cares. Talking pays no tole. The Masters eye fattens his Horse, and his foot the Ground. The Gown is hers that wears it, and the World his who enjoys it. The Presbiters Wife had rather see her Husband in his Shirt, than in his Surplice. Things well sitted, continue long. The good Mother sayes not, will you? but gives. The lame goes as far as the staggerer. That little which is good, fills the trencher.
To a good spender, God is the treasurer. There are many wayes to Fame. There is no companion like the penny. The offender never pardons. The blind eat many a Fly. The tooth-ach is more ease, than to deal with ill people. Thursday come, and the Week's gone. There is great force hidden under a sweet com∣mand. The Cat sees not the Mouse alwayes. The slothfull is the companion of the Counters. The command of custome is great. The fat Man knoweth not what the lean think∣eth. The Fish follow the bait. The March Sun causeth dust, and the wind blows it about. Time is the rider that breaks youth. The sight of a Man hath the force of a Lion. The table robs more than the thief. The thought hath good legs, and the Quill a good tongue. The Ballance distinguisheth not betwixt gold and lead. True praise takes root, and spreads. To be beloved is above all bargains, The evening praiseth the day, and the morning the frost. The perswasion of the Fortunate swayes the doubtfull. To deceive ones self is very easie. To make all firm, let God be thy beginning and thy ending. Talk much, and erre much, saith the Spaniard. That which will not be spun, let it not come be∣tween the spindle and the distaff. There is no great banquet but some fare ill. Talk not of a halter in the house of him that was hanged.
The escaped Mouse ever feels the taste of the baite. Though shooing-horns be out of date, yet horns be as plentifull as ever. Though you see a Churchman live an evil life, yet continue in the Church still. That which two will, takes effect. Three women make a market. To him that will wayes are not wanting. To day above ground, to morrow under. The effect speaks, the tongue needs not. They complain wrongfully on the Sea, who twice suffer shipwrack. The first dish pleaseth all. To a Child all weather is cold. The Friar preached against stealing, and had a Goose in his sleeve. That's the best Gown that goes up and down the house. The best smell is Bread, the best savour Salt, the best Love that of Children. The Market is the best Garden The chiefest Disease that raigns this year is folly. The constancy of the benefit of the Year in the four severall seasons argues a Deity. The faulty stands on his guard. To a crafty man send a crafty and a half to deal with him. To give and keep there is need of wit. The best of the sport, is to do the deed, and say nothing. They talk of Christmas so long, that it comes. The Wolfe must dye in his own skin. The tongue is not steel, yet it cutts. Though the Fox runs, the Chicken hath wings. The white wall is the paper of a fool. There came nothing out of the sack but what was in it. There is no House but hath something in it not to be spoken of.
The Cow knows not what her tayl is worth till she hath lost it. The off-spring of those that are very young, or very old, lasteth not. There needs a long time to know the worlds pulse. Too much taking head is loss. The Court hath no Almanack. They who are least foolish are wis The Wife is the Key of the House. The Law is not the same at morning and at night The Apothecaries Mortar spoils the Lutinists Mu∣sick. The cholerick drinks, the melancholy eats, the flegmatick sleepeth. The little cannot be great, unless he devoureth many. Time undermines all. The Physician oweth all to the Patient, but the Patient oweth nothing to him but a little money The old Mans staff is the rapper at deaths door. Take heed of an Oxe before, of an Ass behind, of a Monky on all sides. The scabby Head loves not the Comb. The singing Man keeps his Shop in his throat. The life of Man is a wintets way, and a winters day. That Man may very well live contented, that needeth not to borrow, nor flatter. There's none desires Drink, more than he that hath too much. The great put the little on the Hook. The least hair makes a shadow. The deaf gains the injury. 'Tis better to go to bed without Supper, than to rise in Debt. 'Tis an ill Ayre where nothing is to be gained. 'Tis a foolish Sheep that makes the Wolf her Con∣fessor.
'Tis good making fast the sack before it be too full. They have need of a Blessing who pray to a Thief. U Use the means, and God will give the blessing. Vain glory is a flower that bears no Corn Variety taketh away society. Variety is the gratitude of Nature. Use leggs, and have leggs. Vice is often cloathed in Virtues habit. Use the company of thy Equals. Unminded, unmoaned. Unknown, unkiss'd. Vice is slippery like Ice. Use moderation, and defie the Physitian. Vessels ratain the savour still, of that thing which them first did fill. Virtue never growes old. Virtue and a Trade are the best Portions for Chil∣dren. Vainly the Mill is said to Clack, where the Miller Ears doth lack. Under water famine, under snow bread. Valour that parlies is neer yeelding. Valour is little worth without Discretion. Valiant mens looks prevail more than cowards swords. Valiant men count every place their own Coun∣trey. W We owe more to our Health than to peasure. When the Wife commands, thunderbolts fly about the house. When it pleaseth not God, the Saint can do little. Wisedom and Hast may vary.
Wisedom is better than Strength. Whose wives chide not, the husbands are in Hea∣ven. Work wisely lest you be prevented. Wolves lose their teeth but not their memory. Womens counsels are sometimes good. Women many in number, make many words. Winters weather, and Womens words, often change. Wranglers never want words. Womens passions are naturall, and can never heal themselves. Wisdome and Judgement go together. When Fortune smiles upon thee, take the advan∣tage of it. Well begun is half done. Who is more busie than he who hath least to do. What sobriety conceals, drunkenness reveals. Weak Men had need to be witty. Wide ears, and a short tongue. When I had thatched his House, he would throw me down. Wine is the Masters, but the goodness is the Drawers. When meat is in, anger is out. Worst part is within. Wine wears no Breeches. When a thing is done, advice comes too late. What the eye sees not, the heart rues not. Who more than he is worth doth spend, he makes a rope his life to end. When all is consumed, repentance comes too late. Whatsoever is given to a fool, is lost. What children hear at home, doth soon fly abroad. When goods encrease, the body decreaseth, for most Men grow old before they grow rich. Where shall a Man have a worse friend than he brings from home.
Who weddeth before he be wise, shall dye before he thrive. Wise Men are bid to Feasts that Fools make. Wine and Women make Men runagates, and beg∣gars. What is better than a contented mind. Wise Feast-takers must be Feast-makers. When Bees are old, they yeeld no Honey. Well doth he live within doors, that is beloved without doors. Wise Men do the work, and fools brag of it. Where wrath is joyned with power, there are thunderbolts. Ware and Wades-Mill is worth London, meaning all Ware in Trading. When the Fox sleepeth, no Grapes fall in his mouth. We seldome prize that which is ordinary, as Limbs, and Senses. We must rather seem, than be naught. Whores affect not you, but your purse. What is a workman without his tools? What the heart thinketh, the tongue speaketh. When the head aketh, all the body is the worse. What some win in the Hundreds, they lose in the Shire. When the Pig is proffer'd, hold open the Poke. Where the Saddle doth pinch, better ride on a Pad Where the Hedge is low, Men soonest leap over. Without hope the heart would break. Who still takes out, and puts not in, will quickly find a bottome. Who lacketh a Stock, his gain is not worth a Chip. Who stumbles, and falls not, goes faster. Who medleth in all things, may shooe the Gosling. Who is a Cuckold, and conceals it, carrieth coals in his bosome. When he should work, each finger is a thumb. Who would please all, and himself too, underta∣keth what he cannot do.
Water, Fire, and War, quickly make room. When Ale is in, wit is out. Who may not as they will, must will as they may. Want of money, want of comfort. We have better counsell to take, than to give. We shall lye all alike in our Graves. When we have gold, we are in fear, and when we have none, we are in trouble. When poverty cometh in at the door, love flyeth out at the window. Where old age is evil, youth can learn no good∣ness. Who hath Glass-windows of his own, let him take heed how he throws stones at his house. Who goes for his money before his day, need car∣ry a Lanthorn and a Candle with him. Who expects an invitation at first sight, wants good manners. Who spends more than he should, shall not have to spend when he would. Well is it with him who is beloved of his Neigh∣bours. When a friend asketh, there is no to morrow. Who hath none to still him, may weep out his eyes Who marrieth for love, and no money, hath good nights, but sorry dayes. When all sins grow old, covetousness grows young Who promiseth, putteth himself in debt. Who remove stones, bruise their fingers. Who tells his Wife news, is but newly married. Wanton and wild Housewives marre and undo the Family. Who hath his Skirts of straw, needs fear the fire. Who hath a Wolf for his Mare, needs a Dog for his Man. Who hath a fair Wife, needs more than two eyes. When prayers are done, my Lady is ready. Who is so deaf as he that will not hear. When a Dog is drowning, every one offers him drink.
Where you think there is Bacon, there is not so much as a Chimney. Whither goest thou grief? whither I am wont. Where shall the Oxe go, but he must labour. When you give a Clown your finger, he will take your whole hand. Well may he smell fire, whose Gown burneth. Welcome evil, if thou comest alone. When you play with a fool at home, expect that he will play with you in the Market. Without favour none will know you, and with it, you will not know your self. Whether you do boyl Snow, or do pound it, you can have but water of it. Where the drink goes in, there the wit goes out. Where there is no honour, there is no grief. Welcome friend, sayes Milk to Wine. Who sings, doth skare away his sorrows. Who must account for himself, and for others, must know both. Who buyes and sells, feels not what he spends. Weight and Measure take away strife. Well to work and make a Fire, it doth care and skill require. War, hunting, and love, are as full of trouble, as of pleasure. Wounds that be ill are cured, but an evil name is never cured. What your Glass tells you, will not be told by counsell. When an old Man will not drink, go to see him in another World. When the Fox preacheth, beware the Geese. When God pleaseth, no wind but brings rain with it. When War begins, Hell opens. When you are an Anvill, hold you still; when you are a Hammer, strike your fill. Who lives by hopes, dyes breaking of wind be∣hind.
Who spits against Heaven, it falls in his face. Who will deceive the Fox, must rise betimes. Who eats his dinner alone, must saddle his Horse alone. Who gives thee but a bone, would not have thee dye. Who lives well, seeth afar off. Who demandeth, misseth not, unless his demands be foolish. Who loseth his due, getteth no thanks. Who will have a handsome Wife, let him choose her upon Saturday, and not upon Sunday, viz. when she is in her fine cloaths. Who sows his Corn in the field, doth trust in God Would you know what money is? go borrow some Who would be well old, must be old betimes. We are fools one to another. Wives and Mills are ever wanting. Who likes not the drink, God deprives him of the bread. Who comes of a Hen, must needs scrape. Water afar off quencheth not fire. Who hath neither Fools, nor Beggars, nor Whores amongst his kindred, was born of a stroak of thunder. Who hath Spice enough, may season his meat as he pleaseth. Who doth his own business, fouls not his hands. Who hath all in one place, hath all in the fire. Who works after his own manner, his head never aketh at the matter. Who commends himself, betrays himself, and be∣wrays himself. Women, Priests, and Poultry, have never enough. Who seeks trouble, is seldome without it. Who keepeth company with the Wolf, will learn to howl. Who hath bitter in his mouth, spits not all sweet. Who speaketh, doth sow, and he who holds his peace, doth reap.
Who is fed at anothers hand, must stay the longer before he be full. Who hath aking teeth, hath ill tenants. Woe to the house where there is no chiding. Where the tooth pains, the tongue is commonly upon it. Where there are no Cats, the Mice dance. Where your will is ready, your feet are light. Who bewails himself, hath the cure in his hands. Who preacheth War, is the Devils Chaplain. War maketh thieves, and Peace hangs them. Wealth is like Rheum, it falleth on the weakest parts. When children stand quiet, they have done some ill Weigh justly, and sell dearly. When the Knave is in the Plum-tree, he hath neither friend, nor kindred. We shall never come to Honour under a Coverlet When the tree is fallen, every Man goeth to it with his Hatchet. Willows are weak, yet they bind other wood. Wood half burnt, is easily kindled. Wisdome hath one foot on Land, and another at Sea. Where it is weakest, there the thread breaketh. Where love fails, we spy all faults. Wise Men need not blush for changing their pur∣poses. Wine in the Bottle doth not quench thirst. When age is jocond, and frolick, it makes sport for death. Wise Men care not for that which they cannot have. When my House is in a fire, it is not good playing at Chess. When God doth punish, he first takes away the Understanding. When it thunders, the thief becomes honest. Whirling the Eyes too much, sheweth a Kites brain.
Where there is a Spring in Winter, and a Winter in Spring, the Year is never good. Where there is peace, God is there. We learn in doing well. Women laugh when they can, and weep when they will. War is deaths feast. Words are Women, Deeds are Men. Words and Feathers are tossed by the Air. Who would be a Gentleman, let him storm a Town. Whoring and Baudery does alwayes end in beg∣gary. When you enter into a House, leave the anger at the door. War and Physick are governed by the Eye. Wine is a turn-Coat, first a friend, then an enemy. Wine makes all sorts of creatures at a table. Wine that costs nothing, is digested before it be drunk. Wronged patience often becomes furious. Y Young Cocks love no Coops. You have leap'd a Whiting. You know good manners, but you use but a few. You may know the Man by his manners. You cannot call a Man worse than unthankfull. You have a little wit, and it doth you good some∣times. You fill your mouth with an empty Spoon. You pay more for your schooling, than your learning is worth. Young Men think old Men are fools, but old Men know that young Men are so. You cannot know Wine by the Barrell. You must strike in Measure, when many strike on the Anvill.
You may bring a Horse to the River, but he will drink when and what he pleaseth. You cannot make a Windmill go with a pair of Bellows. You cannot hide an Eele in a Sack. You cannot flea a Stone. You must do your duty and endeavour, and then a blessing followeth it. You may not lose your Friend to keep your Jest. You may not lose a Hog for a halfpennyworth of Tar. Youth with Wealth destroies many good Estates: (and by much riot many die beggars.) You may lose a Fly to catch a Trout. You may be a wise Man though you cannot make a Watch. Youth is to obey and do what duty is required. Youth over-bold seldome good old. You command enough in obeying the wise. You may be deceived easily if you believe lightly. You were better to pay and have little, than to have much and be in debt. Youth must be kept from bad Company, as Flax from the Fire. You may love your House well, but not ride on the Ridge. You may speak with your Gold, and make other Tongues dumb. Your rich Man walketh to get a Stomack to his Meat, and the poor Man walks to get Meat for his Stomack. You were better give the Wool than the Sheep. You were better pass a danger once, than to be alwayes in fear. Your Letter had better stay for the Post, than the Post for the Letter. Years know more than Books, or Proverbs. The End of the Proverbs.
A Lady to her Daughter, desiring her to wear no more, Spots, or Black Patches, in her face. Daughter, THe Indulgence which I bear unto you, and the wellcome Intelligence which every day I do receive how carefull you are to deserve it, doth invite me to be the more tender over you, And in this your Duty goes along with my affecti∣on, and grace doth encourage Nature. Never∣theless I must not dissemble with you, I am to my great grief enformed, that although you seem an Enemy to the Vices of this Age, you are ad∣dicted too much to the Fashions of it, and that lately you have been seen abroad with those De∣formities on your Face which to give them their proper Name are called Black Patches. A Fashi∣on till of late never practised either in Rome, or Venice, or the Seraglio of the Turk, nor ever read of in all the Histories of the Vanities of Women, It appeareth strange to me, that young Gentle∣women should lose their Reason with their Mo∣desty, and think that they do add unto their Beau∣ty by Substracting from it, I must deal plainly with you, I am afraid that the Black Oath of God damn me in the Mouth of a Ranter, and the Black Patch in the Face of a Gentlewoman are near of kin to one another? I shall therefore as∣sume that freedom of power which is due unto me as to command you to wear them no more, till I am better satisfied in their decency or their lawfull∣ness. And thus not doubting of your care herein, I commit you with my blessing to the blessed protection of the GOD of all Blessings, and rest, Your Loving and carefull Mother, M. C.
The Daughters Answer. Madam, IT is as well Religion as Duty in me to render you all observances, and I do make it as much my Delight, as my Imployment. The greatest Blessing that can arrive unto me is to un∣derstand the Continuance of your Love, which doth oblige me to increase my thankfullness, as it shall to express it by the increase of my obedi∣ence. I perceive some idle tongue hath been so busie with my Face, as to enform you there hath lately been seen some Black Spots upon it, And I must confess, it leaveth some Impression upon my Spirit, that I should be so unhappy to incurre your displeasure for following a Fashion that hath so much Innocence to plead for its Excuse, and so much Custom for its Authority. You may see every day some little Clouds in the Face of the Sun, yet the Sun is not ashamed that it hath at∣tracted them; you may behold the Moon, in the fullness of all her Beauty to have some remarkea∣ble Spots in the Face thereof, and by these Spots it is that she gaineth her greatest Reputation, for she is inconstant in all things else, but in this only. These Spots they receive from the Earth, and shall it be a Sin for us to borrow ours from the Heavens, shall that be a Deformitie in us which is looked upon as an Accomplishment in them, shall our lower Bodies be more excellent, and more Perfect than the higher, and Earth purer than Heaven? When I do put on my Mask (which is no more nor better than one great Black Patch) you do commend me for it And, will you be dis∣pleased at me for the wearing of a few black Spots in my face, which if they are cut into Stars do re∣present unto me whither I would go, or if into little worms, whether I must go, the one of them
testifying in me the sense of my unworthiness, to increase my humility, and the other the height of my Meditations, to advance my Affections. It is the unhappiness of the most harmless things to to be subiect to the greatest misconstruction, and on the same Subject from whence others draw their Suspitions of Curiosity to accuse our Pride, we derive the greatest Arguments of Discipline and Instruction to defend our Innocence. Neither is the Ignorance of Antiquity in relation to them an Argument of any weight to condemn the No∣velty, for the black Baggs on the Head are not much older than the black Spots on the Face, and much less may be said for them, only they have had the good luck to meet with no Contradiction. Nevertheless according to the obligation of my Duty, to give you in all things satisfaction, I am de∣termined to wear them no more, not that I find any such Vanity in them, but that by the fruits of my obedience you may percive what an absolute power your Commands have over her who is, Madam, Your most humble and most obedient Daughter, A. C. A Letter from one Sister to another, com∣plaining of her Silence. Dear Sister, I Never thought after so many Protestations of Love, you would have lost even the Remem∣brance of having made them; In some Letters to you I have courted your very Neglect, and have dissembled to flatter it into a Vertue, to try if by any means I could deserve an Answer from you, which makes me to suspect either the loss, or the Decay of that love, to which both Nature, and the Laws of Nations, and the Altars themselves
do oblige us. It doth the more afflict me, that after the strictest Examination of my self, I can∣not find in my Heart the least Reason for it. Slight Loves, indeed, are fullyed with small Distasts, but a well-grounded Affection is like a strong Bow that is hardly broken, unless it be extreamly over∣drawn. I must desire you therefore to make me so happy, as to vouchsafe me an Answer but to this last Letter, although it contains nothing else but the good News of your Health, which shall be very welcome unto Her who is Your much troubled and most affectionate Sister, M. C. The Sisters Answer to it. Sweet Sister, YOu oblige me with so good a Grace in Com∣plaining of me, that I am constrained to mul∣tiply my thanks, as I should my Excuses for my silence. Every Letter that I have received from you, as it hath increas'd my gratitude, so it hath improv'd my Love, and the want of opportunity to give you a testimony of it, doth breed my greatest Discontent, but for the time to come I will be so carefull to disingage my self, that you shall have a greater Cause to complain of my Im∣portunity than my Silence. And this Assurance I must beseech you to receive from her who is Your much obliged and most affectionate Sister, B. C.
A Letter from one Schoolfellow to another, giving her an Account of the accustomed Care of her Governess. Dear Friend, I Have received your Letter, and with it that little Summe of Money that at your Departure was due unto me, which doth inforce me to ren∣der you my greatest thanks. We are still in the same good Condition as when you left us, there is as yet no Access of any more Numbers, but on∣ly of our Griefs for your Absence, which do in∣crease as our Desires do increase in our daily Discourses of you. We seldome, in the fruition of it, do understand our own happiness, and the on∣ly way to value a Blessing is to be deprived of it. Our Governess follows the method of the year, and as every Morning is more early than another in calling up the Sun, so is she by her Messenger in the awakening of her Scholars, and tempers the unpleasantness of her early Importunity with the Incouragements of the Benefit of our Healths. Although the year be new, yet she con∣tinueth her old Care for the performance of our Duties both to GOD, and to our Parents. Not a Letter is received but she understandeth from whom it cometh, and what be the Answers that are returned; in which, we believe, her Pru∣dence is more to be commended than her Jealou∣sie, for there is nothing we do write, of which we should be ashamed, if it were to be read as well on our foreheads as our papers. If the good News hath not yet been so happy as to salute your Ear, I can inform you that your old Bedfellow Mrs. H. L. hath lately intertain'd a new one, be∣ing espoused to a Gentleman as absolute in his In∣dowments,
as Noble in his Birth; could I be so transcendently honoured, as to understand the like of you, I should follow your deserved good Fortunes with all the Acclamations of Joy, and you should have for a perpetuall testimony of your Vertues. Your most faithfull and most affectionate Servant, D. W. The Answer to it. Dear Friend, I Am much honoured with the testimony of your Affection, but for your thanks for the return of the Money due unto you, you might have well spared that Complement, for me thinks, it is but a rank Courtesie when we are inforced to give thanks for our own. I am glad to understand of the Health, and continued Vigilance of our Gover∣ess, it will procure her more Scholars, and be a Means to confirm them to Her. I heard some dayes since of the Marriage of my Bedfellow Mrs. Hannah, I wish her all happiness in her Choice, and that her Fortune may be answera∣ble to the Height of her Vertue; but for your good wishes to me in the like Nature, (although I am very thankfull to you for them) yet I should be nothing displeased if you would forbear them, for good Husbands are Miracles, and Miracles be∣ing ceased, I would not afflict my self with the vain Expectation of them. I can best content my self with the present Condition in which I am, ha∣ving thereby a greater liberty to express my self to be, Your much obliged and most affectionate Servant, K. L.
Another Letter from one Schoolfellow to another. Sweet Friend, I Have taken a little time from the Exercise of my Needle, to imploy it on the Exercise of my Pen, to assure you that the Inclinations I have to esteem of you, more than of all others, will not permit me to pass by any opportunity without giving you some manifestations of the Truth thereof. I would you were alwayes as ready to honour me with your Commands, as I am to obey them. In the Indifferent Estate wherein I am, I can fear nothing more than to be blotted out of your Remembrance, for in what parts soever of the world my Fortunes shall throw me, I shall still preserve the Memory of your Affection, which is the only Cause that makes her desire to live who is The most faithfull of all who truly love and honour you, A. P. The Answer to it. Sweetest Friend, I Gratulate your Art, and the Delicateness of it, that can so happily translate your Hand, and Fancy, from one Flower to another, from the Flowers wrought by your Needle, to the Flow∣ers wrote by your Pen, and that with so much Grace and liveliness, that I know not in which of them the flourish is more excellent. You need not to make the least doubt of the Integrity of my Love, for although I have not the Art of Rheto∣rick to represent it, yet my Deeds and Services shall be eloquent, and most elabourate alwayes o express my self to be Your most affectionate and faithfull Friend and Servant, E. R.
A Letter from one Kinswoman to another, on her Sickness occasioned by the Death of Her Husband. Madam, THe News of the Death of your Husband, and of your Sickness that did attend it, hath occasioned such an alteration in my Health, that I may justly account my self in the number of those that are not well. If we were alwayes happy we should be something more than wo∣men; we see but part of Heaven whilest we are here on Earth, and I believe if Vertue it self had a Body it would be but sickly, and sad, as you are. It were a Sin in us to expect to live in this world in a Constant happiness, if we could alwayes be in the height of it, we should joyn Autumn to the Spring, and fruits with flowers, and at the same time we should both hope for them, and enjoy them. I am afraid you are too obstinate under this burden of your Visitation, and are resolved to honour your Griefs by your continuance in them, and by your stooping to them. I had well hoped the Experience you have of all things in the world had indued you, if not with more Courage, yet with more Instructions. Perseverance, indeed, may work Miracles, but not alwayes, nor every where; if there be many Examples of the Power of it, there are some also of its weakness. Let me be so happy therefore to be as well your Counsel∣ler as your Kinswoman, and to perswade you to shake off that Melancholy which is so prejudiciall to you, and whatsoever you think to the Contra∣ry, to believe from me that it is an easie matter to subdue Grief, against which Patience never takes up Arms but it overcomes it. I know not whether
my Counsell will prove acceptable to you, but I am confident that it will be very profitable, and that it proceeds from her who is Madam, Your most humbly devoted and most affectionate Kinswoman, A. W. The Answer to it. Worthy Cosin, AS soon as ever I received the first ability of Strength, I served my self of the opportuni∣ty to render you thanks for the Consolation you gave me in my Sickness, and in the loss of my dear Husband, by the Intertainment of your Let∣ters. I must desire you not to deprive me of this Contentment, for it is a great satisfaction to me, to find my self honoured with the Repetitions of your Remembrance. Be as frequent as you please in giving me new Assurances of your Love. All the manifestations and assurances you can have of mine, cannot render it more perfect than it is, as being Your much obliged and most affectionate Kinswoman, E. R. A Letter of Love from a young Gentleman to a Lady whom he much affecteth. Madam, I Find such a large Subject of worth and all Perfections in you, that I am Constrained to tell you, that of all the Beauties in the world you are She only whom I most intirely do affec
They are not words of Complement, for I have no other Obje but your Merits. If you make any doubt of this Truth, serve your self of that absolute Power you have gained over me, to ob∣lige my Indeavours by what proofs you please. My Life and Honour are both at your Disposure. I must beseech you therefore to torment me with no cruelty of Denials, nor by your neglect to ex∣ercise any tyranny over me, for till I shall receive your Answer, he is even sick with Expectation who is Madam, Your most humble most affectionate and captivated Servant, I. F. The Answer to it. Sir, I Cannot but lament with my self the Condition of our Sex, whose Modesty is accounted Cruelty, and because we will not be Slaves to the Desires of others we must be called Tyrants; nevertheless if it lay in my power I should be rea∣dy to infranchize all Captives. You acquaint me in your Letter, that your Expectation makes you sick; truly, Sr, Loves Diseases have so strange a way of cure that I never spend my Charity on such Persons, neither is it in my power to give you any Answer to what I do be∣lieve you would propound, for my Will doth so ab∣solutely depend on my Parents Inclinations, that I cannot violate the Respects which I do owe un∣to them, you are therefore to learn of them what you desire of me, howsoever I shall thank you for the testimony of your Affections, which shall ren∣der me as far as liberty permits, Your Servant, S. B.
The Letter of one Lady to another, condemn∣ing in her own Judgement the common practise of embelling the Complexion of the Face with the helps of Art, and gi∣ving many Reasons for it. Madam, I Must confess I do much honour you, and you be∣ing as absolute in the Indowments of your Mind, as in the perfections of your Body, I must confess I have much Reason for it. I often have had the Experience of your Love, I must desire you now to excuse my Rudeness, which would press upon your Goodness so far, as to give me an Experience of your Wit; I know there is none more able to perform it than your self, which as it should give Courage to you to undertake it, so it doth increase my Importunity to desire it. It is concerning a Borrowed Beauty from Art, and whether it may be lawfully used in points of Con∣science in Religion, I must confess my own Judg∣ment is much unsetled in it; nevertheless, I have been informed by many Reverend and God∣ly Persons, that without all Controversie it is a great Sin, and Inconsistent with the profession of a Christian, and a good Conscience. I have un∣derstood that your Ladiship hath been heard to speak much in the Vindication of these Artificial Helps, which makes me more earnest to desire your Answer, that so I might satisfie my self whether they be lawfull in any kind, at any time, or by any Person that pretends to Piety. I do find that Washing and Painting is condemned in the Scriptures, as the practise of loose, and licenti∣ous Women, who with the deforming of their Souls, and polluting of their Consciences, do use the Art for the heightning of their Complexions.
I do read in the New Testament, that we can∣not make one Hair of our Head white or black; and if we have neither the liberty, nor are to as∣sume the Power to alter the Complexion of our Hairs, much less the Complexion of our Cheeks, and Faces. It argues besides an unsanctified Mind, when we go about to amend what GOD hath made, and are not satisfied with his plea∣sure. It is the true sign of a wilfull, and Contumacious Spirit, to remove, or to hide, that which GOD seems fit to allot unto us. I do find in the New Testament, that St Paul and St Peter did perscribe to Women to be cloath∣ed with Modesty, shamefacedness, and Sobriety, and not with gorgeous Apparrel, or with braid∣ed Hair, or Gold, or Pearls; and if these things were forbidden, how much more is Washing or Painting the Face, which is suitable (some think) to none but to bold, and light Spirits, to such who are not yet redeemed from the vanity of their Conversation. So that this Artificiall Beauty may appear to be divinely forbidden, as an Enemy to TRUTH, which needeth none but its own Native Complexion, and is so far from being beholding to Art for any Addition to enliven her Colour, or to put a blush upon it, that she con∣verteth even Deformities and Decays, into Ad∣vantages, and Perfections. Moreover it may be argued, that this adding of Colour, and Complexion, doth proceed from Pride; and though it reflecteth not on Wanton∣ness, yet it doth on Arrogance, to borrow, and challenge that Beauty to be ours, which indeed is not, but only by an adventitious stealth. And this self-Conceit is an Enemy to Humility, and all Grace, and would by degrees overtop all Vertue. But grant it were not scandalous, nor sinfull; nay grant it were not absolutely unlawfull, yet the offence it giveth to pious Men is a sufficient Argu∣ment
that it ought not to be practised. Is it not much safer to want a little Complexion in the Cheek, than to grieve the Heart of any tender Christian. Although many things may be permit∣ted in themselves, yet they become evil and are to be sorborn when others are offended at them. And this (as I am often told) should be Argu∣ment enough to deter all modest and good Wo∣men from laying any new Complexion on their Faces. Neither is this All, for the very Name of a painted Face doth destroy the Reputation of her that useth it, and doth expose Her to all manner of Reproaches. It ought therefore altogether to be eschewed, not only as an offence, and as a thing of evil Report to others, but to our own private use. We are taught to follow things of a good Report, that we may not only be good, but that in all things we may preserve the Reputation of a good Name; and most sure it is, that the Art and practise of imbellishing the Face with any borrowed Complexion, doth labour with a bad Report, and is not so much an advantage to the Beauties of Ladies, as it is a disadvantage to their Reputation. If the light of Scripture were not so clear and full against all Artificiall Beauty, and painting of the Face, yet the light of Nature doth seem to discover an uncomeliness in it. There is no Person but may conclude, that if GOD threatens to punish strange Apparrel, he will not spare to punish strange Faces, which pretend to handsomeness, and do make that to appear which indeed is not. Madam, I have thus adventured to torment you with the length of my Letters, not out of any disaffection which I bear unto your La∣diship, but out of a grounded Confidence, that if any in the world can in these particulars give a full satisfaction to them, it is your Ladiship only. In a labouring expectation I attend your Answer, by
which you shall most infinitely oblige her who is Madam, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, R. S. The Answer to that Letter in Defence of Artificiall Beauty. Madam, YOu have been pleased to impose a great task up∣on me, which I am resolved to discharge, not so much to show any Wit or Knowledge in my self, as your power over me, by my obedience to your Commands, which I shall find the more dif∣ficult, because I am to discourse of an Art to which I am a Stranger, yet in which your Ladi∣ship may give more credit to me, because what I shall alleadge for the defence thereof, I shall be obliged to it by the Rules of Reason, and not by the liberty of practise. I shall not deny but that sundry Reverend and Learned Persons, are of a Judgement opposite to my own, which have prevailed much on the easie Credulity of many young Ladies, and did at first upon my own, untill I began to examine the grounds of their opinions, and to value more the weight of their Reasons, than the gravity and the numbers of their Persons. And indeed it seems very strange to me, that if this Artificiall Beauty to enliven a pale Complexion, which is the life of the Face, be so great a Sin, that these Divines cannot produce any Reasons of force out of the Scripture expresly to forbid it. The opinions of Men are not of any power to charge the Soul with Sin, in things of outward Use and Custome; neither in this Particular are the Divines them∣selves
all of one mind, for I know many excellent Persons who wisely forbear to condemn the use of those things as Sin, that are innocently helpfull to the beauties of modest Women; for indeed they are so far from Sin, or not from Sin, as the Minds of those that use them are disposed either to a modest Decency, or to Pride, and Vanity; for certainly where there is no Vice countenan∣ced, no good Duty neglected, but only a civill Decency practised, there can be no opposition to Grace, nor any thing that reflecteth on Trans∣gression. Now where it is objected, that Jezabel was de∣voured by Dogs because she painted her Eyes, if your Ladiship be pleased to look again upon the History, you shall find that the painting of her Face, or Eyes, was thirteen or fourteen years after that the Prophet Elisha did presage it, and it was no more the Cause of her dreadfull Death, than was the dressing of her Head, or her look∣ing out of the Window, which was at one and the same time, and one of them as innocent as the other. If all that Jezabel did is to be avoided as a Sin, we may not call a solemn Assembly, nor keep a Fast, because that Jezabel did so, as ap∣peareth by the same History; we may not im∣brace or kiss a Friend, because Joab did so when he killed Abner, and Judas when he betray∣ed his Master. And as for Herodias dancing, which was the Cause of John Baptists Death, we may find in the Gospel that she danced alone, which is allowed by our austerest Divines, and by the precisest Matrons in the education of their Children; she danced not with Herod, but be∣fore Herod; it was not the decent motion of her feet, but the disorderly affections of her heart, and the perversness of her Spirit to the Baptists Doctrine that was the occasion of his murther. And as for those places in the Prophets, from
whence scrupulous and censorious Persons do in∣fer, that the painting of the Face is a Sin, we may truly answer that it is not therefore unlawfull, because we find it there sometimes condemned as unseasonable, or because vain and loose Women do practise it, therefore the modest must altoge∣ther disclaim it. Wheresoever in the Scripture we find any mention of painting the Face, we may observe it never goes alone, but that some other tokens of Pride or Vanity are annexed to it. And shall Perfumes and comely ornaments, shall stately Beds with Tables before them, be still the Desire, and Possessions of the most modest Ma∣trons, and shall a little quickning Complexion in the Face be singled out, and excluded? Believe me Madam, there is not in the whole Scripture any morall Command to be found that expresly doth forbid it as a Sin. We may observe that Queen Esther made use of sweet perfumes, of gor∣geous habiliments and beautifull colours, and whatsoever was then in fashion, the more to at∣tract the Eyes and affections of the King unto her, and this was in her so far from a Sin, that it were almost a Sin in her not to have done it. We find that Rebeckah almost in the beginning of the world received ornaments for her Hands, her Neck and Ears, and certainly she thought it no Disparage∣ment to her modesty, or her piety. Neither is it any new invention for Ladies to use artificiall Helps for the advancement of their Beauties, it is as generall as ancient, and there is no Nation but doth practise it without any Reproach of Pride or Vanity; nor can there be any Adultery in the use of it, when it is only improved to civil Advan∣tages, and there is no adulterous Intention in the Heart. And although in this Nation a commen∣dable Discretion is used in powdering, curling, and gumming the Hair, and in quickning the Complexion, yet beyond the Seas it is every
where frequently done, and as freely owned. It is strange methinks that Supplies should be al∣lowed of for bodily defects and deformities; the Shoomaker is imployed and commended for ma∣king the Body higher, and the Tailor for making of it straiter, and must we account it a sin or scan∣dall to advance the Beauty of the Face? The Face is the Seat of Beauty, and every part of the Body is to contribute to the Honour and the comeli∣ness of it. Much more might be spoken on this Subject, and many Authorities produced to prove the Truths that are alleadged, but I am afraid I have already been too tedious, and punished your Expectation of my Letter with the length of it, which for all the Innocence of the Subject, would be a Sin in Her who is Madam, Your most humble and most devoted Servant. A Letter of Complement from one Gentle∣woman to another. Madam, I Am not so unfortunate as I thought I was, since I find that I do still hold a place in your Me∣mory; yet the grief which I have, not to deserve this Honour, hath put me in such a doubt, that I know not whether I shall rejoyce, or complain; your respect and love unto me are the fruits of your good Nature, and of your Nobleness, and the Ac∣cess of the new Dignities lately conserred upon you, are the Fruits of your Merits. Fortune was inforced to do you this Honour, or to proclaim Her self an open Enemy to your Vertues. I must beseech you to excuse the boldness which I used
in my last Letter; the Friendship, and Service which I did bear unto you, did inforce me to de∣mand the Reason of your silence, although I was almost confident you could alleadge a sufficient Excuse to authorize it; but how lawfull soever it were, I was resolved never to leave off Com∣plaining, untill you had vouchsafed some kind An∣swer, and the Assurance of the Continuance of your Affection to Her who is Madam, The most humble and the most faithfull of all that honour you, E. D. The Answer to it. Madam, I Find so large a Subject of eminent worth, that instead of giving you thanks, I perceive you have given me Cause to Complain, for having by the excess of your favours inforced me to an un∣willing Ingratitude, I am so far from requiting these obligations of your Affection, that I am not able to express them, so that she must study new performances, and a Rhetorick of more than words to disoblige her self who is Madam, Yours most eternally devoted, S. R. A Grandmother to her Grandchild. Dear Grandchild, THose tender affections I have for you, do as my constitution, grow weaker and more
feeble, wax stronger and stronger in my desires and Endeavours after your Wellfare. While I had you in my sight and Company, my care was the less in that I concerned you with my own self, and as an individual and unseparable Companion in the affairs of life; in a vertuous use whereof and for your Example and practise, I hope I may and can with comfort declare I have demeaned my self towards the World. It is now your Ho∣nour, and should be your greatest diligence in this your absence, to improve the good you have lear∣ned here, letting the world thereby to see, that as you have had liberall Education and are descen∣ded of a vertuous Family, so your personall worth can return as much Credit thereunto as you have received from it, when it shall be perceived by your good and generous deportment among strangers, that your naturall inclinations and en∣dowments have subserved as incitements to more compleat and admired perfections in the industri∣ous fruit of your converse and observation of man∣ners. Thus with my heartiest and most Earn∣est prayers, &c. I rest. Your most loving and affectionate, &c. The Answer to it. Most Honoured Grandmother, I Have infinite obligations to render you for your continuall Love and kindness towards me, which I must not presume to sum up in the common Epistolary Preface, my most humble Duty presented. Your care, respect and favour hath been every way so singular and Extraordi∣nary, that I cannot without shame think of being beholden to such common forms to express my
acknowledgements which labour with a more Rhetoricall Gratitude. Your letter I have placed in my bosome, as the nearest place of conference with my thoughts which I hope rejoycing your presence will range themselves in that order which they were wont to keep while under your Government, and I often please them with a diversion that I am giving you their Account. And I can with delight affirm, that there is not a reflection on my whole life which represents its self with half the felicity and advantage as the re∣membrance of your grave and matronall Instructi∣ons and Advice. The only envy that lessens the Con∣tent of it to me is, that I am capable only of percei∣ving how impossible it is for me to reach your great Example, but I owe so much to your medi∣ate production of me, that I can take pleasure in a fruitless toil of aspiring to it, which gives me the Confidence to assure you, that my endeavour shall testifie my Zeal to, if it cannot merit the at∣tainment of those qualities, which may intitle me to your Vertues, and to the Honour of that Interest I have in you and my Family, and ever to sub∣scribe my self Your most dutifull, &c. To a Cozen advising about Fashions. Dear Cozen, I Thank you for your Papers and trouble of that spruce Inventory you sent me, and I de∣sired more out of curiosity than intention of con∣formity, for indeed the Vanity was enough to satiate an ordinary appetite, and besides mine is a vicious one in respect to such kickshawes, I fault in most of these modes, not their levity but their brevity also, especially such as are far fetcht for a
fortnights wearing and leaves not a good Huswife a relique worth the keeping. Methinks they are too near an Emblem of that vice men upbraid our sex with, and suit that dress wherein the Philoso∣phers have accounted her appearance by a most gaudy and antick diversity; whereas they have represented Vertue in a modest and plain attire, I have learnt in a greater matter, that the Fashion of the world passeth away, and therefore I cannot think it but a piece of great imprudence to spend so much industry upon a more frail and perishing object: Yet am I not against such naturall or na∣tive decencies, which may difference persons, and bring not an unprofitable Expence upon their fi∣nery, no more than I discommend a sumptuous feast, when I censure a ridiculous one, for I know not what secret power of blandishment there is in an handsome ornament even to court Beauty it self, and therefore it must be more advantagious to those whose small imperfections it conceals: but of all incongruities, Deformity and the Fashion I take to be the uglest, you know how indifferently I am concerned in either of these three cases, and therefore will easily pardon this Humour to Your most humble Servant. To a Dear Friend Gratulating her Mar∣riage. I Have received the joyful news of your wedding, the more pleasing to me for that it is accom∣panied with a commendation and Praise of your Choice, such as your perfections might promise and my wishes design for you. But the joy I give you is the least part mine own, when I consider I have lost a friend and how unsociable and uncor∣respondent Virginity and wedlock use to be, and
with what an awfull and imperious gravity the dignity of a Wife usurps upon the condition of an alone Maiden. I am apt to hope better of your Vertue and our fair acquaintance, and that you will vouchsafe me as much continuance of it as your greater and happier obligation to your Hus∣band (to whom I beseech you commend my most humble service) will at any time permit you. At present be pleased to admit of my vir∣gin prayers for your conjugal felicity. I am Your most humble devoted Servant. The End of the Letters, and of this Second Part of Youths Behaviour.
An Alphabeticall Table of the most remarkeable things that are contain∣ed in this Book. A AS say. page 7. Accommodation. page 16. Affability. page 17. Attires. page 19. Age. page 19, 24. Affectation. page 20, 40, 43. Allurements. page 21. Amorists. page 37. Admiration. page 43. Advice. page 52. Arts. page 61. Adultery. page 73. Ability. page 81. Angelica. page 94. Arteries. page 96. Abstinence. page 109, 113. Ancestry. page 145. Apocrypha. page 161. Appetite. page 112. B Behaviour. page 31. Books. page 13, 14, 158. Business. page 15. Beauty. page 20, 43, 44, 45. Birds. page 81. Brests. page 83. Black Pepper. page 87. Brown Sugar. page 92. Bazill. page 94. Bettony. page 100. Butter, the best making of it. page 103. Breath. page 92. Bloud. page 118. Business. page 131. Bastards. page 153. Ballads. page 155. Black Spots. page 24. C Cloathes. page 130. Conversation. page 3. Commerce. page 13. Conference. page 12. Candor. page 16. Curiosity. page 19, 43. Complexion. page 27. Chambermaids. page 33. Confidence. page 36. Chastity. page 37, 58. Courage. page 51. Capacity. page 53. Conscience. page 60. Christianity. page 72. Consumption. page 83. Crookedness. page 84. Crudities. page 87, 118. Cloves. page 88. Cinamon. page 90. Candying. page 98. Chylus. page 118. Chyrurgery. page 122. D Dancing. page 4, 27. Discourse. page 13.
Discipline. page 12. Dressings. page 20. Duty. page 21, 74. Danger. page 35. Destruction. page 34, 82. Devotion. page 37, 65. Deformity. page 40. Divorce. page 73. Dayries. page 103. Diet. page 107. Diamonds. page 129. Discretion. page 56. Disobedience to Parents. page 173. The greatness of this sin is declared, by the greatness of its punish∣ment, for we read, Prov. 30.17. the Ravens of the Valley shall pick out the eyes of the diso∣bedient Children, and the young Eagles shall eat them. E Education. page 2, 3, 12. Exercise. page 4. Ears. page 6. Eyes. ibid. Excuses. page 11. Examples. page 12, 29. Equality. page 69. Endive. page 101. Excess. page 110. Employments. page 131. Experience. page 171. F Family. page 24, 76. Frailty. page 24. Functions. page 26. Fancy. page 29. Fortunes. page 34. Friendship. ibid. Flower. page 45. Fear. page 54. Frenzy. page 81. Fashions. page 82, 124. Feavers. page 96. Fennell. page 100. Failings. page 11. Familiarity. page 34. G Governesses. page 8, 14. God. page 16, 70, 127. Gesture. page 23. Gifts. page 43. Generosity. ibid. Glory. page 53. Globes. page 80. Garments. page 86, 127. Ginger. page 88. Guides. page 159. Good things. page 172. H Habit. page 18. Honour. page 22, 56, 69, 144. Harmony. page 28. Homage. page 44. Handmaids. page 51. History. page 61. Happiness. ibid. Husbands. page 70, 51. Humours. page 73.
Honey. page 91. Health. page 121. Humility. page 151. I Instances. page 8, 9. Instructions. ibid. page 12. Insolence. ibid. Imitation. page 13. Incouragements. page 14. Indeavour. ibid. Infancy. page 21. Innocence. page 23, 59. Infection. page 36. Judgement. page 44. Interpretation. page 60. Ignorance. page 78, 162. Idleness. page 134. Industry. ibid. K Knowledge. page 53, 55. Kine. page 103, 105. Kingdome. page 107. Kinds. page 137. Keys. page 139. L Learning. page 62. Limiting. page 28. Life. page 32. Lightness. page 33. Love. page 34, 36. Liberty. page 38. Labarinth. page 52. Laws. page 61. Languages. page 62. Lungs. page 85. Liver. page 120. Linnen. page 95. Licentiousness. page 167. Lying. page 15. Long Trains. page 24. M Maids. page 15, 16. Modesty. page 14, 42, 151. Manners. page 15. Moderation. page 26. Musick. page 28. Mildness. page 33. Malice. page 57. Melancholy. ibid. Marriage. page 63, 65 Mhomet. page 73. Mothers. page 85. Mace. page 89. Milk. page 105. Murder. page 151. Muses. page 63. Memory. page 172. There have been some persons of a pro∣digious Memory, as Ju∣lius Caesar, who could call every Souldier in his Army by his own Name: And Seneca, who at the first speaking of them, could repeat two hun∣dred difficult words, which he never before had heard of. A reve∣rend Divine maketh mention of one Mrs. Ma∣ry Whitnoll, in the Coun∣ty of Kent, who most ex∣actly had by heart all the
Epistle to the Romans, and many of the Chap∣ters in the four Evange∣list; but these are rather Miracles, than Exam∣ples. Those who have but weak Memories, may find means to help themselves: Sr F. B. in his Book of Naturall Hi∣story, hath left it re∣corded, that the Brains of Deer, of Conies, and of Hens, being washed in Wine, do much strengthen the Memory. N Nature. page 3, 15. Needleworks. page 7. Necessity. page 77. Noise. page 81. Novelty. page 83. Nurses. page 85, 97. Nutmegs. page 89. Nutrition. page 96. Nerves. page 114. O Obedience. page 12. Observation. page 15. Ornaments. page 17, 49. Ordering. ibid. page 77. Oration. page 19. Ostentation. page 56. Order. page 111. Obstructions. page 119. Oratory. page 123. Obligations. page 144, 170. Occasion. page 150. Obstinacy. page 16. P Parents. page 10, 11. Pastimes. ibid. Precepts. page 13, 29, 77. Pupill. page 12. Pamphlets. page 163. Pride. page 20. Piety. page 21, 174. Pleasure. page 27, 135. Presumption. page 36. Prudence. page 53. Poligamy. page 72. Pepper. page 87. Preserves. page 98. Panadaes. page 116. Plague. page 120. Pearls. page 129, 160. Paradise. page 138. Q Queen. page 29, 61. Qualities. page 31. Question. page 62. Qualifications. page 148. Quantity. page 160. R Recreation. page 4, 26. Remedies. ibid. Reading. page 5, 157. Romances. page 6. Reputation. page 29. Repentance. page 55. Rosemary. page 94. Remembrance. page 172. Rigour. page 8. Restraint. ibid. Reverence. page 10. Reason. page 12.
Reformation. page 29. S Severity. page 10. Sex. page 19. Stage-playes. page 28. Silence. page 31, 75, 140, 32. Society. ibid. Security. page 36. Sensuallity. page 81. Stars. page 80. Spicery. page 87. Saffron. page 90. Sugar. page 92. Sobriety. page 108. Superfluities. page 113. Secrecy. page 142. Sleep. page 175. It is observable that the Physicians do some of them allow five, others seven hours for Sleep; but young Wo∣men who are of a fleg∣matick Constitution, and have Bodies more sub∣ject unto Crudities, may sleep longer. The best posture when we com∣pose our selves to sleep, is first to lye down on the right side, and after∣wards to turn on the left; but to lye on the back is naught, and young Gentlewomen are to take care to avoid it, for it is alwayes dan∣gerous, often hurtfull, and sometimes sinfull. T Tailor. page 25, 40. Trifles. page 33. Temptation. page 35. Temple. page 42. Treasure. page 54. Truth. page 55. Tongues. page 57. Turks. page 72. Time. page 94. Temperance. page 109. Testimony. page 59. V Vanity. page 20, 47. Visits. page 21. Virginity. page 35. Vocation. page 38. Virtue. page 53, 57, 16. Vagabond. page 71. Ʋrine. page 90. Ʋnderstanding. page 108. Vitall Spirits. page 110. Vapours. page 112. Ʋniverse. page 124. Villanies. page 146. Vice. page 170. Virgins. page 33. W World. page 32, 78. Women. page 49, 50, 63, 75, 146. Wisdome. ibid. Wax. page 50. Wise. page 60. Wife. page 71. Wine. ibid. Womb. page 78.
Worms. page 81. Waters distilled. page 99. Winter. page 106. Watchings. page 111. Y Youth. page 12, 34. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some choice Books Printed for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Turks Head in Fleetstreet. A Systeme, or Body of Divinity, in ten Books, wherein the Fundamentall Grounds of Religion are opened, Here∣sies and Errors confuted, the Orthodox Truth maintained: a work seasonable for these times, wherein so many Articles of our Faith are questioned, and many gross Errors of late published, to the scandall of all good Christians; the Second Impression, with about a hundred Sheets inserted throughout the body of the Book, besides the Additions at the latter end with the Authors Epistle, never to adde any more hereafter. 1662. Price 18s. Annotations upon all the New Testament, both in Fol. The Saints Encouragement in evil Times, 12o. All three by Edward Leigh Esq and Master of Arts in Magdalen Hall in Oxford. Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of England, and the late Lord Marquess of Worcester, concerning Religion, 4o. 1652 Heresiography, or a description of all the Heresies and Se∣ctaries of these latter Times, with many Brass Pictures of the Sectaries, the sixth Edition, by E. Pagit, much enlarged, 8to. large. 1663. History. Plutarchs Lives in English, with a new Addition of twenty Lives, written by a famous French Author, never before pub∣lished in English, with the severall dates of the years of the World, and the years before and after Christ when they lived, in large Fol. 1657. Gods Revenge against Murther, in thirty Tragicall Histo∣ries, by John Reynolds, the fourth Edition, whereunto is added the lively Portraitures of the severall Persons, and Resemblan∣ces of other Passages mentioned therein, engraven in Copper Plates. 1663. Silva Silvarum, or a Naturall History, in ten Centuries, whereunto is added the History of Life and Death, or the Pro∣longation of Life; and now is added his Treatise of Minerals,
by the Right Honourable Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, in Fol. 1664. Resuscitatio, or bringing into publick light, severall pieces of the Works hitherto sleeping, of the Right Honourable Francis Lord Bacon, Baron of Verulam, together with his Lordships Life, not before published. The second Edition with some Additions, by William Raw∣ley Dr in Divinity, his Lordships first and last Chaplain, and now Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, in Fol. 1662. A Chronicle of the late intestine War in the three King∣domes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the year of our Lord 1637, to the year 1663, in 8o. large, in four parts, the first beginning at page the first, the second part at 411, the third part at 625, the fourth part at 758 together with the Pictures or Sculptures, of most of the chief engaged Persons in the said Wars. 1663. Royall and Loyall Bloud, being a Catalogue of all the Per∣sons of great Note, that were arraigned and executed in the Cause of King Charls the First, with their severall dying Speeches, mentioned in the Chronicle above; whereunto is added all the great Commanders, that were slain on the Kings Party, in that unhappy late War. The Interpretation of Dreams, by Artimedorus, the sixth Edition newly corrected by the French and Latin Copies, and enlarged with some new Additions of memorable things of great note. 1663. Latham's Faulconry, with many new Additions. 1661. Hugo Grotius, of the right of War and Peace, in three Books, translated into English by Clement Barksdale. Youths Behaviour, or decency in Conversation amongst Men, composed in French by grave Persons, and translated in∣to English by Francis Hawkins, now much enlarged with three Tales, and many other new Additions. 1663. The Abridgement of Reynolds of Murther, the true Copy, to prevent the sale of a false. Law Books. The Reports of Sr Edward Coke in English, with his Decla∣rations at the end.
The Year-Book of Edward the fourth, also long Quinto of Edward the fourth, both Folio. The Register of Writs in Folio. Bracton de legibus & consuetudinibus Angliae. Lord Bacons Elements of the Laws of England, 4to. Trotmaens Abridgement of Lord Cokes Reports, to which is added an exact Alphabetical Table. Wilkinsons Office of a Sheriff. The whole Office of a Justice of Peace, by William Shep∣heard Esq and much corrected and amended by a Clark of the Assize.
