H480 1851.c.11[40] R225766 99886266 188453
THE DECLARATION Of JAMES Duke of HAMMILTOUN and CHASTELLERHAULT, Marquesse of CLIDDISDALE, &c. Lord Generall and Com∣mander in Chief of all the Scots Forces by Sea and Land. VVHereas I have been very lately informed, that some Of∣ficers and Souldiers of the Scots Army under my com∣mand, have injured and molested the persons, goods and houses of some Inhabitants in these Counties: Therefore to testifie and make apparent how I abhorre and detest such actions (which I shall very unwillingly permit to be used to our Enemies, much lesse to those that have received us with so much kindnesse and affe∣ction, as hath eminently appeared from the Gentry and Commons of these Counties  ) I do hereby publish and declare as followeth. I. That whatsoever Officer and Souldier under my command shall imprison or wound the person of any Englishman, for payment of any money, shall for such mprisonment or wounding, dye without mercy. II. That whtsoever Officer or Souldier under my command, shall plunder ny house, or steal, drive, kill, or carry away the Horses, Cattle, Sheep, or other goods of any of th Its of the ingdom  England, shall for the said of∣fences be punished with death without mercy. III. Lastly, That whatsoever Officer or Souldier under my command, shall where any meadowes or grasse can possibly be gotten, eat up or destroy any growing Corn, either in their march or quarters, shall for so doing, forfeit his or their horses, and be imprisoned one whole week. This my Declaration I strictly require and command all Colonels and other Officers both of Horse and Foot of the Scots Army, that they cause to be distinctly read at the head of every Regiment, Troop and Company, that the punishment of the said offences may not after the publication, be frustrated by pretended igno∣rance. And I further desire, that this Declaration may be read in all Churches and market Towns, that the whole people of England may see how truly sensible we are of their sufferings; and that we are firmly resolved with the blessing of Al∣mighty GOD, and the welcome assistance of all pious, loyall, and well-affected Subjects, to use all wholesome and just means to advance this most Christian and glorious VVork. Given under my hand at Kirkbisthure, the 22. day of July 1648. God save the King. Edinburgh Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excel∣lent Majestie, 1648:
