I94 [ocm]12273078 197362
THE IMPEACHMENT AND CHARGE OF Mr. Henry Hastings Sonne to the Earle of Hunting∣ton, concerning his manifold Misdemeanours, the dangerous in∣surrections, and Tumults, occasioned by the said Mr. Ha∣stings in the County of Leicester, to the disturbance and danger of the whole Kingdome. Which Charge was drawn up by a select Commit∣tee and by them presented to the Assembly of Lords; and an Or∣der from the Lords, for the summoning of M. Hastings to his Answer. Also the substance of a Speech spoken by the Earl of Pembrook before the Committee, concerning an Accommodation between the King and His Parliament, and the Parlia∣ments Command to all Judges &c. Ordered that this be printed and published. Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com. July 22. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Warden.
THE IMPEACHMENT AND Charge of Mr. Henry Hastings, Sonne to the Earl of Huntington. THe proceedings of Mr. Henry Ha∣stings in Liecestershire hath bin ve∣ry great, putting the inhabitants in a great fear and perplexity, he having bin at the Earl of Stamfords House at Bradgate where the Magazine for that County re∣mained, with some hundreds of men in Arms, & at his comming thither, he made a Demand for the Magazine, and desired that it might be delivered into his Custo∣dy and keeping, and that the Charge ther∣of
according to the Authority given him by his Majesty might be delivered into his hands. But the Earl did withstand his De∣mands, and denyed that power which hee there made use of, and still did reserve the Militia in his own Custody. Upon which denyall, M. Hastings being very much moved, in his wrath and Col∣ler gave forth very insolent and proud threats against the Earle, and all his Assi∣stants, and not only did strive to staine their spotlesse Reputation with malici∣ous and most opprobrious tearms, but al∣so proclaimed the Earl and all his follo∣wers Traytors. The Report and Consideration of these Out-rages by the said Hastings so com∣mitted, took up each House some time in debate, and occasioned two Conference for the stopping and hindring of tumul∣tuous meetings, both in that County and else-where. The Houses being much moved at these troubls, took into their consideration
the strength of the malignant Party with His Majesty, and the opposition caused by them, to the great interruption of Par∣liamentall Proceedings. Amongst others concerning the late a∣ctions of Mr. Hastings in and about Leice∣ster: And after some debate thereupon, they appointed a Committee to draw up a Charge, against him and his Adherents. Upon the meeting of the House of Com∣mons, the Committee appointed, having prepared the Charge against Mr. Hastings, according to the direction and appoint∣ment given them by the House, it was pub∣liquely read, and the Lords House being compleated and setled, the said Charge was sent up unto them for their approbation also, with a Desire of the said Commit∣tee that the said Mr. Hastings might bee forthwith proceeded aginst, which was as∣sented to, and an Order issued forth for his summoning in to answer the same. On the 13. of JULY the Committees of both houses being met about the accom∣modation
between His Majesty and His Parliament, the Earl of Pembroke made an excellent Speech; the substance whereof did discover and lay open the meanes for that most happy and desired Union, and the happinesse that would arise from that Conglatination. Wherupon the Committee taking into their serious consideration, the best means for an Accommodation between the King and the Parliament, upon a Message sent to the Lords, there was a Conference. Where it was concluded, that a Select Committee of both Houses should meete the next morning, to consider of those Re∣moraes, which hindered that happy conne∣xion, and to remove them if it were by any means possible. And upon their meeting the next mor∣ning, it was concluded, that the Earle of Holland should present their Desires to His Majesty, who is now gone for the same Businesse, whose Endeavours the Lord of his mercy blesse, for the benefit and peace of this Kingdom.
An Order of the Lords and Commons, Assembled in Parliament. WHeras severall Commissions of Array have lately issued out under the Great Seal of England, into the severall Counties of Leicester, Worcester, and other Counties of this Realm, tending to the great danger of his Majesty, and the disturbance of the peace of this Kingdome: For the preventing thereof, and of the Execution, and issuing out of any such Commissions for the time to come, It is or∣dered by the Lords and Commons, That the Jud∣ges and Justices of Assize, of the severall Counties of England and Wales, bee required in their severall Circuits, at the Assizes and great Sessions to be next held for each County, within this Realm, and the Dominion of Wales, in open Court, and in their severall Charges to be delivered to the Grand-Juries at the said Assizes, openly to declare and publish, that the said Lords and Commons have upon mature deliberation, Resolved upon the question, That the said Commissions of Array are against Law, and against the Liberty and propery of
the Subject: And that all those that are A∣ctors in putting the same in execution, shall be esteemed Disturbers of the peace of this King∣dome, and Betrayers of the Liberty of the Sub∣ject. Ordered that this be printed and published, John Brown Cler. Par. woodcut of a man's portrait
