L2878 816.m.9[7] R224575 99885519 185214
At a Court of the Right Honourable THE PRESIDENT and GOVERNORS FOR THE POOR of the City of London, Holden at Guild-Hall, on Thursday the 25th day of May, 1699. FOrasmuch as frequent Complaints have been made to this Court, of the daily Encrease of Beggers, within this City and Liberties, to the great Dishonour thereof, and to the no small Prejudice, and Annoyance of the several Inhabitants therein, and to the manifest Discouragement of that Useful and Necessary Art of Spinning, and other Imployments designed for setting the Poor at Work, and at this time, by this Court, earnestly endeavoured, to be advanced in the said City: For that few, or none will be willing to Work, as is evident from daily Experience, while they have any hopes left, of getting more Money by Begging. For Prevention therefore of these growing Evils and Mischiefs, and that the Streets may not be Annoyed and Pestered as heretofore, by Rogues, Vagrants, and sturdy Beggers; All Constables of this City and Liberties, are hereby strictly Charged and Required, to Ap∣prehend all Rogues, Vagrants, and sturdy Beggers, that shall be Begging or Wandering within the same, and to send them after Whipping of them, to the Parish where they were Born, if known, or if not, to the Parish where they last Dwelt, for the space of one whole Year; or if that be unknown, then to the Place, where they passed last through, with∣out Punishment. And for the better Information of all Constables, of their Duty herein, they are hereby required to take Notice, That by the 39 Eliz. Cap. 4. every Constable that doth not his best Endeavour, to Apprehend Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggers, and to cause them to be Punished, Forfeits Ten Shillings for every Default. And that every Person, hindering any part of the Execution of that Law, Forfeits Five Pounds, and is to be Bound to the good Behaviour. And that by the First of King James 1. Chap. 7. all Constables refusing to Punish and Convey Vagabonds, Forfeit Twenty Shillings, And that for the future, all the said Forfeitures shall be constantly Levyed. And that nothing may be wanting, to put a stop to the Growth and Increase of Beggers within this City, The City-Marshals, and all their Men, as well Beadles of the several Ho∣spitals, as others, are hereby also strictly Charged and Required, to Apprehend all Persons Begging in the Streets, and to carry them before some of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for this City and Liberties, to be farther dealt with, according to Law, And that of such their Proceedings, they bring unto this Court, a true Account in Writing, every Thursday Morn∣ing, at Eight of the Clock. And the Beadle of each and every Ward within the City aforesaid, is hereby also Required and Enjoined, Weekly and every Week, to call upon all and every the Constables within that Ward, to which he the said Beadle doth belong, for a true, full, and perfect Account, of the Proceedings also of every of the said Constables, relating to the Matters aforesaid, and each and every of them, is hereby required to Deliver the same accordingly. And the said Account and Accounts so received, the said Beadle is further required and en∣joined to bring unto the said Court, at the Day and Hour aforesaid: And also to be Aiding and Assisting to every of the said Constables, in the Apprehending and Punishing all Beggers, according to Law. And likewise to give an Account of all such Constables, as have not their Staves or Laths painted and put up at their Doors, according to the antient Usage and Custom of this City. Augusti Ballowe, Sec.
