M127B [ocm]31355799 205918
That the Northern Counties which abound in Antiquities nd Ancient Gentry, may no longer be bury'd in Silence Information is desir'd concerning the following Queries as they lye in order, viz. either. By 1. Report and Tradition. 2. Evidence or Record. 3. Experience or Know∣ledge of the present Age. noting them with 1. T. 2. R. 3. E. before the Answer. ANd it being design'd for the Honor of your Parish among others, your outmost Endeavours are desir'd in or∣der to a true Information. Which may easily be procur'd by calling some of your Ancient men (who have gon Procession or know the Boundaries of your Parish,) And the Lord or Balive, with some of the Tenents (of good Repute, Knowledge and Honesty) in particular Lordships: from whose mouths you may please to write your Answer on a sheet of paper, folded (as this) with margins on both sides. And to give the more Authority to the work, the Names of those from whom you receiv'd your informations may be return'd at the Conclusion of the Accounts of their Respective Parishes, Lordships, Villages &c. And it is to be vvished that the Minister, and Church-wardens or some of the Parish would subscribe their names to the General Account of the Parish: And the Lord (or his Balive, Steward &c.) with some of the Tenents the Accounts, concerning their Respective Lord-ships. Chap. 1. Queries concerning the Parish in General. 1. The name of the Parish, & why so call'd? how written in ancient Records? In what Diocese, Barony, Hundred or Ward it is said to lye? How is it bounded & divided from other Parishes on the E. W. N. & South &c? by what Rivers, Hedges, Walls, Cause-ways, or common and well known Land-markes, Meets and Boundaries &c. or are they (or any of them) Litigious or Doubtfull? 2. What form and figure does it most resemble. as Square, Oblong, Oval, Triangular, &c. with the Length and Breadth in the largest parts of it, nameing the places where you begin and end your computation, as also where they lye, E. W. N. or South, and the circumference (by moderate Computation) if you can guess at it; 3. What the Quality of the Soyl in general; as clay, mold, sand, gravel? and of what sort. Red, yellow, blew, black, white, &c. And if it be stony, of what kind, as Lime-stone, &c. Also whether is it for the most part Arable pasture, meadow or wood-land? is it very fertile, barren or indifferent? Also what sort of mines, quarries. fuell. &c. doth your parish afford? At what distance do you fetch your fircing? what plenty of it? what general Customs, as Rush-bearing, Hollyes, Bonfires &c? what games, sports &c. and when celebrated? 4. The name of the Church. Why so call'd, to what Saint dedicated? near what Saints day do you keep your Feast or Wake? what manner of building is it, great or smal; Elegant or mean? how many Rows of Pillars? hath it a Spire, Square-steeple, or neither? how many Bells? when and by whom founded, endowd, rebuilt, or extraordinarily repair'd? what Chanteries or Oratories in it, with their Foundation, Dedication, Endowment and Dissolution? Item, what monuments & monumental Inscriptions with coats of Arms &c. of Nobility and Gentry? what witty strange and uncouth Epitaphs either in the Church (1. Body. 2. Chancell) or without it, whether on the walls, or in the Church-yard? Be pleas'd to draw them out or describe them according to their Figure & Colors, as well as you can. What number and names of Chappels belonging to the Church or Parish? 5. Whether your Parish be a Vicaridge, Parsonage, or both? An Impropriation, or not? if it be, who is Impropriator? and what Allowance to the Vicar or Curate? whether hath it Tythes in kind or not? what value is it of by common Estimation? vvhat succession of Patronage? and how transferr'd from one family to another? with the name and Habitation of the present Patron. 6. The Parsonage, or Vicaridge-house in or near to what Town or Village? at what end or side of the same E. W. N. or South? or how far distant otherwise from it? by what name & whence so call'd? how writ in antient Records? of what sort the building fair, mean or indifferent; wood, clay, brick or stone? slated or not? and in what repair? how situated? High or Low; on the top, side, or at the bottom of an hill? By what Springs, or Ponds, Rivers, (Navigabe, or otherwise) with what Commodities as mills, fish, fowl, and the sorts they afford? also near or upon what great Road? & how far distant from any of them, E.W.N or South? how far from the nearest Chappel, Church, Parish-church, Market? what Gardens, Orchards, Dove-coats, Warrens, Parks, Forests, Woods, (Standing or lately cut down) with other Perquisits belonging unto it or are there any such near at hand (tho belonging unto
others) which render the place more Commodious or pleasant? what kind, and plenty of fuel? and from whence brought? Item when and by whom was it built, mended, rebuilt, or extraordinarily repair'd and upon what occasions? (And if it be a Mannor House? what Rent doth it pay, and what Courts are there kept?) Wat Remarkabl about it either within or without? * Within, as cient In captions, Coats of Armes in Glass, Wood or Stone. * Without, as Fortifications, Bulwarks and Trenches round or square; places where battles have been fought, or, other Accidents have happen'd, Heaps of Stone or Earth trench'd, about in manner of a Ring or otherwise; Mounts of War, ancient Ruines; Beacons; Coyns digg'd up; with other Rarities of what kind soever; as springs cold, hot, Me∣dicinal, Bituminous, Petrifying &c. 7. How much Glebe belonging unto it; with the Quantity of an Acre by the account of your Parish? the Quality of the Soyl, viz. of what sort for the most part, Arable, &c. asking and answering the same Questions as in Query the 3d. What Woods, Forrests &c? asking and answering the same Questions as in Qu: 4th of the 3d. Chapt. And what Priviledge extraordinary your Ministers hath? What notabe Remarque of Antiquity upon the Glebe, as Fortifications, &c. see above in Query 6th at the word without, and be pleased to answer those Questi∣ons. &c. 8. Hovv many Lordships or Mannors in the Parish which you are desir'd onely to enumerate and write down their Names; alwaies observing to put the first where the Parish-Church stands, if it happen to be one. 9. Informers Names; and their Information confirm'd by the Subscription of the Minister and Church-Wardens, if it may be had. Chap. II Concerning every particular Lordship enquire of the Lord, Steward, Balive, or experienced Tenents 1. The name of the Mannor or Lordship; hovv vvritten in ancient Records? hovv at present? and vvhence de∣riv'd? In vvhat Barony, Ward, or Hundred? Hovv bounded vvith other Lordships? 2. What Form and Figure &c. asking and answering the same Questions as above Query 2d. 3. What the Quality of the soyl &c. asking and answering as above in Queries 3d. to vvhich adde the measure of an Acre vvith the yearly value of the best, vvorst, and middle sort of Arable. Pasture. Meadovv. excluding the Commons, Moors and Fells. 4. What general and Remarkable Customes of the Lordships? and hovv many free-holds? 5. Hovv, and of vvhom doth the Lord hold the Mannor? and by vvhat service of the King in Capite, or some Castle or Barony? And if so, of vvhat Castle, or Barony? by Escuage, Knights-Service, or Cornage? and vvhat Rents or Acknovvledgments doth he pay? vvhen, and to vvhom? 7. What priviledges hath he, as vvaifes Strayes, boons, &c. and vvhat sort of Finable Rents, fines certaine or uncertaine? Green-hevv, &c (or are they bought off or belonging to others) vvhat Courts doth or may he keep? as Boron, Leet, &c. and vvhere? Concerning the Lords privileges vvhen you have got his Information, be pleas'd to enquire also of some of the Tenents for Confirmation, lest he pretend to more than is his right. 6. The mannor house, vvhat Rent pays it, and vvhat Court may be holden at it? In or near to vvhat tovvn or village is it and so on, asking the same Questions vvhich occur in Qu. 6th. Concerning Parsonage or Vicaridge-houses In cap. 1. vide. 7. Hovv many Demaines belong to it vvith the Quality of the Land &c. Ansvvering the Questions in Query the 3d of cap. 1. Its peculiar priviledges; and vvhat is remarkable therein; as Fortifications? &c. answering the sam Questions as in Query 6th Chap. 1. at the word without. 8. Who the ancient, modern, and present Proprietors, and vvhen and hovv they came unto it? And for the pre∣sent Proprietors especially.) What coats of Arms do they bear? What number of Evidences have they belonging to the family? vvith the date of the ancientest. What Quality are they of; as Earls, Lords, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen? And vvhen the first of any of Those vvere knovvn in their Family? What matches out of it (either by sons or daughters) into other families, vvith the time vvhen, and place vvhere they liv'd? Item, vvhat Pedi∣gree do they shew, vvith a Copy of it; at least an account of the first and last Generation in it, according to Date; or vvhere it may be seen? and if they have none, an account may suffice for three or fower Generations (dovvn to themselves, their Wives and Children;) of their Marches and Issue, vvith the Age, birth and buriall of every one of them, as near as may be. N. but if they have enter'd their Pedigrees in Mr Dugdales Visitation 1664. (which Book I can have the use of at any time) they need not give any further account concerning their families than what hath been since. 9. Hovv many Tovvns, Villages, Constable-vvicks, Hamlets, &c. are contain'd in the Lordship? (which onely enumerate, putting that first where the Mannor house stands. And then in particular Chap. 3. Concerning Every City, Town, Village, Hamlet, &c. 1. The name of the Place, modern, and ancient out of Records; also vvhence deriv'd? the distance from the
nearest Chappell, Church, Parish-Church, Market? hovv situate for traffique? hovv for pleasure? viz. high  lovv, &c. answering the same Questions, as in Query 6th. of Chap. 1. 2. When and by vvhom built, and repaired? vvith the notable accidents and Calamities vvhich have happen'd thereto by fire, vvater, svvord, famine, Pestilence? & vvhen? And if It be a City; or Market Town; vvhat streets have been formerly, or are novv in it? vvith their names and Etymologes, as much as may be. Whether a Borough, Corporation, or neither? When the first Charter granted? vvith an Extract of vvhat great Privi∣ledges it formerly hath, or at present does enjoy; as vvaifes, Strayes, felons goods, Markets, Faires? Hovv many Burgesses they send to Parliament? (their names in succession if it may be had; or at least the Names of the present Burgesses) hovv is it govern'd, as by Mayor, Balives, &c. and vvhat other officers and Attendants, vvith the Ensign of Magistracie carry'd before Him? What is the Tovvn-Seal, and Arms? vvith the succession of your Mayors and Bailives, as far as Record and Knovvledge can supply. But whether soever it be, viz. Market Town or Village &c. you are desir'd further to enquire as followeth; &c. 2. What places remarkable in or about it, as Churches, Chappels, Monasteries, Hospitals, Colledges, Scholes, Mout-hals, Correction-Houses, Prisons, Crosses, Bridges, (vvhether standing or demolish'd) vvith the places or streets vvh re? of Every of vvhich in particular and according to order, Foundation, Dedication, Endowment, Dissolution; vvith Armes &c. asking and answering the sme Questions, as Concerning Churches Ch. 1. Qu: 4. Of eve∣ry particular Church, Chappel &c. And remember to annex the stipend or Allovvance to Chaplains or Readers from the Parish &c. as also the names and succession of such, (so far as is possible) as have bin Msters and Gover∣nors of any of the other places vvhich are of Note, and require Government — Item vvhat Castles, Tovvres, Halls, and oher houses of Genlemen of Quality? Whether standing or Ruinous? of vvhch in particular as∣king &c. The same Questions, as in Query 6th of Ch. 1. concerning the Parsonage-house scil. What its name &c. But if the Manor or Parsonage-house chance to be one of those houses of Note, it may suffice only to Name it, as having spoken of it more at large in its proper place. It. vvhat men of great Eminence for Arts, Arms, o blood? a Doctors, Bishops, Authors of Books, famous Lawyers, Judges, Serjeants at Lavv, Noble Warriors, Generals; &c. Kings, Earles, Princes, Lords, &c. Have any such bin born, bred or Buried in your Tovvn? vvith the place vvhere It. What famous Acts done by Archers? vvhat by vvitches, Spirits and Conjurers, vvhich are ovvn'd to be true, and are very remarkable? othervvise none of them. —It. vvhat Fortifications, &c. Answering the same Questions, as in Qu: 6. Ch: 1. of the word Without, or as in the next following Query at the place marked Thus * 4. What Fells, Moors, and Commons (vvith stint, or vvithout) belonging to the Village or Tovvn &c, and hovv far distant? What profits and Commodities (beside pasture) do they afford? as Fern or Brackens, heath or Ling, furrs or whins, turf or Peat? * What Woods, Forrests, Chaces, Parkes, Warrens, Groves, novv in being or lately destroy'd? But if any be spoken of with the mannor house, only mention them here. —It. vvhat Springs Cold, or hott, Medicinal, Petrifying, or Bituminous? What Ponds, Tarns, Lakes, Rivers? vvith the sorts of Fish and Fovvl they afford. And vvho reaps the benefit? — It. What Quarries, Mines, Pitts. &c. of Marble, Black, vvhite, or Gray? Jeat, Precious Stone; Limestone, hevving-stone; Milstone; slate, (vvhite red, or blevv;) Coal Gravel; Lead; Tin; Iron, Brasse, Copper, Silver, Gold, &c. — It. What Fair there∣upon? vvhen kept? Who has the profits? — It. What Horse-Races? vvhere? for vvhat prize? by vvhom first appointed, and hovv long ago? It. What memorable places vvhere Battles have been fought? Round heaps of Stone, or Earth cast up in Hills, trench'd round about, or othervvise? What Fortifications, Camps? &c. An∣svvering the same Questions, as in Chap. 1 Qu: 6. at the vvord Without — It. What accidents and strange Occurrences have happen'd thereabout? With other Notable Remarks of vvhat kind soever. And what you can say of any of them by your own knowledge, Report, or otherwise. Referring each thing to its proper head as near as you can. 5. Hovv many Freeholders belonging to it, (or if a Borough, how many Burgers, or what fee-farm Rent doth it pay, and to whom?) What other sorts of Tenants in it? at vvhose Courts do they suit and service? By vvhat Tenure do they hold? as soccage, Border-service, &c. or hovv? in vvhat manner are they admitted unto their Estates? and hovv do they passe or Convey them avvay? as by surrender and admittance in Court, Copy of Court-Roll, vvill, or Deed? What Rents do they pay to the Lord of the mannor, or unto others? And vvhat sort of Fines (Certain or uncertain) vvith other sort of Duties; as Oxgeld, green-hevv, Reliefs, Heriots, &c? What services do they, not mention'd before amongst the Lordships Priviledges Chap. 2d. Qu: 5th. — Do they pay any things to any other Lord than the Lord of the mannor? or have any of them purchas'd their Fines and Services? if so, vvhen, and of vvhom? and vvhat their tenure is novv call'd? — Have they any extraordinary Priviledge or Custom in the place, (not mention'd before amongst those of the mannor in general) vvhereby any benefit doth accrue to themselves, their Widdovvs or Children? When You have got the Information of Tenants concerning Priviledges: be pleas'd to inquire of the Lord, or his Steward for Confirmation, lest they pretend to what is not their right. 6. Informers Names. 7th. Confirmation of Lord and Tenents by Subscription. 8th. What Notable Proverbs, or peculiar expressions are us'd in the Parish, Lordship or Village? 9th. The Names and Course of Every Ri∣ver or Beck in the Parish, vvith all its heads vvhence it springs? What vvay it runns E. W. North. or South? and the Parishes or Lordships it runns by or through? also the Tovvns, Halls, or Gentlemens Houses it visits by the Way, and hovv far it leaves them (or any of them) on the E. W. N. or South? The number of Mills and Bridges upon it? The sorts of Fish in it? Lastly vvhere it takes the Sea, or loses it self in some other River
or Lake? 11. The high or great-Roads vvhich go through your Parish; Whence they come? To vvhat place they go, and vvhere they end? With the Parishes, Lordships &c. they passe by or through? Also Gentlemens houses or Notable Antiquities vvhich occure in, or near unto them. Of all these (or as many as you n) Information is desir'd. And you may please to return your Answer, together with the Paper of Queries, as soon as possibly you can to Thomas Machell of Cra∣canthorpe in Westm∣land. A.M. and Fel∣low of Queens Coll. in Oxon. 1. Jan. 1676-7.
