N1204 [ocm]31355581 187761
A NOBLE DEWEL, OR, An unmatchable Combate betwixt Sir VVilliam and the Earl of Southast. Being a true relation how this b E. of Southast Murthered Sir William Gray, Son to the Right Ho the Lord Gray, which news is sad to the Nacion of Scotland, and how the waites for triall for the same. Tune of, Sir George VVharton. 2 woodcuts: portraits of swordsmen MY heart doth bléed to tell the wo or chance of grief that late befel At Biglesworth in Bedfordshire as I to you for truth will tell, There was two valliant Noble men, that very rashly fell at words, And nothing could appease their wraths till they betook them to their Swords. The one was called Sir William Gray, the good Lord Gray his Son and Heir, The other Sir Iames as they him call, or Earl of Southeist as I hear, It séems their quarel they began, within the house of Parliament, And til this Earl had kild Sir Gray, he could not rest nor be contend, About Religion they out fell, the Earl he was a Presbyteir, Sir William did his ways deny, he being a Loyall Cavelier, For our late King as I am told, in Scotland often kept his court, At the house of Sir William Gray, he and his Nobles did their resort. And for his true obedience then, as I do wrightly understand He made was the chiefest Governor, in the Northern part of fair Scotland It séems the Earl of Southeist calld, did kill Sir William for this thing, Because be Governor was made, and much advanced by the King. This Earl was governor before, out of Commission late was thrown, Even by this present Government, so that he could not call't his own, And good Sir Gray put in his place, but truth it brought him into thrall, For though that cruel bloody Earl, his rist was causer of his fall. You sée the bloody minds of those, which lately had the Sword in hand, And if they had it so again, they quickly would confound the Land For to find opportunity this wicked Earl he did invent, How he might Murther Noble Gray, for truth it was his full intent.
The second part, to the same Tune. woodcut: 4 swordsmen VVIthin the house of Parliament, the Earl fell out with Noble Gray But yet before they did depart, they loving friends the  went away, It was not known the Earl did ow, the least ill will at that same time To noble Gray or unto his, or any of his Royall line. They rod together thirty Miles, to Beglisworth from London Town, And in the way was no distast, until they lit there at the Crown. They supped together too that night, as peacefully as men could do, But yet a sudden accidence, betim ith morning did nsue, The Earl he rose ith morn etime, vith mischief harbored in his brest, H come unto the Chamber where, sir William Gray, he lay at rest, And call'd Sir Gay to go with him, unto the Fields to take the Ayr, And he God wot not thinking ill, did with him to the Fields repair, Like to a Lamb that went to dy, not inking death to be so near, Eve so befel the same ye sée, to Noble Gray as doth appear. He left his man abed that morn, because he came in late at night, Desiring them to let him lye, till he returned back with the Knight, His bedfellow and Kindsman too, went as a second in the place, If that the Earl should offer him, any abuse or eke disgrace. He did no sooner come in field, but both the seconds and the Earl, Did plot contrive against Sir Gray, his courage purposel to qeal, The Earl began the quarrel then, and Noble Gray did so outdare, And said he was a better man, then all the Grays in Scotland were, And said to him come fight with me, thou cowardise which art no man, Which forced Valiant Gray to take, his glitering Sword within his hand, And so the battle fierce began, and Noble Gray he plaid his part, But yet at length unhappily, the Earl he thrust him to the heart, This being done they dragd him too a stinking ditch which there was by, And robbed him of his Iewels rich, and then they presently did fly, Vnto the Crown whereas there coach, stood ready for their safe convay, But by a man it was found out, which did them presently betray. When they was took they did them search whereas they found them full of Gold, A golden watch and ring which cost, five hundred pounds his man thus told, They had them to the Iustice straight, and he did send them to the Goal, Whereas they wait for tryall now, I think theres no man will them bail, And thus I will conclude my song, I wish all Traytors to be ware, And not to murder as they do, lest they fall in the hang-mans snare. London, Printed for John Andrews at the White-Lyon neer Py-corner.
