N1478 816.m.20.[1] R224277 99885505 193255
THE SECOND HUMBLE CRY OF THIS KINGDOME To their desired Nursing Father the King with Parliament for their preventing helpe against the Power Of Sword and Famine with the meanes thereof Propounded in this City and all places yet unplun∣dered, and if the Noyse of the multitude of Businesse doe kepe them from hearing us, we entreat Our Elder Brethren in London and Westminster dayly to present this our supplycation to their Eyes and Eares. IN the first place then I beseech you consider whether the next Summer in regard of the trouble like to be, is not like to bring forth a smaller Crop of Corne, so that in some parts our brethren may come to us or we to them for bread if so, then that we may not want how to releve each other; first then if you did let no more mault be made seing Barley with Rye is good Bread-corne, secondly rhat there be not Bere or Ale, sold for above six shillings a barrell, and none from or in any Ale-house any dererer rte then two quarts a peny which will much preserve your plenty of Corne. Then also to prohibit feasting that so people may be the bettter able to further the publick good and releve the poore. And also that all in generall would spare three meales in a week which it would conduce to much plenty also to health of the body as Phesitians say and farther you might I conceive Easily se∣cuer the store of most Counties Townes and vilages, for use of the owners and all the friends of the King and Parliament in such a way as might be for much strengthning and three fold defence; wherein pardon my silence, least the other party should take the first advantage of the same, but I shall forwardly for good ingene∣rall declare the same, to our Nurcing father King and Parliament, or their deputies, and entreat our brethren in London and VVestminster to tender the same to them. And further that whereas such though good Corces in generall, yet may hinder some men in particular, I humbly crave pardon of those who may be hindred thereby and that they would consider that the generall good is first to be desired, and further that honourable house would inforce the brewers or any other Land∣ords, that sell Bere and Ale, may have Rent but according to the Rent of other houses proportionable ac∣cording to the worth of them. And further consider that our feares are encreased by reason the cause is not taken away, the causs of a Lands mourning are swoard and famine. The cause of that cause is vaine swearing, Ieremiah the 23.10. Consider how at this time there is hard∣ly a man or or woman, in the Land but is guilty of swering ever since that good statute came forth as well he that here and conseale, as he that sweares Leviticus the 5.1. Some are apt to say because Papist are so suffered, others because there are so many Religions, others because there is so much envy and back-biting. Others because so many thinke better of themselves, then others all which indeed are to be lamented, but who say or thinke, or beleve it is for vaine, swearing yet god saith so, the reason is that we thinke because tdat fine doth not reflect against our persons and estates, but imediately against God, we regard it not to endeavour the punnishment thereof, now see how God is about to measure to us, such measure as we meet to him. Math. 7.2. The sins of our enemies reflect against our persons and estates, and why should God regard to punnish them for that. Then let us justifie the Lord who saith thy destruction is of thy selfe, and he saith also, doe you provoke me to anger, and not your selves to wrath. The Lord saith he that honor me I will honor, then I beseech you, en∣courage all in their places to honour him by keeping downe that sinne, which cuse our Land to morne then if it please you to order that that sinne may be strictly punished, and whereas the Consealers are guilty as well as the swearers, Leviticus 5.1. if you please to lay halfe the penallty of them, as of the swerers, to shew that you hate the sinne, and not the sinner, if you would plese to order that upon testimony of 2. honest witnesses of which there be knowne no malice before nor yet falling out to cause pation now. An officer in every parish, might take the pennalty and remembring mercy, you might please for 14. dayes after your order that the swearer should pay but 2. pence the consealor 1. peny 14. dayes next one 4. pence the other 2. pence, and after that, one 12. pence, the other 6. pence. And if the Officer should neglect his duty herein, then he should pay double so much as the offender, and as the sinne Cause the Iudgment so the pennalties should be imployed also in the preventing them, paying therewith such as help to resist the enemies, thus you honouring god in taking away the cause, he will honour you in ceacing the effect. I can also enforme how with little expence of money, little spilling of Blood, to the great joy of the Kingdom, & honour to your proceedings, how to secure the store in all Counties, for the use of the own∣ers against the feare of plundring, and so as they shall not neede much feare the aproach of their Enemies but shall drive them back with small cost almost as Davids sling, and as certaine. Thomas Nutt. FINIS.
