M2392 318212022 208383
THE GARDEN OF PLEASURE, Containing several Draughts of Gardens Both in Embroyder'd-Ground-Works, Knot-works of Grass, as likewise in Wildernesses, and others. With their CUTS in COPPER. By ANDREW MOLLET, Master of His Majesty of Englands Gardens in His Park of St. James's. DEDICATED to the KING. DVM PREMOR ATTOLLOR printer's seal: two hands working pumps, a fountain in the center In the SAVOY. Printed by T. N. for John Martyn, at the Bell without Temple-Barr, and Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the New-Exchange, 1670.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. SIR, THose whose Genius's could penetrate so deep as to com∣prehend those sublime and profound Knowledges which Your Majesty doth possess, in all that concerns Arts and Sciences, undoubtedly should not dare to bring any thing before You, but what they believe to be in the height of Perfection. Therefore I do find my self in a strange confusion, which makes me waver between the respect which I owe Your Majesty, and the Duty which I find my self obliged to render You in my WORK. For, when I consider, Sir, That Your Majesty looks on Things with eyes which are enlightned with the purest Lights of the Op∣tiques, and most regular Perspective; I cannot but condemn the defects of this present WORK to shew my respect. But, notwithstanding I cannot forbear to go on in that resolution which I have taken, to shelter them un∣der Your Majesties Protection, since therein I shew my Duty. I know, Sir, that You pick and cull out with an unparallel'd exactness, and with an extraordinary solidity of Judgment every order of Architecture, and par∣ticularly what concerns the Ornaments and Decorations of Gardens. But
I understand also on the other side, that Your Majesty acts in all things with such a Royal and Generous bounty, That following the Example of Your Royal Predecessor, You refuse not any of those Offerings which are Presented to Your Majesty, with that zeal and sincerity which is requisite. Hence it is, Sir, that I am emboldned to Present and Dedicate to Your Majesty, that which the Study, the Experience and the Labour, which I have undergone under Your Auspices and elsewhere, have furnished me with most Remarkable, both as to what hath been observ'd from Anti∣quity, and what hath been acquired of Modern; which are found both in this Work mixt together, as my Respect and my Duty are, and shall ever be in all things which can make Appear, That I will Live and Die, SIR, Your Majesties Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful Servant ANDREW MOLLET.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. GOD hath never made himself better known to Men then by his Works in the Creation, which doth equally prove his Power and his Bounty: But, although that this So∣veraign Majesty hath as it were Limn'd and Character∣ised its self in all Beings; yet it appears, that the good pleasure of his Will, which is (to speak properly, nothing else but that which we call Nature) hath in nothing more been pleas'd to set forth so many vari∣eties of Beauties, and so many different Species of things, then in that which the whole kind of Vegetables furnishes us with, as namely Trees, Shrubs, and other Plants; with their leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds, which yield us so much delight in the variety of their Enamel, Colours, pleasant Odors, that there is not one of our senses which finds not it self charmed by them; and, though Nature furnishes us with all these things, yet it is with a rustical confu∣sion, which nevertheless doth not want its beauties; But, when Art helps this good Mother, and disposes all these Vegetable Productions according to the Or∣ders which she borrows from the divers situations and Soiles which the said Nature provides; It then appears in a regularity, which offends neither the understanding nor the eye-sight, but affords wonderful satisfaction and plea∣sure,
and contributes to the delights of the greatest Monarchs, and Migh∣ty'st Princes, which do find no Divertisement more agreeable, more whole∣some, and of more efficacy, to refresh both the Body and Mind after the toilsomness of Political Studys, and the weighty affairs of State, then Walk∣ing under shady covertures, and in Garden-Allies, where the pleasant Green, and unimitable Tapistry, composed of fruits and leaves of the (Espaliers, (Wall-fruits) the Counter Espaliers) and of the Palissadoes, and curious, and pleasant variety of Enamel'd Flowers, doth furnish a wonderful ra∣vishing object, both to the inward and the outward senses, and which insensibly brings them back to their Palaces with an Appetite, which renders them more capable then before to savour and taste the delicious Cates of their Table. Hence it was, that Lewis the Thirteenth, and the Duke of Orleans his bro∣ther (Princes of most happy Memory) have joyn'd so many fair Ground-Works to their Royal Houses, where, not contenting themselves with the rare works and contrivances of their Overseers and Directors of their Gardens, and their Workmen, they disdained not to change the Scepter, sometimes for the Pruning Knife; using great Art and Dexterity in Cultivating divers curious sorts of Plants, and also in Grafting and Inoculating Fruit-Trees, thereby to ennoble their kind, better their substance, and correct their taste. But, we need look no farther for Examples of a Royal Magnificency, than to what our invincible Monarch, Charles the Second, hath, with excellent choice, ac∣companied with great solidity of Judgment begun, and with incessant care and concernment still prosecutes in his Royal Houses of St. James's, Hampton-Court, and Greenwich, where this mighty Prince hath made more notable Changes, and added more Royal Decorations since the 10 years of His happy estoration, then any of His Ancestors ever thought on in the space of a whole Age. It is assuredly (Friendly Reader) this high and rare example of skil∣ful curiosity, and of honourable and necessary expence, which ought to oblige all
the chief Gentry and Nobility of this Kingdom, to follow, as much as in them lies, the Tracks which His Majesty hath markt them out, since the Climate, and the goodness of their Soyle, affords them at home that agreeable variety of Fruits, Herbs, Pulse, Grain, and other necessaries belonging to Gardinage, without being obliged to buy or beg them from their neighbours from beyond-Sea. Hereupon it is that I have composed this Book, whose designs are all of my own invention, and drawn with my own hand, and that also at large, to the end, that they might be made the more intelligible to the curious. I shall believe to have attained the end I proposed to my self, if I can in any wise be useful to the Pub∣lick, and particularly to the Reader, whom I intreat to receive with a good will the sincerity of my intentions, and to excuse my defects.
To the Author. THat Nomenclator Adam, whose great skill Gave to all Beasts their Names, (not to his will, But suiting with their Nature, Virtue, Form) To dreadful Thunder, Lightning, Tempest, Storm, To all the Minerals in Natures Store, To the base Mettals and the costly Ore! Gave also to each Plants its proper name, That speaks its quality and Virtues fame. And that great King who was surnam'd the wise, That in all learning carry'd the whole prise From all the World; that understood all Plants, And could without Injustice make his Vants, That he did know, from the Hysop on the Wall, To Libanon's proud Cedar strong and Tall Each Vegetable; What did these two know More then was meerly natural and low? But our Learn'd Author adds to Nature, Art, And in that point does act the better part. For, What is Nature without Art in proof But a wild skittish Colt, with unshod hoofe? A hard mouth'd Philly, that at every check, Her Rider puts in danger of his neck? Till by the Bit, the Spur, and Switch of Art, This wanton's brought to play a wiser part. Therefore end thy Carier without delay, Brave Andrew Mollet, thou hast won the day. Belon.
THE GARDEN OF PLEASURE. THe Garden of Pleasure consists in Ground-works, Wildernesses, choice Trees, Palissado's, and Alleys or Walks; as also in Fountains, Grotto's, Statues, Per∣spectives, and other such like Ornaments; without which it cannot be perfect: Nevertheless it will be easily granted, that all these things confusedly and ill-dispos'd, cause no pleasant effect; therefore we shall strive to dispose them each in its proper place, according to that which Experience hath taught us herein: To which purpose the follow∣ing Designes will very much conduce. In the first place, we say, That the Royal and Lordly House ought to be situated in an advantagious place, thereby to be supply'd with all the requisite things for its Embellishment, of which the Water has the first place, be it of Spring or otherwise; for it is with a great deal of reason that Water is said to be the Soul of Gardens, since that without it they seem alwayes to be dying. The second thing requisite to the decoration of Houses of Pleasure, is to have the conveniency to plant before them a great Walk of double or tre∣ble rank, either of female Elms, or of Lime Trees, which are the two sorts of Trees which we esteem the fittest for this purpose; which Walk ought to be drawn by a Perpendicular Line to the Front of the House, and of a convenient and proportionable breadth to the House; and for the Basis of the said Walk, may be made a large Demy-circle, or Square; and in case the place will allow it, there may be also drawn large Walks on the Right and Left of the said Front, which must be Parallel to the said House. As also at the end of the Garden another Walk in a direct Line to the great Walk, in the midst whereof there may be with conveniency a Door of Railes or Palisado's, through which, when the doors of the House are
open'd, one may see from one end to the other, as far as our sight will extend. Such outward Works are most necessary to the Adorning of Houses; and as I put them here in the Front, and before the In-works; it is also by them, that one ought to begin to Plant even before the Build∣ing of the House, that the Trees may be come to half-growth when the House shall be built. Let us come to the inward embellishments, which we commonly call Garden; which ought to be composed of Imbroider'd Ground-works, knots of Grass, Wildernesses, fine Alleys in Terrasses, and flat Walks, so ordered, that they may still end at some Fountain or Statue, and at some of the extremities of these Alleys, ought to be set up some fine Perspect∣ives painted on Cloth, that they may be removed at will, to preserve them from the injuries of the Weather. In fine, to finish our Work, the Sta∣tues ought to be erected upon their Piedestals, and the Grotto's built in the most convenient places; as also the Fountains, Spurts, Ponds, Falls of Waters, Bird-cages, and such like Ornaments, which being well order'd and placed, will give the last Perfection to the Garden of Pleasure. We come now to give some Instructions touching the following De∣signs, that they may be put in practice as it is befitting, and with those pro∣portions thereto required. But first of all is to be noted, that all Ground-works ought to be framed as near as possible may be to the House, that they may be perfectly seen from the Windows, without the obstacle which might be caused by Trees, Palissado's, or any other high Work. It is to be observed also, that the Ground-works the most remote from the eye, ought to be drawn of a larger Proportion, then those that are nearer; for it is certain, that if they be very exactly proportion'd to the distance of the sight, they will thereby appear much more beautiful: And, before I go any farther, it will not be amiss to say a word or two concerning the Knots in Embroidery. They may be made in two manners, viz. with Box, or with Turff. Those of Box are more fit for the neat and small Embroidery, because that the Box can be planted and clipped into what shape one will, and that there is less pains required in the preserving and keeping of it then that of Turff, which is to be often Mow'd and Roll'd. The Turffs are more fit for the Great works, and for Knots, then for Embroidery: yet for curio∣sity sake, there may be some of them made in the Garden of Pleasure, that it may want nothing of what Nature and Art can bestow on it of beauty; which is the reason we have set some down here for the satisfaction of the Curious. Let us give now some Instructions concerning the said Draughts, ac∣cording to their proportions. To perform them, we shall give them a common Measure, viz. of six foot called a Toise; that the Artist's Mea∣sure may be distinguish'd from the Merchants. This Toise is distinguish'd into six equal Parts, which are called Feet, and these Feet are subdivi∣ded
into twelve equal parts, called inches, and each inch into twelve Lines. This Measure being well understood, it will be very easie to practice all our Designs on Earth, with their Proportions; and, to render the thing more feazable to the less skilful in the Decoration of Gardens, we shall make a particular Article of each Design. The First Design. THe first Design is a General Draught, to be done on the back-side of some great Palace, or House of Pleasure, which is of about 310 Toi∣ses in length, and 220 in breadth, which is somewhat near the true Propor∣tion requisite to all Gardens, that is about a third part longer then wide; that so all the Partitions which are to be made in the said General Draught, may have a Parallelogramick Form, as may be seen in our hindmost Draught, except the Knots, which we have made square by reason of their crossing Alleys, which we have drawn Diagonally, to vary the ordinary custom. The said Knots are of 60 Toises square, in the Main-work, that is to say without the outward Walkes; all the Alleys from 4 to 5 Toises in breadth: the which Knots we have set down in large, that they might be the easier comprehended and performed in the Working: They fol∣low the two General Draughts, Fol. 3, and 4. The first is, the Knot in Embroidery: The second is, the Compartiment of Turff, in which the four half ovals are on the out-side, which we have done for variety, and as that which may serve to be put alone in some other place. The half∣ovals may be also plac't inwardly, to answer to the symmetrie or proporti∣ons of the Knot in Embroidery; and that by taking away the four Foun∣tains out of the four Triangles, and placing there Statues upon their Piede∣stals, according as they are marked in the said Draught. After these Knots follow the Wildernesses, Plants of Trees, Ponds, and Grass-plots; in the midst of which may be erected Arbors, and Summer Banquetting-Houses, for several divertisements: As concerning the Trees to be planted; Lime-Trees should be used and not Elmes, by reason that the Lime-trees spread not their roots so wide in the Earth, as Elms do; which I hold fit to be banished absolutely from Gardens, for the in∣conveniency that their great Roots bring to Gardens, to the damage of whatsoever is therein planted of curious, except it be in the outward Al∣leys, of which we have made heretofore mention. But now let us come back to the deduction of all the parts of our first ge∣neral Draught, to which, if it be possible, water should be brought through channels of 10 Toises breadth, whose Alleys on each side should be two or three foot lower then the others, and the Water almost even with the brim of the said Alleys, with steps at every meeting of the Capital or chief Al∣leys;
which there jutt out, and which ought to be planted with a double rank, with a Palissado of Beech in the last rank, not higher then tvvo or three foot; though for variety it may be suffer'd to grow higher in some convenient places, provided, that still the proportions be observed. In fine, the half Circle ought to be framed at the end, with its sprout of Water; all according to the measure of our said General Draught. The Second Design. THis second Design is a general Draught, but lesser then the former, con∣taining about 200 Toises in length, and 150 in breadth; the House be∣ing environ'd with Water, as also the whole Plat-form of the said place, if it be possible, with a half-moon and large Alley in the front; and on the back part may be made the Knot in Embrodery, Fol. 5. to whose sides may al∣so be added the Wildernesses described in our first General Draught. Moreover, on the two wings of the House may be made the Knot in Em∣brodery, and Compartiments of Turf, Fol. 16. and 24. otherwise in lieu of these said Knots there may be put in one of those Wings (which will be judg'd the fittest for that purpose) Orange-trees, Myrtles, Jasse∣mins, and other choice Trees: but on the other, the rarest of Extoic Plants, and ever green, dwarf-Trees, planted in order of Compartiment answera∣ble to the designs of the Wildernesses, to observe the just proportion which is required in all such like Works, adding thereunto Fountains and Statues in their proper places. Then, at the end of the Grand Parterre, or Knott, there are to be 3 Alleys issuing forth from the same Center, and these should be planted with rows of Beech, which serve for high Palissado's; and within the space of six Foot are marked the places where to plant Cy∣prus-Trees, which must be kept alwayes cropt neatly in a Pyramidal form, and not suffer'd to grow above six or seven foot at the most in height. In stead of Beach, the said Palissado's may be planted of Alaternus's, Holly, or Cherry-Laurels, which would produce yet a far more pleasing effect; and in the Partitions which those Alleys make, may be planted dwarf-fruit-Trees, or a Kitchin-Garden, whose deformity may be hid by high Palissado's; for we do not allow that the Garden of Pleasure should admit of common Herbs; nor yet of Fruit-Trees, except they be planted as Wall-fruit, but rather that those Gardens or Orchards be by themselves. In fine, the circumference of our Draught is a large Alley double with its basket-handle, or half-oval, at the end whereof there is another great Alley or Walk Transvers, to answer to that before the House, all environ'd with Water, which is to be communicated from one part to the other, as it may be seen in the Draught. It remains now to treat of the Parterres, Compartiments of Grass, Wildernesses and Labyrinths each of them in particular. And first of all
let us come to the Ground-works in Embroidery, for the constructions of which we find nothing more convenient, as we have already said, then the Box, of which there are three sorts, viz. great Box or Wood-Box, which groweth high enough if it be let alone, but that may be as well kept very low; for being cropt and clipt every year twice according to Art, it will not grow above three or four inches in ten years space; and this is it which is required in our Embroidery Ground-works. The second sort of Box is called dwarf-Box, which never grows higher then one foot and a half, but it is much tenderer then the other, not capable to endure too neer a crop. It is convenient to set the Knots, whose clipping is differing from the Em∣broidery, viz. only square. The last kind of Box is between both the for∣mer, both in respect of its leaf and growth, but doth not afford so pleasing a Green; therefore we shall lay it aside. I know that in this Country most part have an aversion to all kind of Box, by reason of its strong scent, and chiefly the biggest; but that happens onely when it is suffer'd to grow high; for being kept short and low, it scarce smells at all, especially the dwarf-Box. Therefore those curious persons may make use of either, but severally, and not together. These Premises considered, we shall continue to treat of our Designs each in particular; having first advertised the Reader, that the third and fourth Designs are specified in the first general Draught, and the fifth in the second general Draught. The Sixth Design. THe sixth is a Ground-work in Embrodery, containing 42 Toises square. The Lists of the outward Walks of the squares of six foot in breadth, are for low flowers: and, at each external Angle of the said Squares is described a quarter of a Circle, in whose Center, a Statue or Figure is to be set up, or in stead thereof there may be planted a Cyprus-Tree, which may be left to grow at discretion. The Fountain contains se∣ven Toises in Diameter. This sort of Ground-works we made at Stock∣holme, before the Palace of the late Queen Mother of Sweden. The Seventh Design. THe seventh is also a Ground-work in Embroidery of about 47 Toises square in the in-work: Its fountain hath eight Toises in Diameter; the cross-Alleys and the outward VValks are to be four Toises, and the Lists six foot; in the midst of which are marked down from space to space the places where to lay square stones, fit to bear Flower-plots, or small boxes of choice green Trees, some clipt and cropt like Globes, and the others in a Piramidal form. We have not set down in this present Design
the outward-walks, (to prevent confusion) no more then in many others, which however are to be alwayes set out, and proportion'd in all Ground∣works and other Designs; as may be noted in our general Draughts. The Eighth Design. THe eighth is a Ground-work in Embroidery of 40 Toises square in the in-work; whose eight-square Fountain is to be 7 Toises in Dia∣meter; the Lists 6 foot, with the quarters of Circles in the middle Angles, in whose Centers Statues may be set up, or Cyprus Trees planted, and in the midst of the Lists of the out-walks of the squares, may be plant∣ed small choice green Trees, kept as the former, yet with this distinction, that they must be carefully covered in Winter during ill weather, by rea∣son that they cannot be removed into the green-houses as the former: be∣tween those Trees may be set all sorts of low Flowers. The Ninth Design. IS a Ground-work in Embroidery of 36 Toises square in the in-work, with a half-moon at the end, partly in Embroidery, partly in Knots of Grass; the Lists are to be of 6 Foot in breadth, with a space of Grass in the middle. The work of this Design is to be in large, to be seen from far off, in case the House should be remote from the Garden, but if it should be nearer the House, it would not be amiss to add more work to it. The Tenth Design. IS another Ground-work in Embroidery of 28 Toises square in the in-32work; the Fountain of 4½ in Diameter; its Lists between 4 or 5 foot in breadth, and a slip of grass in the great stroke of the Embroidery, as al∣so the Statues and Cyprus-Trees situated in their due places, as is described in the Design. The Eleventh Design. IS a Ground-work in Embroidery, containing 30 Toises square taking in the outward walks; the Lists are of 4 foot in breadth, adorned as in the seventh Design, and at the end is described a half-oval of grass, planted round with Cyprus-Trees in a convenient distance one from the other, and neatly clipped into a Pyramidal Form. It is to be noted, that to keep Cyprus-Trees very well, they should not be tyed, (as many use to do,)
by reason that being without Air within-side, they wither, and become full of dead wood: Moreover, the binding of them causes them to grow too high, and without support; in so much, that there would be a necessity to support them by a Pole fixt through the middle of the branches, which cau∣ses more and more their inward dryness and rottenness; therefore they ought alwayes to be left at their natural liberty, onely cut and clipt both round about and at the top from time to time; and that if it be necessary, twice a year, viz. towards the Month of May and September. Thus they will strengthen themselves towards the root, and be made fit to resist all the injuries of bad weather. The Twelfth Design. IS a Ground-work in Embroidery, of an Oblong Square, containing a∣bout 40 Toises in breadth in the in-work, and 43 in length from one Angle to the other: at the end of which is to be made a large proportion of a Circle, in whose center is also described a Fountain of 10 Toises in Diameter, and in the middle of the Ground-work an Eight-Square of grass somewhat raised, in the Center whereof is to be erected a Statue, or curious Sun-dyal, with a fillet of Grass in the middle of the Lists, as is described in our said Design. The Thirteenth Design. IS a Ground-work also in Embroidery, of an Oblong Square, but diffe∣rent from the former, by reason that it must be seen on the long side; it contains 50 Toises in Front, and 40 Toises of depth; its Fountain has 7½ Toises of Diameter; the Lists 6 Foot, planted with all sorts of low-Flowers, and the great or Master-stroke of the Embroidery with a slip of grass in the middle. The Fourteenth Design. IS another Ground-work in Embrodery, of an Oblong-square, different from the former, by reason that it may seen on both sides; it contains 45 Toises in length, and 33 in breadth in the in-work: in the middle of which may be made an Eight-square of grass, on which is to be set a Statue or Sun∣dyal; the lists and the Master-strokes of the Embrodery are 6 Foot in breadth.
The Fifteenth Design. IS a Ground-work in Embroidery, of an Oblong-square, to be seen only upon its Basis; it differs from the others by reason it has no cross Alleys, and is of 30 Toises in breadth, and 40 in length, with an half-oval at the end; the lists are of 6 Foot in breadth, as also the chief stroke of Embroi∣dery. The Sixteenth Design. IS finally another Ground-work in Embroidery, of an Oblong Square, (without cross-Alleys) containing 40 Toises in length, and 33 in breadth, with the outward Alleys; in the middle of which may be plac't a Foun∣tain, and in the 4 outward Angles, Statues upon their Piedestals, or else Cy∣prus-Trees Planted; the List is of six foot in breadth, adorned with a slip of Grass in the middle: this Design may be contrived for its view which way one pleases, yet it will be more delightful to be seen breadth-wayes. The Seventeenth Design. IS a certain kind of Frize, which may be continued as long as one will; it is of 12 Toises in breadth, partly Embroidery, and partly Knots of Grass and Flowers. The Eighteenth and Nineteenth Designs. ARe two small Ground-works in Embroidery, with their Lists turffed, the biggest is of 6 Toises in breadth, and about 9½ of length; it is best to be seen length-wayes, the smallest contains about 10 Toises in front, and 4½ in depth, and is best to be view'd in the same manner. This is in short and in general concerning our Designs and Ground∣works in Embroidery of Box; It remains to give some Direction to the less skilful in them, how to perform them well on the ground, which is done by the means of several lines strait drawn, both upon our said Designs, and on Earth, and proportionally inter-cutting each other thereby to frame Squares of six Foot every way in Designs of a moderate bigness, but of 9 Foot in the bigest, to prevent confusion; and then observing the places where each Leaf cuts or crosses the said Lines, of which an exact measure must be taken with a Compass, which being placed upon the Scale, will shew us the precise measure, which is to be transferr'd upon the Ground by the means of our common Measure of six foot, and so proportion'd to the Design. Thus one may easily attain to the contrivance of all sorts of
Designs, as it is described upon our two Designs in Embroidery of Grass, Fol. 26 and 27, where the lines are traced upon one of the Squares. After the Ground-works in Embroidery, follow the Compartiments of Turff-work, and of Flowers, which, being kept as they ought to be, will make a glorious shew; they are more proper for this Country then any other Country of the World, by reason that the Gardeners are more ex∣pert and skilful in laying and keeping of Turff then any other Country Gardiners. Nevertheless, since it may be this Books fate to cross the Sea, we shall give some short directions to the Out landish Gardiners, how to chuse the fittest Turff for this use, as also how to keep and order it after the English manner. In the first place, that Turff must be chosen on which Sheep commonly feed, which ought to be free from all other Herbs, except Camomile; then you must have a slicer with along and crooked handle, to cut the said Turff in direct Lines, still remembring to slope your hand whilst you cut, that if the Turff chance to be raised, it may be neatly rejoyned and put to∣gether again, so that it may seem as if it was made long since. This cut∣ting of the Turff must be made square one foot in breadth, and three in length, of the thickness of an inch at the most, that it being raised with the slice of Iron somewhat bended, and with a handle of a convenient length, it may be roll'd like a sheet of Paper, to be transported where 'tis necessary, and plac't with Art according to the Traces of our Ground-works. The best season for this work is after Michaelmas; for, if you stay till the Spring, there happen then sometimes Droughts, which do endamage extreamly the said Turff, so that one is sometimes forced to water it, and yet notwith∣standing it hinders not the good grass from dying, and nothing remains on our Turffs but base Herbs and Weeds. But, let us come to the means to maintain and keep the said Turff, which is done by often Mowing and Rowling of it; first with a Rouler of Wood, to take off the Worm-cast; then afterwards with the stone Rouler, to render it the firmer and more tite: This rouling must be done every day, or at the least every other day; and it must be Mowed at the least twice a week, that the grass may grow the thicker, and the Knots lie alwayes close cut and smooth: the sithe must be made accordingly, and so stockt, that it may be laid flat upon the grass, so as to cut it the more even. There remains yet a word to say concerning the Garden-Alleys, which are the chiefest Ornaments of a Garden, and wherein England excelleth other Countreys, as well as by its art in Turffing; wherefore we shall give some small instructions therein, which may be of use in Forreign Countreys: which is, that, to have fair Walks, in which one may walk in all weathers with ease, there must be chosen a firm gravelly Sand, without the least mix∣ture of any earth, except Clay, in case the gravel be too stony; and after it has been sifted somewhat grosly, let the biggest be laid in the bottom of the Walks, and that which is sifted on the top, very even, but only three or four
inches higher in the middle then on the sides, just enough to drain the wa∣ters and no more; for I do not approve so great slopings which some use to give to Alleys, which are troublesome to those that walk, by their over∣roundness. The Walks being thus gravelled, they must be neatly kept by Weeding and Rouling of them daily with a stone Rouler: Note by the by, that the said small gravel or course sand must be laid as thick as may be, that the Worms may not pierce through; to that purpose it will not be amiss to lay all sorts of rubbish in the bottom of the said Alleys. This is in brief what was to be said concerning the Turff-works, and the Alleys belonging to the Garden of Pleasure; there may be added ano∣ther bed or couch upon the surface of the said Alleys, viz. small shells, which are commonly found on the Sea-shore; which shells must be bea∣ten very small, and strewd lightly over the said surface, the more to prevent the Worms from piercing through, and add a greater Ornament to the Walks. We shall now come to the distinguishing of Ground-works and Knots of Grass, each in their place and order; the first is to contain 60 Toises square in in-work; the cross-Alleys, from one Angle to the other, between four and five Toises, with the Fountain in the middle of 8 Toises in Dia∣meter, and the four other Fountains at the four Angles; All, as is descri∣bed in our Design, set down at the beginning of the Ground-works in Em∣broidery, Fol. 4. as being intended to be drawn upon our great General Draught; but before we go on with the particulars of these said grass-Knots, it will not be amiss to give a word of advice concerning our intention in the structure of the said Knots, which is, that the Master-stroke which forms the Design be planted of Box, and clipped square; the space from one bor∣der to the other is the path-way, which is to be of nine foot in breadth in the great Designs, but of six foot in the lesser; in the middle of which path ought to be made a List of grass, which will make a lovely shew from on high: Then, in the middle of the cut pieces should be made a List to set Flowers in, which must be raised some three or four inches higher then the level of the ground, exactly fallow, according to the order of the Knots; then, in some places lay the cut pieces of Turff, in others plant Camomile and matted Pinks; above all, still observing the exact Symmetry and true proportion; In stead of setting Flowers in the List, it may be sanded or gravel'd with another colour'd Sand then that of the Paths, but of an even Level: As also those that will not make use of Box, may make use of Boards or Planks Pitch'd within side, and Painted without, that they may last the longer; which Planks being aptly disposed according to our De∣signs, will give no small satisfaction to the curious. These things above∣mention'd being well understood, it will be, I believe, easie enough to contrive all manner of Designs for the greater Perfection of the Garden of Pleasure. Now we shall go on with the Particulars of our Grass Knots, the
second of which in Fol. 19. contains 40 Toises square in in-work; its Fountain is to be 7½ in Diameter, and the 24 Statues to be set up upon their Piedestals, or else half-Statues and half Cyprus-Trees, all in proportion with the grass List in the middle of the Paths, as they are described in the Design. The third Fol. 20. is an Oblong square Knot, of 50 Toises in length, and 38 in breadth in in-work, the eight-square Fountain 6 in Diameter, and the Alleys 4½ in breadth, with Statues and Grass-Lists in the middle of the Paths, as may be seen upon the Design. The Fourth, Fol. 21. is another Oblong square-Knot of 38 Toises in length, and 30 in breadth, in in-work; its Fountain of 6 in Dia∣meter, and the Alleys 4 in breadth, the Statues and Grass-Lists placed in their due places as aforesaid. The fifth, Fol. 22. is also a grass-Knot, but without cross-Alleys, containing about 28 Toises square, with the outward Walks, which are of three Toises, or 20 Foot in breadth, the Fountain of 4 in in-work, the whole accompanied with Statues, and adorned with a Grass-List in the middle of the Paths, with a half-oval at the end, and a Terrasse or high Walk on the Front, as it may be noted on the Design. The Sixth, Fol. 23. is an Oblong square Knot, without cross-Alleys, containing about 29 Toises in Front, and 22½ in depth, the whole in-work, adorned with Statues and Grass-Lists in the middle of the Paths. This Design differs from the others, by reason that there is neither strait lines nor compass-strokes in it; We made it in one of the Castles belonging to the late Prince of Orange, called Honsclerdeck. The seventh and last grass-Knot, Fol. 24. is also an Oblong∣square, without cross-Alleys, containing 40 Toises in length, and 26 in depth; the Statues and Cyprus-Trees being disposed with due pro∣portion, as also the Grass Lists in the middle of the Paths, as is de∣scribed upon the Design. This is in short what I thought fit to say concerning the Embroider'd Ground-works, which ought to be planted with Box, as also touch∣ing the Grass and Box-Knots: Now it remains that we Treat of the Embroider'd Turff-ground-works, as also of the Knots without Box; and finally of Wildernesses and Labyrinths or Mazes: And we shall begin with the Royal-Garden, which we have contrived by His Ma∣jesties Order in His Park at St. James's. This Royal Garden, Fol. 25. contains 200 Toises in length, and 50 in breadth; and whereas there is no place near it from which it may be view'd from on high, we have therein omitted all Embroi∣dered ground-works, and Knots of grass, and have contrived it into
several Parallelograms, according to its length; and in regard it falls out, that at one end there happens to be a wild Wood, we have contrived another of green Trees over against it, of which the great Tree which was found standing there in the middle makes the Head, both of the green Wood and the rest of the Garden; which Tree we thought fit to leave as a remembrance of the Roy∣al Oak. The Lists in the said Parallelograms are Planted with dwarf-fruit-Trees, Rose-Trees, and several sorts of Flowers; the circumference is planted with Cyprus-Trees and other green Plants, to make Palissado's of about five foot high, with two perforated Gates to every square; the said Lists are parted with Grass in the manner of Knots. Finally, the Alleys are of five Toises in breadth, with their Lists, in the middle of which are planted dwarf-fruit-Trees and Vines; the great Walk on the Right-hand is raised Terrass-like, and Turff't; having a Fountain of five Toises in Di∣ameter, and a Round of Grass whereon to set up a Dial or Sta∣tue, as also in several places Cut-Angles, as may be seen upon the Design. The  first Ground-work in Embroidery of Grass, Fol. 26. con∣tains fifty Toises square in in-work; the Fountain eight in Dia∣meter, and the Alleys four in breadth, the Lists of grass which en∣viron the 4 Triangles, have 4 foot in breadth, and may be border'd with Boards in stead of Turffs, and set with low-Flowers; likewise at each Angle there may be Cyprus-Trees neatly kept and cut. We made this and the following Design much like unto those in Fol. 3. and 16. that thereby all the foregoing Designs which are in Em∣broidery, may be the more easie to the less skilful in Designs, for to add or diminish according as it will be thought convenient, when they come to be put in Practice. The second Ground-work, Fol. 27. is of Grass-Embroidery, of a Parallelogramick form, containing 36 Toises in front, and 29 in depth; the outward List four Foot in breadth, with four Cut-Angles, wherein may be set up, either Statues, or Cy∣prus-Trees, beside what is placed in the center of the said De∣sign. The third Ground-work in Embroidery of grass, Fol. 23. con∣tains about 35 Toises in breadth, and 40 in length, from one Angle to the other, with a half-oval, both upon the Basis, and at the end of the said ground-work: There may be set up in it four Statues, viz. one in the middle of the List of the half-oval up∣on its Basis, two upon the inward great strokes over against one another, and the Fourth in the Center of the double C. there re∣maining yet four places in which Cyprus-Trees may be Planted.
The Fourth Design, Fol. 29. is a Grass Ground-work, contain∣ing 50 Toises in in-work; its eight-square Fountain seven in Dia∣meter, and the Alleys four in breadth; in each square there may be set up three Statues, and four Cyprus-Trees planted, or else but one single Statue in the Center of each square, as also at the four external Cut-Angles of the said Squares, and all the other places planted with Cyprus-Trees; it is to be noted, that all those marked with small points, ought to be grass, and the rest gravel, which must be renew'd every year, by reason that the Worms casts take away its lovely colour, which is one of the chiefest ornaments of Grass Ground∣works; the same may be understood concerning the Designs in Em∣broidery in general. The Fifth, Fol. 30. is also a grass Ground-work, containing 40 Toises in breadth, and fifty in length, from Angle to Angle, with a quarter of an oval at each side of the upper end, in whose Center is an eight-square of grass to set a Statue on; as also at the four outward Angles, and likewise in the four Parallelograms of our Design, with the Cyprus-Trees planted in order, all according as it is described in the Design. It is to be noted, that one of the said Parallelograms of our Design, may be also contrived singly on ground, and that in making of it bigger or less as need requires; as likewise, it may easily be turned into a Wilderness, giving a conve∣nient breadth to the grass-Lists; which must be changed into Al∣leys with Palissado's on each side, and the rest filled confusedly with Wood. This is sufficient as for the Ground-works in Embroidery, and grass-Knots in general; there remains now to treat concerning the Wildernesses, which are distinguished two-fold, viz. Wildernes∣ses planted of wild Trees, and those that are planted with all sorts of ever-greens. This last kind is fittest in the Gardens of Pleasure, and the first are most convenient in Parks, and more remote places, as growing higher and thick, which would not sute well with the inclosure of the Garden of Pleasure. The first Wilderness, Fol. 31. contains 44 Toises square, the Al∣leys three in breadth, and the Fountain six in Diameter; the four inward Walks, as also the four large Arbors at the Angles of them may be made of Timber, vaulted at the top, so as to joyn neatly there to the Palissado's, that, during the violent heat of Sum∣mer, one may have the conveniency of cool shades, under which to sit shelter'd from the parching Rayes of the Sun, either for stu∣dious Retirement, or the enjoyment of Society with two or three Friends, a Bottle of Wine and a Collation: Nevertheless, I do not so much approve of this kind of Covering, for two Reasons;
The first, because it is unwholsome for want of Air; The Second, by reason that the Green cannot well grow in the inside of them, and by consequence the Palissado's, though of Quick-set, and ve∣ry green without, seem but like dead Wood within; therefore if the Curious are desirous to have of them in their Gardens, it will be requisite they should have great Gaps, or Windowes made in the top at some convenient distance, through which the Air may come in, and by this means prevent such inconveniences. The Second Wilderness, Fol. 32. contains 40 Toises square in in-work, the Alleys two in breadth, and the Fountain eight in Di∣ameter; what is fill'd with small points ought to be grass, and the rest Sand or gravel and Flowers, as may be seen in the Design. The great stroke which forms the Design is to set a Palissado in, which may be suffer'd to grow some five foot high at the most, which must be understood of all the other Designs of Wildernes∣ses. The third Wilderness, Fol. 33. is a Parallelogram, containing 36 Toises in length, and 26 in breadth; the outward Walk three, and the other inward ones two; the Fountain six in length and four in breadth, the List of flowers and grass in their proper places; the whole according as it is described in the Design. The Fourth and last Wilderness, Fol. 34.. is also a Parallelogram, containing 42 Toises in length, and 28 in breadth; the Arbors joyn∣ing one to another, and the Statues and Trees set in their places in order, as may be seen in the Design. We shall end our Designs with the Labyrinths or Mazes, whose Palissado's are to be planted in double ranks, that they may be thereby the stronger and thicker, to hinder the going through them. The first, Fol. 35. is of an eight-square form, containing 36 Toi∣ses square in in-work, the Alleys are to be 12 foot in breadth or more. The second Labyrinth, Fol. 36. is an Oblong square, containing 36 Toises in breadth, and 44 in length in in-work; this is wholly without all proportion, nevertheless it will make a pretty shew on Ground. It is to be noted, that the most of space that can be given to Labyrinths is the best; therefore it will be necessary to chuse some convenient place out of the Garden to contrive them in, where one may have space enough, as 60 or 80 Toises in square. I hope I have rendred my self sufficiently to be understood for the Designing of all General Draughts, Ground-works, Wilder∣nesses, and other Designs which may make up a Garden of Plea∣sure; the which I have done, that the less skilled in the adorning
of Gardens, may reap thereof both use and pleasure in their Deco∣rations; the whole WORK being the Product of my many years Practice and Labour, and the Skill which I have acquired there∣by; Therefore I entreat all Lovers of the Art of Gardening, to take in good part this small WORK of mine, which I have Pub∣lished for the Publick good. FINIS.
1 the first garden design, Fol. 1
2 the second garden design, Fol. 2
3 Knot in Embroidery for the first garden design, Fol. 3
4 Compartiment of Turff for the first garden design, Fol. 4
Knot in Embroidery for the second garden design, Fol. 5
6 the sixth design, a ground-work in embroidery
7 the seventh design, a ground-work in embroidery
8 the eighth design, a ground-work in embroidery
9 the ninth design, a ground work in embroidery
the tenth design, a ground-work in embroidery
11 the eleventh design, a ground-work in embroidery
12 the twelfth design, a ground-work in embroidery
13 the thirteenth design, a ground-work in embroidery
14 the fourteenth design, a ground-work in embroidery
15 the fifteenth design, a ground-work in embroidery
16 the sixteenth design, a ground-work in embroidery, Fol. 16
17 the seventeenth design, a ground-work in embroidery
the nineteenth design, a ground-work in embroidery 19 the eighteenth design, a ground-work in embroidery 18
9 the fourth grass-knot, Fol. 21 in the text
2 the third grass-knot, Fol. 20
22 the fifth grass-knot, without cross-alleys, Fol. 22
23 the sixth grass-knot, without straight lines, Fol. 23
24 the seventh grass-knot, an oblong without cross-alleys, Fol. 24
25 the First Wilderness. Fol. 31 in the text.
26 First ground-work in grass embroidery, Fol. 26
27 the Third Wilderness. Fol. 33 in the text.
28 the Fourth Wilderness. Fol. 34 in the text.
29 the Fourth Design, a Grass Ground-Work, Fol. 29
30 the Fifth Design, Grass Ground-Work
design for Royal-Garden, Fol. 25
27 Second Groundwork of Grass-Embroidery, Fol. 27
28 third Ground-work in Embroidery of grass; number is mirrored; Fol. 23 in the text
29 the Second Grass-Knot, with 24 statues
29 the first labyrinth. Fol. 35 in the text.
30 the second labyrinth. Fol. 36 in the text.
outline of a garden appears hand-drawn
