S2187 [ocn]489265459 208714
THE Sea-mans doleful Farewel; Or, The Greenwich Lovers mournful Departure. See here the Pattern of true Love, which absnce cannot stain; And nothing shall his mind remove, till he returns again. Tune of, State and Ambition. This may be Printed, R. P. woodcut of two figures standing at port woodcut of two ships at sea Man. FArewel my dearest Love, now must I leave thee▪ to the East-Indies my Course I must steer, And when I think upon't lore it doth griee me, let nothing possess thee wth doubt or with fear; or i'le be Loyal unto thee for ever, and, like to the Turtle, will constant remain, Nothing but cruel Death our Love shall fever, but we will be married when I come again. Maid. nd must we, by Fortune, thus strangely be parted? what dost thou think will become then of me? ho must continue here quite broken-hearted, let me thy true Love now venture with thee: ear not the dangers that wait on the Ocean, y troubles will greater be here on the Shore, to thy true Love now grant what she doth mention, o else greatly fears she shall see thee no more. Man. With dangers on Seas thou art little acquainted, for when the winds blow, and the billows do roar, I fear the (my true Love) will greatly be dounted, then let me intreat thee to stay on the Shore: My heart in thy breast I will sure leave behind me, and thou of my Constancy ne're shall complain, A Pattern of true Love thou ever shalt find me, and we will be married when I come again. Maid. How many, like thee, that are constant and loyal, do venture to Sea, and do never return? Then grant me my sute and make no more denyal, for I in thine absence for ever shall mourn: Oh like to a Sea-Boy let me be attired, and talk not of leaving me here on the Shore, Thy Company by me so much is desired, that sure I should dye should I see thee no more. woodcut of woman with fan woodcut of ship at sea Man. Cease, my true Love, and no more do perswade me, hy shouldst thou run hazards just now in thy prime? Thy true Love for ever blind Cupid hath made me, and then to the top-mast i'm sure cannot climb; Thy Lilly white hand cannot handle the tackle, the pitch and the tar on thy palms will remain, Tho' now thou art fetter'd in upids strong shacle, yet we will be married when I come again. Maid. Go then, my trur Love, and Heaves great blessing (where e're thou dost sail) still upon thee attend, Love is a pleasure beyond all expressing, and Neptune, my dearest, I pray thee defend: For if in mine absence my Love should micarry, whom I for his Virtues do so much adore, Then I of my life without doubt should be weary, and pine to my grave should I see thee more. Man. Come be of good comfort and grieve not my dearest, for I am as loth from my Love to depart, Heaven can prevent all the dangers thou fearest, then let not such jealousies trouble thy heart: For should I behold all the Beauties in Venice. yet still to my Dear I would constant remain, And nothing shall cause any difference between us, but we will be married when I come again. Maid. I long for that hour and covet the minute when Hymen my true love and me shall unite: I surfeit to think of the pleasure there's in it, 'tis comfort by day, but far sweeter by night, VVhen we like true lovers shall joyn our poor face and find such delight as I ne'r knew before, Tis for certain a bliss for to lye in embraces, and then I will part with my true Love no more. Man. VVell now the wind serves, in despight I must leave thee, but at our farewel let us change a sweet kiss: Again I do swear I will never deceive thee, and hope at the last to enjoy what I wish; Still hping that Fortune will show me such favour that I may be prosperous on the Salt Main, My true love in sorrow I fear for to leave her, but hope to enjoy her when I come again. Maid. Then down their poor cheeks the salt Tears they did trickle, whole vollies of sighs from their breasts there did fly, At last he prevailed by little and little that he might be gone, and she could not deny: But kisses at parting were wonderful plenty, and needs it must be that it grieved them sore, Tears they did drop till their eyes they were empty, for fear she her true love should never see more. Printed for I. Deacon at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street without Newgate.
