10252.5 22914631 25870
❀ ARTICLES, TO BE ENQVIRED OF within the Dioces of London, in the visitation of the Reuerend Father in God, Ihon Bishop of Lon∣don. 1589. In the xxxj. yeare of the raigne of our most gratious soueraigne Lady ELIZABETH by the grace of GOD Queene of England, Fraunce, and Ireland, defender of the faith. &c. Imprinted at London, 1589.
The tenor of the othe ministred to the Church-wardens and sworn-men. YEe shall sweare that all affection, fauour, hatred, hope of reward and gaine, or feare of displeasure, or malice set a side, you shall vpon due consideration of the Articles ge∣uen you in charge, present all and euery such person of or within your parish, as hath cōmitted any offence or fault, or made any default mentioned in these or any of these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected, or otherwise defamed of any such of∣fence, fault, or default: wherein you shal deale vprightly and according to equitie, neither of malice presenting any contrarie to truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to present anie, and so conceale the truth; ha∣uing in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeale to main∣taine truth, and to suppresse vice. So helpe you God, and his faithfull promises contained in these his holie bookes. The charge of the Church-wardens and sworne∣men set downe for the better performance of their duties, and discharge of their oathes. THey are straightly charged to heare all these articles read ouer vnto them, and diligently to consider and enquire thereof. And for that the time is so short in this the visitation, that they shall not be able to make a perfect answere vnto all of them, and that notwithstan∣ding there are manie notorious faultes presently worthy of present∣ment and reformation: they are charged to make their answere vn∣to them presently, so farre forth as their memory shall now serue them: And to present now such faultes in their Parish, as at this time are wor∣thie of presentment and reformation. And that after their comming home betwixt this and Michaelmas next, they shall agayne heare all the Articles read ouer vnto them, and diligently consider and enquire thereof with the Minister of the Parish, who shall (if he know any thing in the Parish to be reformed) together with them make a due present∣ment, and a true and full aunswere in wryting, signed with their handes and markes, wherein they shall present aswell all such faultes or offences, contrarie to the Ar∣ticles as they forgot or omitted to present at the time of the visitation, as also all such faultes and offences contrarie to the Articles as shall happen and chaunce betwixt this and then.
¶Articles to be inqui∣red of within the Dioces of London in this Ʋisitation, holden in the yeare of our Lord God. 1589. Articles concerning the Cleargie. WHether Common praier bée read by your Mini∣ster in your seuerall Churches or Chappels di∣stinctly and reuerently, and in such order as it is set foorth by the lawes of this Realme, without any kind of alteration omitting or adding to any thing, and at due and conuenient houres, the Mi∣nister wearing a Surples? And whether the ho∣lie Sacraments be likewise ministred reuerently in such manner, as by the booke of Common praier is appoynted. And whether vpon Wednesdaies and Fridaies, not being holi-daies, the Letanie and other praiers appoynted for the day be sayd accordingly. 2. Item, whether the forme of Comination against sinners bée by your Minister plainlie and distinctly read in your Church or Chap∣pell vnto the people, according to the Booke. 3 Whether any Parson or Parsons, not being ordered at the least be a Deacon, do say Common praier openlie in your Church or Chappell, or do solemnize matrimonie, or administer the Sacra∣ments of Baptisme, and what be their names that do so? 4 Whether the Parson, Vicar, or Farmer of your Benefice do cause or suffer any Curate or Minister to serue your Church before he bee examined and admitted by the Ordinarie in writing, and do shewe his license to the Church-wardens. 5 Whether your Minister doo serue two Cures in one daie, where∣by he must néedes be driuen to serue the one of them at inconuenient houses? 6 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate doo euerie Sonday whē there is no Sermon, read distinctlie and plainlie some part of the Ho∣milies prescribed and set foorth by the Quéenes authoritie to be read: and whether any Minister not admitted by the Ordinarie, or by other
lawfull authoritie, doe expound anie scripture or matter of doctrine, by the waie of exhortation or otherwise, and thereby omit and leaue off the reading of the Homilies. Or be there any in your Parish that do depraue or speake against the Homilies and the vse of them in the Church? 7 Whether any Lectures, Conuenticles, or priuate méetings bée read or vsed within your Parishes, either publique in the Church, or priuate in the house, by any not sufficiently licensed thereunto by the Ordinarie: or whether any such Reader do teach any Doctrine of Innouation to withdrawe the people from due obedience to the Or∣dinances of the Church set forth by publique authoritie, or to cause them to forbeare participating in praier and Sacraments with our Church? 8 How many Sermons doth your Parson or Vicar preach in his owne Church yearely: and if he be no Preacher himselfe, how many doth he yearely procure to be preached there, and who haue preached them: and whether bee they that do preach them licensed or no, and by whom were they licensed? 9 Whether your Minister haue or do receiue to the holie Com∣munion any persons which be not of his owne Parish, without testi∣monie from the Minister of the place where they dwell: what they be, that it may appeare that they be not persons excommunicate? 10 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do euery Sonday and Holi-day openly in the Church call for, heare, and instruct all the children, apprentises, and seruants of both sexes, that bee of conue∣nient age within your Parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serue, and as he may well heare or instruct for one houre at the least, before or after Euening praier in the tenne Commandements, the Articles of the beléefe, and the Lords praier, and diligently examine and teach them the Catechisme, as it is now allowed and set forth in the Booke of Common praier. And whether for that purpose he doth take the names of them all, and by course call certaine of them euery Sonday and Holi-day to come to the teaching of this Catechisme? 11 Whether your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other Minister in your Church or Chappell hath admitted to the holie Communion any open and notorious fornicator, adulterer or euill liuer, by whom publique offence is giuen without due penaunce first done, to the sa∣tisfaction of the Congregation enioyned him by his Ordinarie. Or any malicious person that is notoriously knowne and detected to bée
out of charitie, or detected to haue done any open wrong to his neighbour by word or déede, without due reconciliation first made to the partie that is wronged? 12 Whether in any of your Parishes your Minister bee brought in by popular election, sent by some peculier election of ministerie, confirmed by the Parish, and so allowed priuatly of before the sayd Minister be presented to his Ordinarie? 13 Whether your Parson or Vicar haue anie other benefice besides this: if he so haue, where lieth it, how long in the yere is he absent frō this; how doth he sée the cure of this serued, and what hospitality kee∣peth he on this Benefice? 14 Whether your Preachers or Minister be peace-makers, and ex∣hort their parishioners to obedience towards their Prince, and all o∣ther that be in authoritie, and to charitie and mutuall loue among thē∣selues: whether they be diligent in visiting the sicke, and in comfor∣ting them? 15 Whether anie doo preach, declare or speak anie thing in deroga∣tion of the booke of Common praier which is set forth by the lawes of this Realme, dispraising or deprauing the same or anie thing therein contained, or against the preachers or ministers of the word and sa∣craments by law authorized? 16 Whether your Parsons, Vicars, Curates and Ministers keep well their Registers of all weddings, burials, and christinings with∣in your parish according to the Order of the Quéenes Iniunctions, and whether they read the Queeenes Maiesties Iniunctions euerie quarter of a yere once or no? 17 Whether they or anie of them kéepe anie suspected woman in their houses, or be incontinent persons giuen to drunkennes, idlenes, or be haunters of tauernes, ale-houses, or suspected places, hunters, hawkers, dicers, carders, common table plaiers, swearers, dancers, or otherwise suspected of anie notorious crime, or light and vnséeme∣lie behauior, or giue anie euill example of life, or vse disordered and unseemlie apparell, either in colours, gards, or light fashion? 18 Whether they or any of them do keep or suffer to be kept in their parsonage or vicaredge houses, anie ale-houses, tippling houses, or tauernes, or do selbale, beere, wine, or anie other victuall? 19 Whether for the receiuing of the perambulation of the circuite of your parish, the Parson, Vicar or Curate, Churchwardens, & ∣taine of the substantiall men of the parish in the daies of the Rogaci∣ons & daies  called Gang-daies walke the accustomed Boundes
of your parish. 20 Whether anie new Presbyteries or Eldership be latelie among you erected, and by them anie Ministers appointed without Orders taking of the Bishops, to baptise, minister the communion, or deale in anie function ecclesiasticall or contrarie to law gather anie priuate conuenticle whereby the people be drawne from the Church. 21 Whether there be anie in your parish that readeth anie priuate lectures in the same, or vseth expositiō of the scriptures in any priuate mans house whatsoeuer, cōtrarie to the law. And whether anie prea∣cheth, and dooth not at certaine times in the yeare minister the sacra∣ments in their owne persons, and in such Church where he readeth his lecture. 22 Whether there be anie in your parish, Ministers, or Preachers, that vse either priuate or other assemblies out of their Dioces, with other preachees, or other with them: and doo in them vse to set down anie orders contrary to the orders obserued in the Queenes Booke, or anie in your parish that doo contribute to anie such preachers, and what be the names as well of the contributors, as of them to whom they doo contribute, and what seuerall summes do they contribute? 23 Whether any Minister do reiect those women being maried, which doo come to the Church to giue thankes after Child-birth, according to the order set downe in the booke of common praier? 24 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate haue maried anie per∣son not being three seueral Sondaies or Festiuali daies lawfully as∣ked in their parish Churches, or not being sufficiently licensed there∣vnto, and by whose license the same persons were so dispensed with∣all to be maried? 25 Whether anie contention haue growen amongst the preachers in these parts for anie matter of doctrine or ceremonies: and what & who was the cause thereof: and whether any strife hath grown about pewes or seates in the Church, and betweene whom was it? 26 Whether your Parsons, Vicars or Curates doo keep a iust and perfect nose of all such as doo communicate in their seuerall parishes, and doo not rather regard their priuate gain, receiuing their offrings at Easter, and deliuering them tokens, and so enter them into their booke, and certefie as Communicants those who neuer receiued? 27 Whether there be anie Ministers or Priests within your parish which liue idlie without anie Cure, neither seruing in anie place, nor hauing anie place of reading or preaching? 28 Whether anie Minister doo refuse to vse, or neglect such godly
exercises of prayer and preaching, as be by publique authoritie ap∣pointed for preseruation of her Maiestie, the Countrey, and Church: or for thanks-giuing for any victorie gotten ouer Gods enimies, and the States of the Realme. Articles concerning the Church. WHether haue you in your Parish Churches and Chappels all thinges necessarie and requisite for Common praier, and ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, especially the Booke of Common praier with the newe Kalender, two Psalters, the English Bible in the largest volume of the edition set forth by the Bishops, and lately imprinted by the Quéenes Printer, the Table of the tenne Com∣mandements, a conuenient Pulpet well placed, a comely and decent Table standing on a frame for the holie Communion, with a fayre linnen cloath to lay vpon the same, and some couering of silke, buc∣keram, or other such like for the cleane kéeping thereof, a fayre and comely Communion cup of siluer, and a couer of siluer for the same, which may serue also for the ministration of the Communion bread, a decent large Surplesse with sléeues, a sure Cofer with two lockes and keyes for kéeping of the Register booke, and a strong chest or boxe for the almes of the poore, with thrée lockes and keyes to the same, and all other things necessarie in and to the premisses. 2 Whether any do make any laystals, or vse to lay any filthinesse against the Church walles, to the anoyance of the Church or of the people, assembling themselues to heare Gods word, and publique exercise of praier? 3 Whether your Churches and Chappels with the Chauncell be wel and sufficiently repaired and kept without abuse of any thing, and whether your Church-yards bee well fenced and cleanly kept, and if any part thereof be in decay, through whose default it is so? 4 Whether the Church of your Parish be now vacant or destitute of an incumbent or no, and if it be, how long it hath béen so, and who is the Patron, and whether he suffereth the Benefice to lye vacant, and occupieth the glebe land, and taketh the tithes and other fruite to himselfe during the time of the vacation, or who els occupieth and taketh the same, and by what authoritie? 5 Whether your Church be a Parsonage or Vicaredge, presenta∣tiue, a donatiue, or otherwise serued by a Cure? Whether did you euer heretofore heare or knowe that it was a Parsonage or Vica∣redge, and how came it to be decayed from being a presentatiue to be
in the state it nowe is, and when was it first decayed from being a benefice presentatiue as you remember? 6 Whether your Fonts or Baptisteries be remoued from the place where they were wout to stand, or whether any persons leauing the vse of them: doe Christen or Baptize in Basons, or other prophane vessells, not customably vsed in the Church before time, or whether any Christen without eyther Godfather and Godmothers, and the signe of the Crosse appoynted by the booke of common prayer? Articles concerning Ecclesiasticall officers. WHether the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Commissary, officiall, or any other, vsing Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction in this Dioces, their Registers or Actuaries, Apparitors or Sumners, haue at any time winked at and suffered any Adulterers, Fornicators, incests, or other faults or offences presented vnto them, to passe and remayne vnpunished and vncorrected for Money, Rewards, Bribes, Plea∣sure, Frendship or any other partiall or affectionate respect? 2 Whether at the Archdeacons visitations which haue bin sithence 1586. the Archdeacon of your Archdeaconrie or his officers hath cal∣led to the Church wardens for a Certificate from the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of your Parish, thereby to vnderstand whether the Iniunc∣tions of the saide Bishop giuen in his visitation held in that yeare 1586. haue bin duely and precisely obserued or not, according to the Tenor and effect of one of those Iniunctions? 3 Whether any haue beene lawfullie presented to the Chancelor, Archdeacō, Commissarie, or Official, within these three yeres passed, for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiasticall Courts: who neither haue made their purgation, for the infamie of the same offence, nor haue receaued pennance, whereby the parish hath béen satisfied. Articles concerning Schoolemaisters. WHether the Schoolemaisters within your parish openly or pri∣uatly, in any Noble or Gentlemans house, or in any other place be of good and sincere Religion life and Conuersation, and bée diligent in teaching and bringing vp of youth: and whether they haue bin examined allowed and licensed for Schoolemaisters, by the ordi∣nary or his officer in that behalfe. 2 Whether your Schoolemaisters doe themselues receiue the ho∣ly Communion as often as they ought to doe, & whether they bring with them so many of their Schollers as be of age sufficient, and of
capacity by instructions to receiue the Lordes Supper. 3 Whether your Schoolemaysters doe orderly on Sondaies with their Schollers come to the Church of their Parish where they teach, and there see their Schollers placed in some conuenient place, so as they doe not disquiet the Minister or parish in time of deuine seruice: but may exercise themselues godly in reading and hearing the ser∣uice and Sermons, and in answering with the Congregation in rea∣ding of publique prayers. 4 Whether the Schoolemaisters eyther priuate or publique doe teache their Schollers the Catechisme aucthorised by publique auc∣thoritie, at the least once euery weeke: and doe instruct and examine them in the same, or doe teache any other Catechisme: and what Ca∣techisme is it that they so teach? 5 Whether any of your Schoolemaisters be knowne or suspected to reade vnto their Schollers priuately any bookes, or priuately to in∣struct them in theyr yong yeares eyther in Poperie, Superstition, or disobedience, or contempte to her Maiestie and her Lawes Ecclesia∣sticall, by publique authoritie allowed? 6 Whether any Schoolemaisters vnder pretence of Catechising their Schollers (which is a most godly order carefully by them to be obserued) do keepe Lectures reading, or expositions in diuinitie, in their houses, hauing continuall repayre vnto them of such people as seeke after innouations, and refuse their owne Parish Churches and their Minister? Articles concerning the Parishioners and others of the Laity. Whether all Housholders in your Parish, cause their Children, Seruants and Apprentices, both mankinde and womankinde, being aboue seauen yeares of age and vnder twenty, which haue not learned the Catechisme, to come to the Church on Sondayes and holy-daies at the times appoynted for Catechising, & there diligently and obediently to heare. And what be the names of those that do not cause their Children, Seruants and Apprentises so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined. 2 Whether any doe worke, or kéepe any Shop, or any parte of their shop open vpon the Sabaoth dayes, or vpon any holy-daies appointed by the Lawes of the Realme to be kept holyday? 3 Whether you your selues or the Churchwardens in the yeares before you, haue suffered any vnmaried women being begotten with
Childe to goe out of the Parish before she hath done pennance, or any man defamed of whoredom to departe vnpunished vpon direction ap∣pointed by the ordinary, and forth of whose houses haue they gone away with Childe vnpunished, and how many vnmaried women which haue bin deliuered within your parish these three yeres last past haue gone away without doing of penance? 4 Whether there bee any in your Parish, that doe themselues for∣beare, or dehort others from comming to publique prayer and hea∣ring the word Preached, condemning all forme of praier which they cal stinted prayer, calling our Churches the Temples of Idols, and our Preachers false teachers sent in the Lordes wrath: which leude opinions, some Sectaries haue lately broched? 5 Whether any man keepeth or readeth any seditious and Schis∣maticall bookes, or pamphlets written by any which enuaieth against the Religion now receaued, or the order and gouernement of the Church now publiquelie established, or that stirreth vp the hearers to innouation, or altring of the Churches gouernement by Lawe now established? 6 Whether the Parish Clarke be appointed according to the aun∣tient custome of the Parish with the allowance of the ordinarie, and whether he be not obedient to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate: and whether he be able to reade, and whether he keepe the bookes and or∣naments of the Church fayre and cleane, and cause the Churche and Quier, the Communion table and the fonte to bee kepte cleane and decent against the seruice time, the Communion, Sermon, and Baptisme. 7 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiastical or Tem∣porall within your Parish, or elsewhere within this Dioces, that haue reteyned or kept in their custodie, or that reade, sell, vtter, dis∣perse, carrie, or deliuer to others any English bookes or Libels, set forth either on this side or beyond the Seas by Papistes, or others, against the Quéenes Supremacie in causes Ecclesiastical, or against true Religion and Catholique doctrine, or the gouernment and dis∣cipline of the Church of England now within this Realme, recei∣ued and established by common authoritie, and what their names and surnames are? 8 Whether there be any in your Parish which for any cause what∣soeuer forbeare to come to Church to publique praier, or to heare Gods word preached, pretending it vnlawfull to come to our assem∣blies as the Church of England now standeth?
9 Whether any do refuse to receiue the holy Communion at their owne Ministers handes, either because he is not a Preacher, or be∣cause he duely obserueth the order of ministration appoynted by the Booke, and who they be that do go from their own Parish to receiue at any other Ministers hands? 10 Whether any of your Parishioners hauing a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do absent themselues from his Sermons, and resort to any other place to learne or followe after such innoua∣tions as are there taught. 11 Whether the people of your Parish, especially householders hauing no lawfull excuse to bee absent, do resort with their children and seruants to their Parish Church or Chappell on the Holi-daies and on the Sondaies to morning and euening praier. And who they be that either negligently or wilfully absent themselues, or come ve∣rie late to the Church vpon the Sondaies especially, or that walke, talke, or otherwise vnreuerently behaue themselues in the Church, or vse any gaming or pastime abroade, or in any house, or sit in the stréete, or Church-yarde, or in any Tauerne or Alehouse vpon the Sonday or other holi-day in the time of Common praier, or reading of the Homilies, either before or after noone? 12 Whether the forfeiture of twelue pence for euery time of ab∣sence from Church (appoynted by a Statute made in the first yeare of the Quéenes Maiesties raigne) bée leuied and taken according to the same Statute by the Church-wardens of euery person that of∣fendeth, and by them be put to the vse of the poore of the Parish: if it be not so leuied, by whose default is it? 13 Whether there be any Inne-keepers, Alewiues, Victualers or Tiplers, that suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses to eate or drinke, or play at Dice, Cardes, Tables, Boules, or such like games in the time of Common praier or Sermon on the Sondaies or Holi-daies: or any Butchers or other that commonlie vse to sell meate or other thinges in the time of Common praier, Preachings, or reading of Homilies. And whether in any Fayres or common Markets, falling vpon the Sonday, there bee any shewing of any wares before Morning praier bee done? And whether any markets or selling of wares be vsed or suffered in any Church-yards on the Sabboth day by common Packmen or Pedlers going a∣bout? 14 Whether the Church-wardens of the last yeare haue giuen to the Parish a iust accompt of the Church goods and rents that were
committed to their charge, according vnto the custome that hath bin aforetime vsed, and what Church goods they or any other haue sold, and to whom, and whether to the profite of your Church or no, and what hath béen done with the money thereof comming? 15 Whether the Church-wardens and Sworne-men since the visitation holden 1586. haue of any priuate corrupt affection con∣cealed any crime or other disorder in their time done in your Parish, and haue not presented the same to the Bishop, Chauncellor, Arch∣deacon, Cōmissarie, or such other as had authoritie to reforme the same: and whether they, or any of them at any such time as they should haue béen at deuine Seruice on Sondaies or Holi-daies, and should there haue obserued others that were absent, haue béen away themselues at home, or in some Tauerne or Alehouse, or els about some worldly busines, or at Boules, Cardes, Tables, Dice, or o∣ther gaming, without regarde of their office and duetie in that be∣halfe? 16 Whether your Minister and you the Church-wardens, or any other of your Parish haue on your reuesterie made any orders, or do vse to call any parties before you for any cause to bee ordered by the Ecclesiasticall lawes, and so do vse a kind of presbiterie, or censuring ouer your neighbours? 17 Whether any of your Parish being of conuenient age, haue not receiued the holie Communion thrice this last yeare at the least, and namely at Easter last, or thereabouts for once, and what their names are, or which at their receiuing haue not signified the same before to your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, that he might conueniently examine them, and who haue refused to come to him to bee exami∣ned? 18 Whether there bee any in your Parish that administer the goods of those that bee dead without lawfull authoritie, or any that suppresse the last Will of the dead, or any Executors that haue not fulfilled their Testators will, especially in paying of Legacies giuen to the Church, or to other good and godlie vses, as to the releefe of pouertie, to Orphanes, poore Schollers, poore maydens marriages, high waies, Schooles, and such like, and by whom are they so de∣tayned? 19 Whether there be any in your Parish that hath or doth offend contrarie to the Statute made in the xxvii. yeare of the raigne of King Henry the viii. for the reformation of Vsurie, and reuiued by an Act made in the xiii. yeare of the raigne of the Quéenes Maiestie
that now is, and what be the names of such offenders? 20 Whether hath your Minister, or any of the Parish, not being Iustices of Peace, without the consent or priuitie of the Ordinarie, caused any to do penaunce or be punished, either openly or otherwise, for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiasticall lawes, and what bée the names of the parties, who haue béen so punished, and in what manner? 21 Whether the Iniunction sent from my L. Grace of Canterbu∣rie, and the High Commissioners in Nouember 1587. directed to your Minister and Churchwardens not to receiue strange preachers not licensed, be obserued: and whether the said Iniunction remaine in your Church, or no? 22 Whether there be any among you that do vse sorcerie or witch∣crafte, or that bee suspected of the same: and whether anie vse anie charmes, or vnlawfull praiers: and whether anie doo resort to anie such for helpe and counsell: and what be the names both of such as vse it, and of such as resort to them for helpe? 23 Whether anie couples that be maried in priuate houses with∣in these thrée yéeres last, haue béen knowen or suspected to haue béen married after anie other order, than is appointed by the Church of England, by reason that the one partie or the other are noted to bee such as refuse to come to the Church, or dislike of the orders of the Church of England? 24 Whether there be among you any Blasphemers of the name of GOD, great or often Swearers, Adulterers, fornicatours, incestuous persons, bawds or receiuers of naughtie and incontinent persons, or harbourers of women with childe which be vnmaried, cō∣ueying or suffering them to goe away before they do anie penance, or make satisfaction to the Congregation: or anie that be vehementlie suspected of anie such faults, or that be not of good name & fame tou∣ching anie such crime and fault: anie dronkardes or ribaldes, or anie that be malicious, contentious, or vncharitable persons, railers, scol∣ders, or sowers of discord betweene neighbors, and speciallie railers against Ministers, and against their marriage? 25 Whether there be anie in these parts that haue married within the degrees of affinitie or consanguinitie, by the Lawes of God for∣bidden: or anie that being diuorced or separated for the same, doo yet notwithstanding inhabit and keepe companie still together: or anie that being maried without those degrees, haue vnlawfullie forsaken their wiues or husbands, & married others. Anie man that hath two
wiues, or anie woman that hath two husbands: anie that beeing di∣uorced or separated asunder haue married again: anie that haue ma∣ried or contracted themselues without the consent of their parents, tutors, or gouernors: anie that haue married without Banes thrice solemnlie asked: anie couples maried that liue not together, but slan∣derouslie liue apart. 26 Whether there be anie in your parish, who will come to heare the sermon, but wil not come to the publique praier appointed by the booke of common praier, making a schisme or diuision as it were be∣tweene the vse of our publique praier, and preaching. 27 Whether the Minister and Churchwardens haue suffered anie Lords of misrule, or Summer Lords or Ladies, or anie disguised persons, or May games, or anie morrice dancers at anie times to come vnreuerentlie into the Church or Churchyard, and there to dance or play, especially in the time of common praier: and what they be that commit such disorder: or that accompanied or mainteined them? 28 Whether there be among you anie notorious euill liuers, or a∣nie suspected of any notorious sinne, fault, or crime, to the offence of Christian people, or any that stubbornly refuse to conforme thēselues to vnitie and godly Religion now established by publique authority: or any that beareth abroad rumors of the alteration of the same, or o∣therwise that disturbeth good orders, and the quietnesse of Christes Church, and the Christian Congregation? 29 Whether all such admonitions and Iniunctions, as haue come to your parishes from my Lord of London in and sithence the last vi∣sitation for the obseruing of anie order for the Church, or putting downe anie disorder, haue ben dulie kept euer since or no, & by whose default they haue not been kept? 30 Whether there be any married women or others within your parish, which after child-birth doo refuse or contemne to come to the Church to giue thanks for their deliuerie, & to haue the prayers pub∣lique, appointed in that behalfe by the booke of common prayer. 31 Whether any carry out the Infants to be Christened in other parishes, as misliking the order of Christening in their owne parish: whether any preach in any Noble mans or Gentlemans house, not being licensed of the Bishop? 32 Whether any within your Parishes doo resort vnto barnes, fieldes, woods, out-houses, or to any extraordinarie Expositions of Scriptures, or conferences together: and so doo (as it were) make a
seuerall Church or Sect vnto themselues; or be drawers or perswa∣ders of others to any such schismaticall and damnable Sects. 33 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate haue wittingly maried together any couples whereof the woman hath ben got with childe, or carnally knowen before mariage: or whether the man for money or reward hath married anie woman that hath committed a∣dulterie with another man, without publique acknowledgement of their offences, and reconciliation to the parish: & what are the names of all such that haue been so maried in anie such case, and when, and by whom they were so maried together? 34 Whether any doo keepe their Children vnbaptised longer than the Sunday after Birth, vnlesse it be for sicknesse of the childe, or other vrgent occasion: & whether any doo carrie their children from the Parish they are borne in, to other Parishes to bee baptised? And whether any do refuse and carrie their children from their owne Parish to bee baptised in other places, or do bring strange Ministers into their owne houses, to baptise their children priuatly according to their owne phantasies? 35 Whether the order of praiers on Wednesdaies and Fridaies, set forth lately by the most reuerend Father the Archbishop of Can∣terburie, by him appoynted to bee obserued through his whole Pro∣uince, be obserued as it is required, and who bee they that vnder co∣lour of it do bring in any newe deuised order, prayer, or fastes, lea∣uing the prescribed order of that booke? FINIS. The seconde bils which are to be deliuered at Michaelmas next, are to be brought into Maister Blackewels office in Iuie Lane, Register to my Lord Bishop of London, betwixt Michaelmas and the eyght day of October following, or els the Church-war∣dens and Side-men making default herein, are at their perils to shew cause the x. of October next in the Consistorie in Pauls, why they should not according to law, bee proceeded agaynst for their contempt.
