1068 99837330 1646
The right way to goe to Worke: OR, A SERMON SEASONABLE AND VSEFVLL IN these Stirring Times: Containing matter of direction in all Actions, AND Presenting meanes of supportation vnder the weight either of publike or priuate, dangerous or difficult seruices and employments. Vpon PROVERBS 16.3. PSAL. 57.1, 2. In the shadow of thy wings (O God) will I make my refuge, vntill these calamities be ouerpast. I will cry vnto God most high, vnto God that performeth all things for me. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Haviland for William Bladen, and are to be sold at his shop at the great North doore of PAVLS. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL, THE MASTER, WARDENS, and ASSISTANTS, of the Company of Carpenters in London, with others his late Bountifull BENEFACTORS. SOlomon giueth this pru∣dent aduice to all buil∣ders:Prou. 24 27▪ Prepare thy worke without, and make it fit for thy selfe in the field, and afterward build thine house. To mee therefore, a∣mongst others, as to one hauing manu∣mission and freedome of that Society, is it directed. But how is it by mee followed? Now that you see me building me thinks I heare you questioning, whether my worke be well prepared, and fitted before
hand? Yea, or I my selfe well prepared, and fitted for this worke? First, for my selfe, I answer (and should so continue answe∣ring yet a while, were I left to my selfe) as Plutarch reporteth Pericles and Demosthenes vsed to doe in sleighter cases, , I am not ready; for if they (so eloquent) thought themselues vnready to speake in any weighty matters, how then can I (so rude) with modesty be so ready to speake (and in print too) about more weighty mat∣ters than any whereof they could speake? Againe, for my prouision before hand, I answer as the wise Virgins did, by way of confession, , There will not be enough for vs and you. For if they (so prudent) feared they had not oyle in such plenty as they might gratifie others with a portion, how then can I (so ignorant) with humility thinke, I haue such store of stuffe by me, as to proffer matter of light vnto others, already better furnished? If I haue prepared any worke without, (inter syluas Academiae, in the field, I meane of the Vniuersitie) surely I haue fitted it, as yet, onely for my selfe (according to the letter
of that aduice) and not to build an house in the City, or (as it were) in the common roade, obuious to the eies of all passengers. But you may quickly reply, If your priuy wants of preparation be such, why take you this publike way of edification? I wil tell you in∣genuously how the case stands with me. My reuerend father desirous of some triall of my Theologie, required mee to make this Discourse, and when hee had heard it, was as desirous that your Worships, and other my worthy Benefactors might bee partakers thereof, in token of thankful∣nesse for your exhibition to me, whiles I was at Cambridge; and this desire cooled not presently, but continued with instant importu∣nity, and encreased out of diuers considerati∣ons of gratefull equity. Now how could I crosse him whose desires are commands? Or what could I oppose against his reasonable perswasions? I might haue said some I feare will say) that this seemes not to bee the right way to goe to worke, to fall into the Presse as soone as to stand in the Pulpit. Might I haue said thus? Nay, I did say so, & so long withstood his pleasure, till I per∣ceiued
the gathering clouds of his discon∣tent. But then I yeelded, (though by yeel∣ding I runne my selfe vpon the pikes of many sharpe censures) calling to minde that of the Poet, In vitium ducit culpae fuga: by shunning the fault of Vaine glory, I must needs fall on the vice of disobedience: and being confident that (what euer others thinke or speake) yee will conceiue (as the truth is) that my willingnesse to doe my duty, ouercame much vnwillingnesse to be in print. Wherefore (Right Worship∣full) in imitation of my Reuerend Father, who many yeares since, dedicated a Cate∣chisme to the Company, out of like respects, I here present you with this poore modell, my first in this kinde, wishing it were wor∣thy to be an encouragement vnto that pious charity which ye not only extended to me, but to my Father before me, and to others with mee, and will (I doubt not) to many after mee; That so ye may helpe to traine vp such as may be able not onely to shew you the right way, but also to point out to you the right worke, and to comfort and strengthen you in it, till yee receiue the glori∣ous
reward of it. But in meane time, how doe I shew the way? I confesse I haue not reared so faire a structure, as the large foun∣dation would haue borne vp, yet shall you finde (I hope) firmnesse ioyned with plaine∣nesse in this little Frame. Which plainnesse I vse, both to shew what I am, (a Carpenter, not a Caruer,) and what I should be too in this kinde of building; subscribing to Cypri∣ans iudgement, as consonant to Gods will, which is to this effect, In iudics in con¦cione pro rostr ∣pulenta facundi volubili ambitu iactetu▪ cum de Dumino Deo vox est, vocis para syn¦ceritas non eloquen∣tiae veribus nitt ad fidei argumenta sed rebus, &c.  1. ep. ad Donatu. Volubility of elo∣quence is requisite in legall pleadings, and ciuill orations; but in speeches concerning God and his matters, it becommeth vs to vse onely purity of words with simplicity of truth, as most powerfull to beget faith. His minde and meaning will bee more fully exemplified in the follow∣ing discourse; which I leaue to your fa∣uourable construction, and kinde acceptation: your selues also to Gods more abundant retribution, my selfe euer remaining, Your Worships in all gratefull Obseruance, S. B.
THE RIGHT WAY to goe to VVorke. PROVERBS 16.3. Commit thy workes vnto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. THese words as they proceed out of the mouth of the wise man, so they come vnto vs clad in the habit (as it were) of a graue aduice, or counsell; which, to the best of mine apprehen∣sion, suteth with all circumstances. I need not tell you the conueniencie betweene this place, and my Text. Is not this the house of God? are not his Ora∣cles heere vnfolded? are wee not heere made ac∣quainted with his Will? Now where else should we receiue direction for our proceedings than where wee meet with resolution for our enterprises? where
should we make that resignation (which my Text im∣porteth) but where we receiued our Commission? For the time, surely, as it cannot but bee alwayes vsefull to those that are doing, and desirous to speed in their doings: so, more especially at this time when we haue so great cause to commit the common publique affaires of the Churches of God (whose actions, and agitations are, in some sort, our owne) and all their designes in behalfe of the Gospell, vnto the Lord. But to come nearer. When can wee more seasonably learne than when we are presently to practise? And when haue we more instant need to practise, and follow this counsell in my Text than when we are about so sacred a businesse? If euer, Beloued, we commit our worke vnto the Lord, let vs now when we are conuersant in the Lords worke. As for Persons, I hope heere are none but will yeeld to the necessity of this dutie. Who hath not this speech commonly in his mouth? By Gods helpe I will doe this or that; Thereby acknowledging (as there is cause) a disability to doe any thing without Gods helpe. How much more assistance then, need wee to craue of God in these matters? For which (saith the Apostle) who is sufficient? 2. Cor. 2.16. We see then all of vs, the speaker, especially, who is now to enter vpon so waighty an employ∣ment, how much it stands vs vpon to commit our seuerall workes vnto the Lord, that our thoughts may bee established. But lest my preface should seeme to vsurpe Application before Doctrine be deli∣uered, I draw toward my Text. For the explication of the words, it is not requi∣site
heere, as in other places of Scripture, to haue re∣course vnto the context, and to consider the depen∣dance vpon former, or the coherence with following verses; For that part of the will and wisdome of God which is reuealed in this booke, is laid downe for the most part (especially from the tenth chapter to the end) in sentences perfit, and entire, there be∣ing no continued series or processe of matter close∣ly hanging together, but each axiome absolute in it selfe, and independent. So that these Prouerbs may be not vnfitly compared,Peret▪ id est  me thinkes to those  those single grapes (according to the Hebrewes ex∣position Leuit. 19.10.) which were not to be ga∣thered and impropriated by the owners, but left in common for the poore. They are, first, as grapes that pleasant and heart-chearing fruit, and therefore called mingled wine, Prou. 9.5. and said to be life to those that finde them, and health to all their flesh, Prouerb. 4.22. Then they are single grapes (which is to our purpose) in that they are not ioy∣ned one vpon another in sense, but disseuered, whilst other parts of Scripture are like clusters of grapes compacted together, and linked in Logicall argu∣ment. But if any will be curious to search out a de∣pendency of these words vpon the former, some∣what may be said according to the opinion of some judicious, who hold this verse to be an instruction, or document inferred, and deduced from both the former verses, as from arguments vrging, and pres∣sing it. In the first verse, Solomon tels vs that the prepara∣tions of the heart are in man, but the answere of
the tongue is from the Lord, that is, Howsoeuer man hath powers of minde to premeditate, and consult, yet hee cannot expresse what hee hath thought without Gods direction and assistance. Whence the wiseman concludeth; If we cannot so much as vtter with our tongues what we haue pre∣meditated, without Gods aide, then wee ought to commit our more weighty workes vnto the Lord: But we cannot doe the former; Ergo &c. The argu∣ment is thus drawne from the lesse to the greater: o∣therwise it may be thus framed, taking in our speeches into the number of our workes (as they may well be:) If all our actions, euen the least, as our speeches, be from God, then are they to be commit∣ted to God; but they are from God: Ergo. So we see how this third verse hangs vpon the first. In the se∣cond verse his meaning (I take it) is this, that how∣soeuer we are naturally so ready to flatter and sooth vp our selues in our owne doings, that wee imagine all to be right, and as it should bee, which we goe about, especially if it haue but a spice or ap∣pearance of good in it: Yet God is not alwayes pleased with that wherein we so please our selues; he many times either allowes not of the matter, or manner of those performances which wee so ap∣plaud, and magnifie: why? Because he lookes not onely on the outside of the action, but takes notice out of what grounds we doe it, and vnto what ends, weighing and discerning the secret working of our spirits. Heereupon he inferrs in my Text, that be∣cause God doth so, therefore we should commit our workes vnto him, that is, lay them to the rule of
his word, for the approbation and warrant of them, and then so do them as we may confidently put our selues, and our manner of performing them to Gods scanning, and judgement: Thus working vp∣on a sure ground wee shall haue them established. And so I come to the words read. The parts whereof appeare at the first view to bee two, and but two; hauing only one terme of connexion [And] The first we may either call A counsell and aduice (as I said in the beginning:) and the second answerably, A promise or successe in following it: Or else we may conceiue the latter to be an end proposed by euery man to himselfe; and the former as the way and meanes by which it may be attained vnto. Of these as they lye in order. For our better proceeding, the words are to bee explained before any point be obserued; and the only word which needeth opening is [Commit] We are therfore to know that in the originall it is  Colcom∣ming from a root signifying To route or turne, &c. so that according to strict translation the words are to be read, Roule thy workes to, or vpon Iehouah. The speech is metaphoricall, and importeth thus much, that euen as men when they cannot lift or weild a thing well, tumble it to another that can better, or as when they haue lifted it, if it bee so burden some that they cannot vndergoe the weight, they will seeke helpe, and lay it vpon anothers shoulders: so wee being vnable of our selues to manage our af∣faires, are to turne them ouer vnto God, and being pressed with the weight of any charge, or duty ly∣ing vpon vs, are to expect aide from him and looke
that he should sustaine either it for vs, or vs vnder it. In a word, we are aduised heere to doe no other thing, than what men doe in those cases, wherein they alone are insufficient. What doe they? They goe to some body, of whose sufficiency and faith∣fulnesse they are assured, and tell them that they know not what to doe themselues, they cannot goe through with the businesse, and therefore they relie and depend wholly vpon him, committing it to his ordering and disposing. Mee thinks Pharaohs cari∣age towards Ioseph, shadoweth out our duty to∣wards God in this point: He hauing weighed the in∣terpretation of his dreames, and the necessity of ta∣king some course for preseruation of himselfe & his people, casts himselfe vpon Ioseph (whose sufficien∣cie he had well proued) and left the whole businesse to his wisdome and prouidence. Thus ought wee confidently to entrust God with all our workes, and much rather than any man. This is enough for the discouery of the Metaphor: the fuller meaning we shall haue afterwards. In the other words there is no obscurity. Vnder [Workes] we are to compre∣hend Words, being one kinde of our operations, though wrought only with the tongue: as also our Intentions and resolutions are heere to bee vnder∣stood, and taken in: By [Thoughts] then in the se∣cond part of the verse we are to vnderstand, both our Act of deliberation, and the Obiect or thing whereon we thinke, and whereabout we deliberate and resolue. In summe, Commit thy workes, is as if he had said, Commit the choice, the ordering, and the successe of thy workes to Iehouah; and so the last
word [established] intimates, signifying (in the originall . ) as well aptabuntur, as firmabuntur; prepared and fitted, as well as confirmed, established. The words thus, in some sort, vnfolded, I come to the point of instruction taught plainly in the words, viz:ot. Euery one ought to commit their workes vnto the Lord. It may not be amisse, first generally to proue it, and then to lay out the particulars com∣prized in the generall. For proofe we haue sundry parallel places to this. Dauid giues the same coun∣sell, Psal. 37.5. Commit thy way vnto the Lord, &c. And what counsell he giues to others, we finde re∣corded he tooke himselfe, Psalm. 22.9. He trusted in the Lord, &c. said his very enemies. The same word for Rouling is vsed in both those places which is heere. We finde the same kinde of Meta∣phor for sense in other places, though the words be somewhat different, as Psal. 55.22. Cast thy bur∣den vpon the Lord, &c. And 1. Pet. 5.7. Cast all your care vpon God. &c. Where the words transla∣ted [Cast] though they note properly another mo∣tion from Rouling, which wee know by that name; yet doe they as clearely illustrate this duty in my Text, which chiefly imports a transferring, or re∣mouing from our selues our waighty workes, or bur∣dens, or cares, vpon another that is stronger than we are. For more full explication of which duty so manifestly and straitly enjoyned vs, descend we to the particulars therin contained. There are three things which seeme to take vp the whole nature of this Committing: 1. A sense, and acknowledgement of selfe-insufficiencie for the worke. 2. A faithfull de∣pendency
on God for the appointing and effecting of it. 3. An actuall recommending of it vnto God in prayer. These three, were this an assembly of Schollers, I would liken vnto those three principles of naturall things which Philosophers tell vs of, Priuation, Mat∣ter, and Forme. The deniall of our owne abilities, I may call in some sort a Priuation. for vnlesse wee confesse our want of them, and strip our selues na∣ked (as it were) out of all conceits of our owne sufficiency, we shall neuer be disposed to looke vn∣to God in our actions. Yet is not this (indeed) es∣sentiall to this duty, though necessarily preceding, and making way for it. Secondly, our faithfull de∣pendency vpon God, and imposing the weight vpon him, may be termed the matter, of which this duty consisteth. Thirdly, our actuall recommending of our workes vnto God in prayer, is as it were, the forme of this duty, by which it is compleat in the ee, or being of it: Now for the explanation of these seuerals. First we must finde our selues vnable to vnder∣goe the burden, and acknowledge our weaknesse; And this in a threefold respect, 1. of Iudgement, 2. of Wisdome, 3 of Power. We must deny our owne Iudgement to direct in matter of resolution what to doe. For how great cause haue we to confesse our folly, and our blindnesse in choosing? True it is which the wise man speaks, Vers. 2. All the waies of a man are cleane in his owne eyes, and (cap. 21.2.) right in his owne eyes. Yet see what good judges our eyes are, Vers. 25. There is a way that seemeth right vn∣to a man, but the end thereof are the waies of death.
And, indeed, not one only, but euery way, euery worke that is of our owne finding out, of our owne deuising, is sinfull, and tendeth to death, vnlesse we haue warrant for it elsewhere, from God. Fearefull is that Irony of the Preacher, Eccles. 11. vers. 9, 10. Walke o young man in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know, &c. I need not tell you how sharply God reproued the peo∣ple by his Prophets, for walking in the peruerse and crooked wayes of their owne hearts. Doubt∣lesse no greater judgement could befall euen the best of vs, than to eat the fruit of our owne wayes, and be filled with our owne deuices, Prouerb. 1.31. But to lay aside these more weighty considera∣tions, let vs examine our actions, by the meere grounds of morality; and (alas!) how sottish, how blinde are we when we are our owne Coun∣cellors! What grosse mistakings, what silly choises make we? How great failing in judgement do we bewray in ciuill actions? Was it not a foo∣lish project to thinke to perpetuate ones name by a building, as they did at Babel? Gen. 11.4. No better projects many times do we lay, but such as will end in confusion: At the best, we study, and im∣ploy our selues, for the most part, but about toyes, and trifles, and things that profit not. We rather choose Marthaes encombrance, than Maries better part. So that we haue great cause to renounce our owne judgement in choosing. Againe, in the second place, for wisdome in ma∣naging and disposing of a matter resolued on, sup∣pose the resolution bee good, wee lacke that too.
There are but two wayes (we vse to say) a right and a wrong, and do not wee generally take the wrong? In spirituall matters, we would worship God: but how? Our owne wisdome would faine intermeddle too farre in the manner, & intermingle the inuentions of our braines, which are very louely & decent in our owne eyes, how contrary soeuer to Gods word: when in the meane time we marre all, corrupting our seruices, & making them odious to God. It was certainly a godly mind in Dauid & the Israelites, that moued them to bring the Arke out of the house of Abinadab, and their solemnity in ma∣king a new Cart for it, made a faire shew for the time, of discretion, and wisdome; but afterwards they found their folly to their griefe, and that they had not sought the Lord in due order, 1. Chron. 15.13. why? Because they thought themselues wise enough to manage that action, without following and obseruing Gods order. In worldly matters al∣so we saile either in not vsing right meanes or not in a right manner: Wee either leane on a Reede which will breake, and pierce our hands (as Ae∣gypt is called, Esa. 36.6.) or else wee take the wrong end of a good staffe. Either we take those courses which will hinder, and prejudice our inten∣tions, or we worke so preposterously, so vnseasona∣bly, that we are not a whit the neerer, to that which we would effect. Surely, vnlesse an higher proui∣dence leade, and guide vs, we may all vse the words of Eliphaz, Iob. 5.13, 14. Our counsels are car∣ried headlong; wee meete with darknesse in the day time, and groape at noone day as in the night. Espe∣cially
in a case of extremitie, and in distresse wee are so distracted that we are at our wits end, and know not which way to turne our selues. So that in this respect we haue good reason to take Salo∣mons counsell, Leane not vnto thine owne vnder∣standing, Prou. 5.5. And let vs ingeniously ac∣knowledge vnto God with Ieremie (cap. 10 23.) O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himselfe; it is not in man that walketh to direct his owne steps. In the third place wee are to deny our owne Power to accomplish any worke though neuer so well conceiued, though meanes are neuer so well ordered, and the businesse in very great forward∣nesse. Who is he (saith Ieremie, Lamen. 3.37.) that saith, and it commeth to passe when the Lord commandeth it not? I may adde; when he assisteth not, prospereth not; For, poore impotent creatures that we are, if we looke vnto spirituall actions, we can∣not so much as will to doe good of our selues, much lesse can we carry our selues through any ho∣ly duty with comfort, and successe: Without mee (saith Christ) ye can doe nothing, Ioh. 15.5. which is true also if we looke to temporall affaires, and emploiments. For what can we say we will doe? God can interpose when he will, and stay our pro∣ceedings a thousand wayes. He can either sud∣denly crush vs, and turne vs into dust: or blow vp∣on our labours, or suffer others to crosse and cleane ouerthrow our enterprises. So that, in mat∣ter of profit no man can say, my power, my labour, the might of my hand hath gotten me this wealth,
Deut. 8.17. Nor in point of honour, By my po∣licie I haue builded my nest on high: by the strength of mine arme I haue gotten the victorie, Psalm. 44.3. Therefore (to shut vp this first preparatiue act to into duty) we are in euery action to take notice of our weaknesse, and to groane vnder euery imploi∣ment, as vnder a burden insupportable, should we haue no helpe: We may bee in continuall motion, rouling and tumbling our actions vp and downe, but shall neuer finde rest, and firme setling of them, before we lay them vpon God: seeing before wee come to him, it is with vs as Mathematicians tell vs it is with a Globe vpon a plaine, impossible to stand still, and as impossible to stirre to any purpose. If then we set vpon spirituall duties, say with the A∣postle Paul, We are not sufficient of our selues to thinke (much lesse to doe) any thing as of our selues but our sufficiency is of God, 2. Cor. 3.5. And nei∣ther is he that planteth, any thing; nor he that watereth, but God that giueth the increase, 1. Cor. 3 7. If we goe about any worke of our worldly callings, humbly acknowledge with Dauid, Except the Lord build the house they labour in vaine that build it, Psal. 127. 1. So, except he prosper other our handy-workes, in vaine do we think in our owne strength to bring them to a wished end: especially when any more important affaire is in hand; as when preparations are made for warre, and publique seruice is to be done for the Church of God; then let vs be most sensible of our owne weaknesse, and confesse with Iehoshaphat, That we haue no might against our ene∣mies, nor know we what to doe, 2. Chron. 20.12.
But had not Iehoshaphat a great Armie, and valiant men? Yes, yet in them was no might. Did not he know that he had no way but to lead out his for∣ces? yes, and yet he knew not what to doe. Only this, Our eyes (said he) are towards thee, that is, seeing we cannot worke effectually for our selues, we roule (not our eyes only, but) our worke vpon thee ó Lord, &c. And thus we passe on from the first preparatiue, vnto the second, an essentiall act of this duty: from the act of acknowledgement in humilitie of our selfe-insufficiencie, to the act of Faith in dependencie on God, and his efficiencie. Now in this resting and relying vpon God consisteth principally this de∣uoluing or committing our worke vnto God, and this is manifested in so many acts as there were par∣ticulars wherein we discouered our owne weake∣nesse. First then, he that commits his worke to God, must depend as well on his wil and allowance before he begins it, as on his helpe and assistance afterward; he must out of that suspicion he is to haue of his owne iudgement in choice, referre his determinations to God, consult with him, and as he willeth, and prescribeth, so doe, and not other∣wise. This was the course which Gods people tooke of old; they would neuer attempt any mat∣ter, especially of moment, without a warrant, Thus the Israelites, when Ioshua their Generall was dead, before they stirred to elect another, asked of the Lord, who should goe vp first for them, &c. Iudg. 11. They consulted againe with God before they would take armes against the children of Ben∣iamin,
Iudg. 11.18, 23, 28. Thus did Dauid sundry times, 1 Sam. 23.12. & 30 8. Thus did many others of Gods seruants in such like cases, and all in obe∣dience to Gods ordinance, Numb. 27.21. that the Priests should aske counsell for them after the judgement of Vrim before the Lord, and at his word they should goe out, and come in, &c. But what tell I you of this extraordinarie course of ta∣king resolution? We in these times can haue no re∣course vnto a vocall Oracle, yet notwithstanding we must looke that all our actions be lawfull, and warranted by that written Oracle which is among vs; Why else hath God left vs his word? Why are we called To the Law and to the Testimonie, Esa. 8.20. Whatsoeuer we commit to the determination of that word, we commit to God himselfe. Obiect. But the Scripture (some will say) doth not menti∣on thousands of particular actions, about which men are imploied. Answer. True, yet it giues such rules and directions, as may be applied to euery action that we can possibly fall vpon, and are able to satisfie him that rightly applieth them. If ther∣fore we intend any holy worke or seruice, let vs commit it to God, and examine we our selues whe∣ther he hath licenced vs to meddle thus, or thus in his holy things, whether he hath called vs, and sent vs, and set vs about them. If we go about any other ciuill actions, put each of them likewise to the question, Is it lawfull? haue I any ground for it? and be resolued from God before we aduenture on it. Wherefore we are to take Dauids course in submmitting our selues to God, and waiting on
him continually to know the way wherein we should walke, Psal. 143.8. So that this is the summe; we are not to be our owne caruers, but leaue it to God to chalke out our way, and appoint our worke; otherwise we cannot worke in faith; and whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne, Rom. 14.23. Grounds why we should thus depend on God for his licence, and approbation are many: But, be∣sides his command, and his childrens practise (of which we haue heard) take only these two: First, his Will is the rule, and patterne of holinesse, and justice, and therefore are our actions holy and just, and good, because agreeable to his will: From which if we swarue, and doe that which neuer came into his minde, though it may seeme glori∣ous, it is abhominable.  Secondly, we owe vnto God that respect, that obedience, he being our So∣ueraigne Lord, and Gouernour, and Commander, as to doe nothing (as neare as we can) but what he giues leaue to doe, and which we know is ac∣ceptable to him, &c. We proceed on to the second act of dependency, viz. A resting on God for the disposing, and ordering of our actions, the warrantablenesse whereof (let be supposed) we are perswaded of, and are now en∣tred vpon them: And heere is seene a strong worke of faith, and confidence on God, in attri∣buting so much vnto him as to put ouer all our bu∣sinesses into his hands (as it were) and in a manner out of our own. For we must trust to him for the prouision of meanes, for the disposition of them; yea though all meanes seeme to faile, yea further,
though all seeme to make against our proceedings, still rest vpon him. Fit for our strengthning in this  are those prescripts of Christ, one in Matt. 6.25. Take no thought for your life, what yee shall eate, or what yee shall drinke, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on: For (as it followeth in that place) your heauenly father will feed and cloath you. &c. The o∣ther in Mat. 10.19. where Christ foretelling his Dis∣ciples of their ensuing troubles, he biddeth them, when they are deliuered vp to Councels, and Gouer∣nours, not to take thought how, or what they should speake; for it shall be giuen you (saith he) in that houre what  all speake. As if he had said, when we are called to confesse my name, do not lay the taske vpon your naturall parts, as your wit, your learning, your eloquence, and fluency of speech, thinking they must saue your credit, and be the meanes to doe that worke as it should be done; no, rather cast your selues vpon me, and expect fit mat∣ter and words, of my prouision, and suggestion. But heere (before we goe on further) a scruple must be resolued, and taken away, both for the cleaing of these places, and of my Text; for some may be ready to gather from thence, this conclu∣sion: If I must ule my worke on God, and take no thought for any thing, then need not I stirre, but may sit still, and let God doe all. We are therefore to know that this doctrine is farre from ministring my plea to any supine lazinesse, or carelesse idle∣nes; it only sheweth vs the way how our actions may become both lawfull, and succesfull: it gi∣ueth no exemption from imploying our own in∣dustrie,
and endeuour. For the better cleering of the point I lay downe two propositions; 1. That we are so to commit our workes to God, as that yet they may remaine our workes. 2. We are so to doe our workes, as not to busie our selues with Gods worke. First, I say, we are so to roule our workes vpon God, as yet to vndergoe somewhat our selues. Otherwise, how could the Text say [thy worke] if we had no finger in it? How other where could it be called [our way] if we neuer stirred a foot in it? Againe, for the last alleadged places; Can any dreame that Christ forbids all premedita∣tion, and conuenient preparation before hand, when a man is (perhaps) to speake in publique, and there where are both curious, and captious hea∣rers? Would not such boldnesse be presumption? Or can any imagine that hee forbids all proui∣dence, and prouision of necessaries, when in other places we are commanded to labour, that we may eat, and to be painfull in our callings? Would not such idlenesse be Sathans illusion? Yes surely; for no precept rightly vnderstood, contradicts ano∣ther. God that workes for vs, will yet haue vs worke with him. We must be like Pilots at Sea, who though their eyes are lifted vpward, obser∣uing the starres, yet hold their hand on the Helme to direct the Sterne: And we must imitate Nehemi∣ah and his people, who as they made their prayer to their God, so they set a watch day and night to de∣fend themselues, and their worke, Nehe. 4 9. The second proposition will make the point plainer, viz. That God would haue vs so to doe
our owne worke, as not to busie our selues with his worke: What now is our worke? To be industrious and diligent in vsing the meanes which God offe∣reth vs, and employ those talents which he hath giuen vs, after the best sort we can. What is Gods worke then? To dispose of all things according to his owne counsell, and to giue the successe of the action according to his will: So that, if we ei∣ther vex, & disquiet our selues with needlesse feares, or torment our selues with solicitude and excessiue cares about the accomplishment of our businesse, we incroach vpon Gods worke, and that only is there forbidden. This now being cleered, it is apparent that our diligence, & our repose on Gods prouidence may stand together; of which repose we now speake, and it is to be practised in two respects: 1. In re∣gard of our selues; 2. of other meanes. First, for our selues, we must yeeld as instruments to bee fit∣ted, and prepared for the worke, and to be direct∣ed, and guided in it, by him. Our eyes must be to∣wards him that he may instruct, and guide vs with his eye, Psa. 32.8. And we finde that the eye of God was vpon the Elders of the Iewes in their worke of building, so that their enemies could not make them to cease, Ezra 5.5. If our businesse bee in speech▪ we are to beleeue that God who made our mouthes, will be with our mouthes, and teach vs what to say, as he did Moses, Exod. 4.11, 12. If it be in action otherwise, consider that God giueth abilities, and a spirit fit for the worke, as he did Gideon, Iudg. 6.16. Againe, for other meanes
we must rest on him to bee borne vpon the wings of his prouidence, and to haue such meanes mini∣stred as may most aduance our designes and de∣sires. Dauid, when it was told him that Ahithophel was among the conspirators with Absalom, Lord (said he) I pray thee turne the counsell of Ahi∣thophel into foolishnesse, 2. Sam. 15.31. When he prayed thus, going vp the hill, he knew no meanes how God would effect it, only he referred it to him who could either infatuate Ahithophel, or confound his counsell, as pleased him; but we finde how that God presently as soone as he was gotten to the top of the hill, presented vnto him a meane whereby it was possible Ahithophels counsell might be reje∣cted, viz. The sending of Hushai vnto Absalom to mate Ahithophel with his wisdome, & that proued effectuall. Gideon, when God had called him to fight against the Midianites, and had caused him to send home the greater part of his Army, and after∣wards of the remnant, chose only 300. men, knew not (questionlesse) how God would worke with those men, or after what manner they should as∣sault the enemie, yet beleeued he that God would some way employ them: and we finde that God taught him, at length, how they should be armed, how appointed, not with weapons, but with Trumpets, and fire-brands, and pitchers, Iudg. 7.16. Very pertinent to this point, is that worthy example of Abrahams seruant going to get a wife for his young master Isaak, Gen. 24.13, 14. He not only trusted God with the successe of his journey, but commited to his disposing the meanes
also, as the comming forth of the damosel, her speech to him, &c. Many instances might be giuen to shew the de∣pendance of Gods children on him to carry them through their employments; and there are good grounds why they should doe so. Gods wisdome is so exact, so infinite, that hee knoweth what meanes will be fit to be vsed now, and what not, both for his glory, and the establi∣shing of the thing in hand: He knowes what may hinder, & can either preuent, or frustrate it. He both knowe how to open a doore for Paul to do good in his ministerie; and for Peter to escape imminent danger. In a word, he knoweth how to knit secon∣dary causes, one vnto another, and to make them conspire together in an admirable harmony, which we our selues cannot doe. Therefore, rely on him, and in faith make vse of that speech of the A∣postle, Rom. 8.28▪ which though he speaketh to another purpose, yet may bee applied to ours in hand, viz. God will make all things worke toge∣ther for the best. Gods prouidence is in euery particular thing that falls out; he is not such a God as some of the hea∣then make their Iupiter; of whom they say, Non va∣cat exiguis &c. Iupiter is not at leasure to attend petty matters: But the truth is, he hath a stroake in minimis, euen the least matters. Not a Sparrow falls to the ground but by his will. He feeds the fowles of the arre, and cloathes the flowers of the field. How can we then thinke but that he disposeth of euery thing that concernes vs, or our affaires? Mans go∣ings
are of the Lord (saith Solomon) Prou. 20.24. how then can he vnerstand his owne way? And, A mans heart deuiseth his way, but the Lord directeth his steps, vers. 9. of this chapter. Yea God numbreth our steps, Iob. 14.16. Great reason then haue we, Beloued, to commit our workes to his managing, and ordering, &c. And now we are come to the third, and last act of Dependency, viz. A resting, and waiting on God for the successe of our businesses, and endeuours. Which is so necessary, that the promises annexed to these precepts seeme more especially to aime at it. Commit (saith my Text) thy workes vnto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall bee established: what doth this sound else, but, Commit the establishment of thy workes to God? So is that, Psalme 37.5. to be resolued: this wee are taught to doe, when wee are in any holy worke, or seruice, by Paul, and Bar∣nabas, Acts 14.23. They commended the Elders vnto the Lord, &c. that is, the Ministery and successe of the Ministery of the Elders, chiefly. Likewise by the Prophet Isaiahs owne example (Isay 49.4.) who though he feared his labour was in vaine, yet herein findes comfort, that his worke was with his God, that is, the successe of it, &c. When wee are vpon other affaires, this duty is also commended vnto vs. Ioab when hee went out against the Am∣monites and Syrians, and had marshalled his Ar∣my, and set his troupes in the best order he could, for greatest aduantage; and omitted no part of a wise and discreet Generall; what saies hee to Abi∣shai his brother? Be of good courage, and let vs play
the men, and the Lord doe that which seemeth him good, 2 Sam. 10.12. He thought his part was on∣ly to play the man: it was Gods part to incline the day, and giue the victory to this or that side, and to him he left it. Nehemiah when he had resolued to speake to the king his Master, in behalfe of his peo∣ple, troubleth not himselfe what answer he should haue, but leaues that to God; Prosper I pray thee (said he, cap. 1.11.) thy seruant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. So Hester, &c. Hester 4.16. But what doe I heaping vp knowne examples? Call to minde with mee but one more, namely, that of Abraham; God had called him to doe a worke, a seeming vnnaturall worke, of slaying and sacri∣ficing his only sonne, (Gen. 22.) What doth he? He goes about it presently, without questioning the nature of the fact or Gods promise, and had done it if God had not stayed him. O wonderfull strength of faith! O matchlesse confidence! We may well thinke that this father of the faithfull, as he told his deare Isaak (verse 8.) that God would prouide a Lambe, so was perswaded that God would prouide in other respects that the successe and conse∣quent of this act should bee such, as might stand both with Gods mercy, and faithfulnesse, and also the encouragement of his owne Faith in assurance of posterity. But to leaue examples, consider with me what strong grounds we haue whereon to build this dependance for successe on God. Gods absolute Power requireth thus much at our hands; He is both Omnipotent, able to doe all
things; and also Soli-potent, only able to doe what him pleaseth in heauen and in earth. Who hath not found that true which the Preacher found true, Eccles. 9.11. The race is not alwaies to the swift, nor the battell to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, &c. And what else are we to conclude thence, but that there is another supreme Ruler, and Gouer∣nour ouer man who giues the issue, not according to the seeming abilities of the persons, or likeli∣hood of meanes vsed, but according to the good pleasure of his owne will. The three children there∣fore, though it was a sore burden of care, and feare, and doubting, that lay on their necks when they were either to be cast into the fiery furnace, or to worship an Idoll (call it what you will, a worke or a suffering) committed the euent to God; and vpon what ground? The power of God; Our God (said they) is able to deliuer vs, &c. Dan. 3.16. So did Asa, 2 Chron. 14.11. Lord it is nothing with thee to helpe whether with many, or with them that haue no power; helpe vs, O Lord our God, for wee rest on thee, &c. The Decree of God is a maine prop and pillar of this confidence. He hath fore-determined, and ap∣pointed whatsoeuer commeth to passe; All our times are in his hand, and all the actions and moti∣ons in those times. Whatsoeuer we doe therefore, let vs wait in silence, and patience, for that euent which God hath decreed. Many deuices are in a mans heart (saith Solomon) neuerthelesse the counsell of the Lord that shall stand, Prou. 19.21. Hence that faithfull speech, Isay 26.12. Lord thou wilt ordaine peace for vs, &c.
Now, because flesh and bloud findes this an hard taske, to depend thus on God, though there be ve∣ry many thinke it an easie lesson, and will say that they hope in God, and now they haue done what they can, will not trouble themselues further, there∣fore let vs examine how the case stands with vs, by a signe or two, taken from the nature of this act. Know then, that confidence on God for the euent, casts out both carnall feare, and distracting care. These two, Feare and Care, I may not vnfitly compare vnto those two brethren Rechab and Baa∣nah (of whom we reade, 2 Sam. 4.5, 6.) For as they slew Ishbosheth while he lay on his bed in his house; so these will take away the life of our Faith, if once they get into the house of our hearts, while wee thinke it resteth it selfe securely on God. So that, first, the faithfull man feares not; (I will trust and not be afraid, Isay 12.2.) though he finde many wants in himselfe, no succours from others, yea though there arise impossibilities in his conceit, yet hee is like Abraham, Rom. 4.18, 19, 20. Hee beleeueth in hope, aboue hope, not staggering at the promises of God, &c. And thus he giues glory to God, euen the glory of his power and omnipotency, as is there testified of Abraham. Againe, the faithfull man is not carefull, that is, distracted with immoderate, and excessiue care, as if his caring, and musing could any thing alter the case; No, he knowes that what God hath determi∣ned shall be effected, though he cast about neuer so many waies to fulfill his owne desires, and there∣fore he answereth either his owne soule or others,
as the three children did the king, Dan. 3. We are not carefull to answer thee, that is, we are not soli∣citous to finde out shifts, or wayes about to escape, that which is our dutie we will doe: let God alone for the conclusion. Sure it is, that Rouling our bur∣den vpon God, and loading our selues still with a burden of cares and feares, cannot well meet to∣gether. Secondly, faith, as it casts out feare, and care, so is it accompanied with cheerefulnesse, and cau∣seth a man to encourage himselfe in God. So wee finde Dauid affected, 1. Sam. 30.6. While he was in danger of being stoned by his owne people, and had all the disheartnings that (almost) could be, yet euen then he encouraged himselfe (saith the text) in the Lord his God. And therefore in Psal. 37.4, 5. Delighting our selues in the Lord, and commit∣ting our way vnto him, are joyned together as com∣panions, hauing the same promise in effect made to both. There remaineth only the last thing required to this Commiting &c. viz. Prayer. For, as we must deny our selues, and depend on God for a warrant when we are in consultation, for assistance, and meanes when we come to resolution, and for successe when the businesse is to bee ripened, and brought to perfection: So we must make a solemne recommendation of our worke to God, in Prayer, which I called the formall act (that is, the set man∣ner) of Commission, because whereas by faith and de∣pendance we doe, indeed, really, and truly roule our burden vpon God, by this prayer that faith (as ma∣ny
other graces besides) is acted forth, and cleerely manifested. I explaine my meaning by an ordinary course in Law (as I take it) viz. When a man puts ouer his estate to another, or estates another in any thing, there must be, besides the writings drawne, a formall deliuery of them to the party: To these writings, wherein is contained the substance of the conueiance, I liken Faith: to the deliuery of these writings, in the manner of conueiance, I liken Prayer. Now for prayer, that it is included in this duty, is without question. Some would haue it on∣ly, or at least principally, meant in the text, and therefore translate it (in stead of Roule thy workes) Reueale thy workes vnto the Lord. But that they are mistaken, both the proper signification of the Hebrew word sheweth, and the nature of the thing. For, will my bare telling another that I am bur∣thened, ease me any whit, or keepe my burden from falling? No, vnlesse I lay it vpon him, and he helpe to support it: Will my faire words to another, how I will entrust him with such an estate of mine, either better mine estate, or keep it from decaying? No, vnlesse by a due legall proceeding I resigne it ouer vnto him, and so giue proofe that I trust him. No more will a bare acquainting God with mine intentions, or actions, or griefes, further my de∣signes, or ratifie my desires, vnlesse I repose my confidence in him. Yet must we take in Prayer within the compasse of this Rouling, though not shut out the other for
its sake: But what shall I, or need I now speake of it? If we looke backe to the examples of those a∣fore mentioned, we shall finde diuers of them dis∣couering their faith in the prayer of Faith. It was in prayer that Iehoshaphat confessed his weaknesse and committed his worke of warfare vnto God: It was in prayer that Dauid asked God what hee should doe, and in what way he should walke: It was in prayer also that hee be trusted God with the meanes to be foole Ahithophel; as did Abrahams ser∣uant to find out a wife for his yong master. Lastly, it was in prayer that Nehemiah commended his speed∣ing with the king his Master vnto the Lord. What need I adde any instances to these? I wil only com∣mend to your generall imitation that act of He∣zekiah, Isa. 37.14. He went to God, and spread the letter of Sennacherib before the Lord: So let vs in all our occasions, whether ordinarie, or extra∣ordinarie, when wee are to doe any worke, when we would be eased of any burden, goe vnto God, lay open our case, offer vp our petitions, and in faithfull prayer, poure out our soules before him. O what maruellous encouragements and forcible motiues haue we so to doe! All the grounds for each of the former points serue joyntly to beare vp this too. It is first his good will and pleasure that we should pray in this case: and then his wisdome should inuite vs to haue recourse vnto him: and thirdly, his power should be a strong argument to moue vs to runne vnto him, Prou. 18.10. But I cannot insist on these, but must hasten towards an end.
Yet I will adde one more to the former, which may aboue all other motiues encourage vs to pray, viz. The consideration of Gods Loue and mercy to vs, and readinesse to put forth himselfe for vs. This is that argument which is vsed in my Text and like places by way of promise: Cast all your care vpon God (saith the Apostle Peter) why? For he careth for you, 1. Pet. 5.7 Yea, God tende∣reth vs as a father doth his children. Psal. 103.13. And will a father let his childe sinke vnder a bur∣den when he entreats his helpe? No, hee will either beare it for him, or sustaine him vnder it. If earth∣ly parents doe for their children, shall not our hea∣uenly father doe for vs? Much more surely, as Christ concludeth, Matt. 7. And therefore will Dauid call vpon God, because hee is the God that performeth all things for him, Psal. 57.2. I con∣clude then with the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4.6. Be carefull for nothing; but in euery thing by pray∣er, and supplication with thanksgiuing, let your requests be made knowne to God. The Doctrinall part of this counsell being ex∣plained; see we in briefe what may be thence col∣lected. First, here is a word of Exhortation, that wee would all take this course, and follow this counsell. But his may be spared (in respect of our priuate workes) because the doctrine it selfe was exhor∣tatorie, and many exhortations were intermixed among the explanations of it. Yet let vs all be per∣swaded to cast an eie vpon the Churches of God, I meane especially the distressed parts of it, and com∣mend
their workes and designes for their owne safety, together with the workes of others in their behalfe, vnto the Lord. We may in charity, suppose that they haue committed the choice of their enterprises vnto him, and haue a warrant for them: Let vs now commit the meanes and the successe vnto God. Howsoeuer matters goe hard in many places, meanes faile, the case seeme almost desperate, God giues successes to the enemie, suf∣fers his children to be cruelly and iniuriously hand∣led, scattered, slaughtered; (So that wee may take vp for them that complaint of those, Psalme 44.10, 11. Thou makest vs turne backe from the ene∣mie, &c.) yet let vs so carry our selues that we may say with them there, Verse 17 all this is come vpon vs, yet haue not we forgotten thee, &c. Againe, heere is a word of rebuke to as many as will not be aduised by the wise man: And they are of diuers sorts. 1. They that make their owne sufficiencies the fundamentall base, and prop of their actions. As Papists, who make the strength of nature able to worke diuers good actions: And generally, all proud persons, who pride themselues in their owne might and power, as if they could doe what they list, and God not able to hinder them. The cariage of many, though haply not their speeches, bewray such arrogant thoughts. 2. They who will not endure to commit the choice of their actions to God, nor stay for a war∣rant, but runne on vpon their owne heads: such as they, Deut. 1. who would needs fight when God
forbade them, so farre were they from demanding leaue of him: Or as they, Ierem. 42.20. who would seeme to commit their iourney to God, but in hypocrisie, hauing resolued what to doe before hand, let Gods command be what it will. They that dare not depend vpon God for meanes. Such are they that faint in themselues, and make themselues more vnfit for the worke than God hath made them, by their diffidence of euer being enabled for it. Herein was Moses faulty, Exod. 4.10. Secondly, they that distrust God if such and such meanes doe not take, and at such a time. Such were the Israelites who are said to limit the holy one of Israel, Psal. 78.41. Thirdly, they that rely vp∣on their owne procurement of meanes, as they that trusted on the strength of Aegypt, Isa. 31.1, 2. A∣gainst whom both a woe is denounced, and Gods Wisdome opposed: yet (saith the Prophet) he is wise; i. though you so leane to your owne wis∣dome in contriuing meanes, and to Aegypt in af∣fording them, God will outreach you. Of this sort we finde many who will thinke to make all so sure, and order euery thing so wisely, that Gods proui∣dence shall be (in seeming) cleane shut out, as if he could not make a change, &c. Fourthly, they are most to blame who vse indirect meanes, and so by consequence commit their workes to the Deuill. Saul did so palpably, in consulting with the Witch at Endor, 1 Sam. 28.8. Others doe it couert∣ly, &c. They that trust not God with the euent and successe of their businesse; but peremptorily conclude
what their feare suggesteth. So Moses, Exod. 4 1. Behold (said he) they will not beleeue mee &c. And Dauid, 1 Sam. 27.1. I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, &c. But wee must know that howsoeuer God allowes vs to be Historians, or recorders of those workes which he hath done for vs: yet he will not haue vs be Prognosticators of future euents, so as to determine what he will doe, especially when wee conclude against our selues, and the glory of his mercie. Thus much for the Counsell, or precept in the Text. And thy thoughts shall be established. THese words appeare plainely to be a Promise subioyned to that counsell which the Wise man gaue in the former part of the Verse; and containe that end which is aimed at by all agents, and easily obtained by taking that course, and fol∣lowing that way which was premised. Heere, for our orderly proceeding, wee are first to seuer the words in explication, and then ioyne them againe in a generall obseruation, which when wee haue branched forth into particulars, and fenced from obiections, we will shut vp with application. Two words are to bee opened [Thoughts] and [Established.] Thoughts in the soule of man are properly the inward agitations, or workings there∣of, beating as it were, vpon an obiect fomerly ap∣prehended; and we shall finde the greatest vse of them in matters either of weight or difficultie, and
the more wee are possessed, or pressed with any thing, the more they are multiplied. O what a world of them, in such cases, throng in one vpon the necke of another to the disquieting of our spi∣rits▪ The best men of the best tempers are subiect vnto them; euen Dauid himselfe is heard to com∣plaine of the multitude of his thoughts within him, Psal. 94.19. And indeed, this swarming of thoughts is a maruellous grieuance vnto a man, for they hinder and interrupt the cleare discourse of reason, and raise as it were, such a mist in a mans minde, that hee is not able to discerne one truth from another. This noted by the way, I passe on to other acceptions of thoughts: For in Scripture they are often put for the effect of thoughts, that is, for counsels, and resolutions taken after the work∣ing of the thoughts; and so Ierem. 11.19. They haue thought a thought, or deuised a deuice against me. &c. The word is the same which is vsed heere. Which acception bordereth very neere vpon ano∣ther, viz. when thoughts are put for the obiect of thoughts, or the matter it selfe deuised and purpo∣sed, whether outward, or other; so Exod. 35.35. Bezaleel and Aholab are said to be filled with the wisdome of those that deuise cunning worke, or (according to the Hebrew) that thinke thoughts; the word is the same likewise with this in the Text. Now in both these latter acceptions, I thinke the word is to be taken here, and so the meaning of this promise is, Thy counsels, deuices, or worke thought on shall be established. Before we passe further, it will be neither imper∣tinent,
nor vnprofitable, to cleare a scruple which may arise from the change of the word [Workes] vsed in the forepart of the text, into this word [Thoughts] in the latter part of it. One would thinke the promise would haue better answered the precept if he had said, Commit thy workes vnto the Lord, and they (i. thy workes) shall bee esta∣blished. May we not gather hence, that we our selues are sufficient for our thoughts, and it will be needfull onely, to refer our workes to God? Especially see∣ing it is said, Verse the ninth of this chapter; A mans heart deuiseth his way, but the Lord directeth his steps: Which seemeth to intimate that we haue power of our selues to will, though not to worke. It is true, a Papist and an Arminian will be rea∣dy to catch at such shadowes; but shadowes are no good couerlets for errors. I will not drench my selfe into the bottome of Free-will, no nor wade into it, seeing I may keepe my selfe on the banke and resolue this doubt. This then I take to be the truth in a word: Wee cannot thinke or deuise any thing meerely of our selues; for euen in naturall operations of the minde and heart about naturall and ciuill things, there is a generall concourse of Gods prouidence. In God wee liue, and moue Acts 17.28., not our feet onely, but our hearts also; He it is by whose leaue and licence we will euery thing, and who putteth this or that into our hearts, when we will or affect any good thing. Thoughts are like∣ned to conceptions: Words and workes to births; and as births vsually are not, so conceptions can∣not
be without others helpe. To this purpose the first verse of this chapter runneth thus in the last translation; The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. We questi∣on not now whether the will hath freedome in na∣turall, and ciuill actions, nor deny it, but this is certaine, that the actuall exercise of this freedome is gouerned by God, who can make vs either sus∣ped our act of willing, or diuert our thoughts from one thing to another, or incline vs to thinke vpon this or that, now or then, at his pleasure. For instance; we finde God promising the Israelites that whilst they went vp thrice in the yeare to ap∣peare before him, no man should so much as desire their land, Exod 34.24. What? was it not in the power of the heathen borderers to haue inuaded that dispeopled country at such a time? Yes in some sense it was, and had not God hindered, it is likely they would soone haue beene tampering with Gods inheritance: But we see that though they supposed they had stated themselues, (per∣haps out of some politique respects) yet it was God indeed that stayed them. Againe, we finde Isa. 7.18. that God would hisse for a flie from Aegypt, and a Bee from Assyria: and Iudges 4.7. that he would draw out Sisera to fight, &c. But did the Aegyptians heare any such hissing? Did Sisera feele any such drawing? No surely, they thought they had by their owne meere aduice put them∣selues into those iourneys. So that we see when man thinkes hee resolues of himselfe, then God hath his stroke in that resolution. Now to answer
this question; why it is said (notwithstanding all this) that man deuiseth his way? I answer; 1. It is so said to shew that though God in his counsell hath determined, and moderated our counsels, yet our naturall liberty in consulting is not taken away. 2. The first thoughts, and purposes of the heart may be attributed to man, rather than other acts comparatiuely; for thoughts and meditations, being the first productions, and the most simple acts of the faculties in man, his worke is most sensible therein, and lesse of Gods worke is discerned. Whereas the more our operations are compoun∣ded, the more are the acts and ioynt workings of diuine prouidence manifold, and doubled. I ex∣presse my selfe more clearely thus: In the motions of the will or minde, there God workes only vpon the will or minde, and that inwardly, and very closely: but when we come to execute our designes, there God must not only concurre with the soule, but with the parts of the body likewise, as with the tongue in speaking, with the hand in working, with the feet in walking, and that more palpably: And hence it is that in speciall manner the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, and our steps directed by him. And now I hope, we may proceed without stumbling blocke vnto the last word. Established] is in the vulgar Latine read [dire∣cted.] But the word in the Originall (as I formerly noted) is more full, signifying both to be prepared, or fitted, and to be confirmed or accomplished; and therefore a translation into another language,
French Sont gencee rendreth it excellently by a word importing to be accommodated, dressed, fitly disposed, rightly matched, or iustly applied, &c. So that more is ai∣med at than the bare effecting what we would haue done, and our guidance what to doe, and how to doe it, must needs also be vnderstood. Briefly, this establishment is opposed to that breaking off of thoughts, and purposes, Iob 17.11. as it were a rooting of them vp, and plucking them asunder, when as, namely, there is distraction, and perplexi∣tie, and infelicity of successe. To leaue the words then, wee come to the point, which you see, at first, breathes out comfort, and encouragement, that He who commits his workes vnto the Lord, shall haue his thoughts established. For generall proofe wee are to looke againe vnto like places, Psal. 37.5. Commit thy way vnto the Lord, and he shall bring it to passe; and Psal. 55.22. Cast thy burden vpon the Lord, and hee shall sustaine thee. Prou. 3.6. In all thy wayes acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. See how God is all in all to them that commit themselues vnto him. Sup∣pose we can goe lightly away with a charge of bu∣sinesse, yet we may haue rubs, and fall in our pas∣sage; why then, if we trust him, hee will addresse our way, and bring vs prosperously to our journies end. Yea, suppose that we are heauily burdened in the way, why then hee will graciously ease vs, if wee lay it vpon him. But now left any should thinke we are aduised to any fruitlesse, or hopelesse performance, and that we may perceiue the extent of this promise, we will branch it forth into parti∣culars,
and lay them side by side (as it were) vnto those duties formerly commended vnto vs. Ob∣serue therfore, that as we are bound to commit our resolutions, and our proceedings, and the successe of all to God; so heere are incouraging promises answering to each of these. First, he that consults with God for his warrant, and dares not attempt any thing before hee hath good ground for it, shall be instructed in the best course and the safest he can take. If we aske for the old way, which is the good way, Ierem. 6.16. and if we aske where we ought, viz. at Gods Oracle, the Law, and Testimony, Isa. 8. then shall that be verified to vs which is promised, Isa. 30.21. Thine eares shall heare a voice behinde thee, saying, this is the way, walke ye in it, when ye turne to the right hand or to the left. If wee hearken vnto the com∣mands of God, and attend on him, then our peace shall bee as a Riuer, for God teacheth vs to profit, and leadeth vs by the way that wee should goe, Isa. 48.17, 18. Hee is the best counsellor (we heard be∣fore) and the wise man tells vs, that by counsell (Gods counsell then especially) euery purpose is esta∣blished, Prou. 20.18. Now that this is so, we find both his people lay∣ing hold on these promises, and him also fulfilling them to his people. Dauid beseecheth God to or∣der his steps in his word, being confident that hee should not be ashamed when hee had respect vnto Gods commandements, Psal. 119.6. By not being ashamed, hee meanes that he should not bee led into errour, nor be deluded, or frustrated of his
hope: for what causeth shame, but to be seene to haue foolishly, and idlely enterprised a businesse? Againe, Psal. 25.9, 10. he tels vs the Lord will teach the meeke his way, that is, those who hum∣bly yeeld themselues to his teaching, and are not presumptuously puffed-vp in selfe-conceit. And what way is it which he will teach? His wayes are mercie, and truth. As for experiences of the ful∣filling of this promise, first take his (namely, Dauids) at Keilah once, at Ziglag another time. 1 Sam. 13.12. & 10.8. So that no maruell hee was with God continually, and said it was good for him to draw neere vnto God, Psal. 73.28. The like experience we reade Vzzi∣ah the king had, who so long as he sought the Lord (viz. by way of inquiry what to doe) be prospe∣red, 2. Chron. 26.5. To passe on to the second (because I must bee short in the confirmation of the truth of these promises) it is this: He that depends on God in the vse of meanes, shall haue them fitted, and orde∣red for the best. Take but one, or two experiences, wherein this hath beene made good. Abraham, committed his seruants journey to God, and his seruant also, the disposition, and prospering of the meanes, Gen. 24. Now see there how admirably those meanes were applied, which he referred to God. Iacob in faith made vowes to God, on con∣dition that he would be with him in his way, Gen. 28. and see how God prouided the meanes of his kinde entertainment by his Vncle, as that he should come to the Well, and Rachel about the same time, that he should so opportunely doe her a curtesie,
&c. Gen. 29. See this againe in the same Iacob, Ge. 33.10, 11. where God put into his head that most po∣liticke course of sending presents to his brother. Who seeth not there an euident fulfilling of this gracious promise? Nay (to appeale to our selues) who is there of vs that walkes with God, and ac∣knowledgeth him in his wayes, who hath not found it fulfilled vpon himselfe? Many wayes doth God manifest his assistance in our working, as, 1. By giuing vs wisdome to goe the right way to worke. 2. By blessing the instruments which we imploy. 3. By making times and seasons and all occurrences to suit with our desires. Wee are certainly either blinde, or very forgetfull, if we cannot say thus much out of experience. Yea, many times is not that true of vs, which is but fai∣ned of Timotheus the Athenian Captaine? Are not wee little better than asleepe (as is said hee was) when all things are brought into our net which we fish for? Doe not our businesses thriue well vnder our hands, we cannot tell how, but only that pro∣uidence will haue it to be so? How then should this hearten vs, to wait on God, and trust in him? seeing that the steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psal. 37.28. The third branch of the promise hangs vpon the former, namely, that he that referreth the suc∣cesse of his actions to God, shall haue a good issue of them. They shall not only be ordered but per∣fected. The Scripture is plentifull in giuing assu∣rances of this promise. Many examples formerly alleaged might be here repeated. Abrahams seruant
trusted God would establish his thought, and God did so. Ioab committed the successe of the battell to God, 2. Sam. 19.12. and obtained the victorie. Hester depended vpon God, for her finding of fa∣uour with king Ahashuerosh, and found it.  What should I say more? Dauid and others in cases of difficulty & danger, haue found the proofe hereof: I waited patiently for the Lord, and he set my feet vp∣on a Rocke, and stablished my goings, Psal. 40.1, 2. A∣gaine, when the Psalmist had asked this question; Who will rise vp for me against the euill doers? (a que∣stion subordinate to this, Vnto whom shall I commit my worke?) hee answereth, Vnlesse the Lord had beene mine helpe, my soule had almost dwelt in silence; but when I said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy O Lord held me vp, Psal. 94.16, 17, 18. And yet somewhat more plainly: Because thou hast made the Lord, euen the most High, thine habitation, therefore no euill shall be∣fall thee, for he shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee to keepe thee in all thy waies, Psal. 91.9, 10, 11. How many such probates of this truth might we finde in this booke! I will insist no more vpon any of them, but will only propound the experience of Peter as a cleare confirmation of this promise, laid downe Luke 5.5, 6. Peter and others of his fellowes had beene toyling all night at their fishing worke, and had caught nothing: Christ bid him cast out his net for a draught; at Christ his word (though otherwise he had little hope) he did it; thus com∣mitting his worke to Christ for the successe of it, (yea another time euen for the ordering of the meanes, as casting on the right side of the ship,
Iohn 21.6.) and what wonderfull successe he had both times we may there reade. As it was with Pe∣ter in the worke of his fishing, so shall it be with Ministers in their spirituall fishing, and with all of vs, in our seuerall emploiments, if we doe as he did, let God haue the managing of our worke, and beleeue him. Faith well grounded may wax bold, for it cannot but be welcome to God. O then let vs delight our selues in the Lord so shall we be sure to haue our hearts desire, Psal. 37.4. The certainty of this promise, as it is made to faith, is apparant: It is a sure looking to Prayer made in faith. Iehoshaphat commended his worke to God in prayer, 2 Chron. 20. Nehemiah also his worke: and Ezra his, and the Iewes their way to∣ward Ierusalem, Ezra 8.22, 23. And all of them had their thoughts established, as a multitude of Gods Saints besides, whose well-speeding should be our spurre to their imitation. I neede not speake more largely of this, because it is but an expression of our dependance on God. Now, by this time I doubt not, we haue drawne in the sweetnesse of this promise: yet for further satisfaction, search we out the grounds why such a promise of establishment should be annexed to our faithfull dependance on God: and surely as the reasons why we should trust in, and pray to God, were taken from the Properties of God: so the reasons why faith and praier haue this power with God may bee taken from the nature of faith and Praier. First for Faith: That which carieth to God most
glory, that is the best meanes to bring backe to man the assured grant of a blessing: But it is faith where∣by we most of all glorifie God (Abraham, being strong in faith, gaue glorie to God, Rom. 4.20.) And the glory it giues him is manifold, viz. the glory of mercy, the glory of wisdome, the glory of omni∣potency, and the glory of truth. 1. It ascribes Mercy to him; otherwise durst we be so bold with him, as to roule our burdens vpon him, did he not pitty our weaknesse? 2. It attributeth wisdome to him; otherwise, would we put ouer difficult, and intricate affaires to him, did we not thinke he knew how to winde vs out of them? 3. It builds vpon his omnipotency; how else durst we trust our weightiest enterprises in his hand, did we not rely on his strength? 4. It celebrates his Truth, and sets to its seale that God is true in this promise of establishment. Now then Faith glorifying God so many waies, he who aboue all things tendereth his owne glory, cannot but make that good vnto vs wherein we thus honour him. Whereas on the other side God should lose much of his glory from vs and others, by giuing repulse to our confidence; for those attributes of his would soone bee questioned, yea much eclipsed. But shall it euer bee said that the mercifull Lord shakes him off that depends vpon him? shall it euer be said that the most wise Iehouah misleads a man that followes him? Shall the vn∣godly haue cause to say that our God, who called Aegypt, and all humane strengths, Ezek. 29.6, 7. broken reeds,
himselfe deceiueth him that leaned on him? Shall it be suspected that he who committeth a businesse to God, is as he that sendeth a message by that foo∣lish messenger (Prou. 26.6.) Who cutteth off the feet, and drinketh dammage? Or shall it be feared that he, who is called the fountaine of goodnesse, and a ready helpe at all assaies, should become, as waters Iob 6.15. that faile? Or he who is a man of warre, a rocke immoueable Psal. 18.2.31, 32., should bow vnder those burdens we roule vpon him? No; farre be it from him: As his name is, so shall be euer his praise. Hee will not lose a whit of his honour; And for that his ho∣nours sake we may claspe with his promise, and ap∣ply Dauids words, Psal. 56.9. vnto our Text, When I commit my workes to God my thoughts shall be establi∣shed; this I know, for God is with me. To the same effect we may reason for Prayer; For as Faith sped well because it brought glory to God: so shall the Praier of Faith speede well, that wee may glorifie God afterward in praise and thanksgiuing. I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glo∣rifie me, Psal. 50.15. So, I will finish thine affaires for thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. Shall men of abi∣lity take a faithfull care of orphanes, and other im∣potent creatures who cast themselues vpon them, and make suit for their tuition? and will God re∣iect our sutes? If it was Augustus his praise that none came at any time discontented out of his pre∣sence, shall it not be Iehouahs much more? Neuer was any Petition put backe where Christ is Master of requests to present it: neuer any cause cast out of that Court where he is Aduocate to plead it.
Before any application can bee made, the do∣ctrine must heere bee cleared of some exceptions taken against this indefinite propounding of it. For me thinkes I heare these demands: 1. May not that commission be made to God, and yet this establishment not follow vpon it? 2. May not this establishment be found where no such commission went before it? The first of these questioneth the generality of this point; the second, the peculiarity of it. To each of these a word. First, whether all that practise this duty are par∣takers of this promise. It seemes not. For did not the Israelites consult with God in that important affaire of theirs (Iudges 20.) and were they not twice discomfited; and almost disheartened? A∣gaine, doe not the people of God professe their boasting in God all day long, that is, their confidence in him (Psal. 44.8.) and yet complaine in the next verse that God had cast them off, and went not forth with their armies? Besides, how many faith∣full prayers haue beene made in other particular cases, and yet not this ordering, and accomplish∣ment ensued? I answer: The promise may be sure, and yet the time of fulfilling it vncertaine. God doth not li∣mit himselfe when to bring to passe our desires, nor must we limit him. And many times indeed, hee suffereth our lawfull actions, and those wherein we depend on him, to bee interrupted, and cros∣sed for a long time. But what then? Shall wee suspect his faithfulnesse? By no meanes. If wee doe so, it is a signe we doe not trust him with our
businesse as we should: for will not he that thinks any one able, and wise enough to doe the thing it selfe, leaue the time of doing it to him also? Doubtlesse if wee cannot effect what we would presently, it is either because in the ordinary dis∣pensation of Gods prouidence, it cannot be done so soone, or if it could, it would not be so good for vs. Now for the Beniamites, we see that at length their worke prospered, and why it did not sooner wee may well guesse. For (say our Diuines) it is probable, that they had not throughly denied themselues, but something was defectiue, in their humiliation; and therefore we finde that whereas the first time they but inquired, the second time, inquired and lamented, the third time they more solemnly fasted, and thereupon got the victory. Againe, it is not vnlikely that their enemies being so few, they were too confident in their strength: God therefore, to let them know that all prepara∣tions without him are but vaine, let them a while see their weaknesse. So that we may rather gather a lesson of continuall dependance vpon God from them, than a cauill to infringe a promise. And as for the other instance, we see that for all Gods hi∣ding himselfe a long time, yet they forgot him not, but stucke close to him, in their confident de∣pendance. Obiect. Yea, but sometimes mens counsels are vtterly disappointed, and this promise neuer made good. I answer, this promise neuer faileth if men faile not in any part, or circumstance of their for∣mer
duty. But here is vse of a distinction. Promises are either generall, or particular. Generall promises, made to all persons; of which number this is one: but now some of these doe not hold in all cases, for in some they are absolute, in others conditionall. This in some cases is but a conditionall promise, as namely when our workes, or affaires are such as touch not our spirituall estate in the maine hold of it, but only this or that ciuill employment; and all conditionall promises haue their fulfilling reserued to the pleasure of God. To the point then, whether it be vncertaine I shall prosper in this worke or no, I say this, sup∣pose I doe not prosper in it, yet the text remaineth good in these respects: 1. If wee commit our workes to God, wee must looke to the nature of them. If they be not such as are absolutely pro∣mised, we ought not absolutely to beleeue the accom∣plishment of them. Now to apply this by turning of it: Then only shall our thoughts bee established absolutely, when wee can absolutely commit our workes to God without doubting. 2. If we fully roule our workes vpon God, our thoughts shall be established, if not in the forenamed, yet, at least, in another sense, viz. our after thoughts and counsels; for if Gods working for vs be not according to our first thoughts, yet our second thoughts shall be con∣formed, and fitted to his working, that is, hee will so satisfie vs in that particular that our thoughts shall be setled and we contented. To the second doubt, whether none but these resigners shall haue their thoughts established, I
answer, yes, and that ordinarily. We finde it a scandall to the godly that the wicked do so prosper in their way, Ierem. 12.1. And they who are so farre from trusting God with their workes, that they aske what God can doe for them, yet haue their houses filled with good things, Iob 22.17, 18. But what of all this? The promise only belongeth to the faithfull, and none but they can presume, or with any reason looke to haue their thoughts esta∣blished. 2. The establishment of thoughts, is vouchsafed in mercy only to them: to others, in judgement. The wicked are thereby more puffed vp in conceit of their owne power, and prudence, and policie: but the godly haue their eyes opened to see God the better, and the rather to acknow∣ledge his prouidence. 3. They that worke with∣out God, haue not their counsels and thoughts fully established: for first they cannot be so establi∣shed when they are troubled, and distracted with cares, and feares; but so troubled they must needs be, when they want faith, which is it that setleth and composeth them. Secondly, how can their thoughts bee properly said to be confirmed, when the Scripture tels vs, their expectation is suddenly cut off, and themselues soone cut downe, yea gone in a moment? We find their estates called slippery,Psal. 73.18, 19 Iob 8.14. Psal. 37.38. their workes, Spiders webbs, soone blasted, soone ouerturned, soone vanished, yea their name, and their posteritie, and the inheritances which they leaue behinde for others, soone worne out, and scattered. Iudge we now whether their portion bee in this promise. Thus I hope, the doctrine is cleered.
application then. As we formerly found out wha  were, that did not commit their workes to , i here we may descry their folly, for they that  the dutie, cannot haue the comfort of this . Againe, committing our workes to God,  commended vnto vs as the best way, and surest course for the attaining to those ends which wee had in our thoughts, and therefore they must needs bee deemed vnwise, and foolish, who dreame of establishment by other meanes, or without vsing these meanes. Discouer we their folly in parti∣culars. First, how can they looke for establishment who deny not themselues, but are confident in their owne strength, and ability to carry their owne burden? God hath pronounced, that he resisteth the proud,  and certainly their actions can neuer prosper whom God resisteth. As it is one point of his omnipotency to be able to doe what he will without let or hinderance: so it is another, to bee able to hinder whatsoeuer he is not pleased with. Now if they be not proud (and so of the number of those whom hee will hinder) who hold themselues able to moue with∣out him, in whom they both liue, and moue, and who acknowledge no powerfull concurrence, or prouidence of him in their worke, who indeed, sustaines both them, and it, if, I say, these be not proud, I know not who are. Yet more particularly, how can they looke for establishment who enterprise any worke without Gods warrant, and approbation? Gods promises
are made to obedience, not to heady presumpti∣on. He that asketh not Gods leaue, nor hath his consent, hath none of his company. So hee told them that would needs goe vpon a peece of seruice without his command, Deut. 1.42. I am not among you, &c. And he who is without God, and left alone to himselfe, is likely to haue such successe as they had in that action. Againe, what a folly is it for a man to presume that his affaires can be well managed or disposed of when he runs vpon his owne head, and neuer hath any respect vnto God nor his guidance? It is not a sufficient ground that such an enterprise shall bee effected, to be assured that it is warranted or ap∣proued: He that giues vs leaue, vnlesse he set vs in a right course and direct vs, we cannot but faile and falter in the manner of doing it. And will not he (thinke we) let vs alone when we thinke our selues able enough to contriue the only course, and deuise the best way to compasse it? Surely, we may looke that he will either infatuate our counsels, and besot our minds, or else crosse those meanes which might otherwise, with his blessing, haue beene effectuall: Either wee shall goe the wrong way to worke, as Absalom, in reiecting Ahithophels, and embracing Hushai's counsell 2 Sam. 17.14.: or leane vpon poore tottering props, as the Philistims, committing their worke to Goliah who deceiued them, and could not make good his vndertakings 1 Sam. 1. .: Or if we vse good meanes (without dependance on Gods blessing) and at length obtaine our desires, yet wee are commonly like the children of Israel, going that iourney forty
yeeres, which perhaps might haue beene dispatch∣ed in forty daies. Lastly, who can expect establishment, that thinke themselues sufficient to make an end of their busi∣nesse, and depend not vpon God for the successe of it? Will God suffer himselfe to bee robbed of the praise of his wisdome and power? He will not, but will lay open the weaknesse of these men by scatte∣ring their deuices, and confounding their purposes, that they may learne, that with him onely are po∣wer, and strength, and wisdome, to establish mans thoughts, and that though they take counsell toge∣ther, it shall not stand but come to nought, Isa. 8.10. Now if they cannot prosper who wait not on God, what shall we thinke of them that are angry both with God and others, when their actions are but a little crossed? We read of Xerxes King of Per∣sia, who hearing that his bridge ouer Hellespont was broken downe with the waues of the Sea, caused three hundred stripes to be giuen to the Ocean in way of reuenge. It may bee all will wonder at this madnesse of his; and yet they are as mad who when their actions are crossed, fall out with the instru∣ments of their grieuance; For what doe they but behaue themselues frowardly toward God? and therefore may feare that he wil be froward to them, and euen set his face against them for euill. Let vs, in the second place, bee exhorted to be∣leeue this promise made to faithfull dependance on God, as before we were exhorted to that de∣pendance. Giue we to God the glory as of his power and prouidence, so of his faithfulnesse, and
set to our seale that God is true. He loues to bee trusted, and those that trust in him, knowing (as the Apostle saith) whom they haue trusted 2 Tim. 1 1. shall neuer be ashamed of their confidence. Whether therefore our affaires be publike or priuate, let vs commit them to God. Commit we our trades vnto him, our stu∣dies vnto him, the administration of euery office and function vnto him, especially businesses of greater either difficulty or danger vnto him. And because I cannot stand to instance in particular cases, let vs all as members together of one and the same body, commit the common affaires of the whole Church vnto God, and our ioynt desires touching them, perswading our selues that in so doing, the thoughts of our hearts shall be established. What though many designes and seruices for the Church, are not for the present successefull? Yet expect Gods worke. And the rather because it is his vsuall course in these cases, not to be seene till the last. Euen as the Roman Triaij (who were the strength of the Army) neuer fought till the vi∣ctory seemed to be hazarded: So the Trinity (in whom is the strength of the Church Militant) make our extremity their opportunity. Now then cum ad Triada deuentum fuerit: when it is time for God to worke; as, Psal. 119.126. no question the wheele shall turne and the enemies of the truth shall be vn∣dermost. Suppose the enemies get the better for a time, and many times foile the Lords hoast, yet they may say as Pyrrhus once did when he had conque∣red the Romans, Etiamsi deinceps &c. Though we▪
againe and againe ouercome (the Protestants) yet the finall ruine and downefall shall be our owne. In a word, Dauid hath no cause of fearing he shall fall one day by the hand of Saul: but Saul may be as∣sured hee shall fall before Dauid; and when the time of establishment commeth, then they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion which cannot be remoued, Psal. 125.1. Whensoeuer we finde this promise fulfilled, and that our actions haue thriued vpon our commit∣ting them to God, then forget not to be thankfull, and to acknowledge by whom our workes were wrought. And not onely so, but let our experience teach vs so much the more confidently to depend vpon him for after times. Obserue this in Gods people, Isay 26.12. Lord thou wilt ordaine peace for vs, for thou hast wrought all our workes for vs: Faith here drawes an argument of assurance for time to come from time past. FINIS.
