11545 99849053 14184
LINSI-WOOLSIE OR TWO CENTVRIES OF EPIGRAMMES. WRITTEN By WILLIAM GAMAGE Batche∣lour in the Artes. Patere, aut Abstine. LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his Shop in Bethelem without Bishops Gate, at the signe of the Sunne.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, AD my much honoured Ladie, KATHERINE▪ Ladie MANSELL, daughter to the Right Honourable Lord, L. Viscount de Lisle: Earths Glorie, and Heauens Happinesse. RARE PARAGON of vertne, affying, or rather presuming on your heroicall disposition, I haue aduentured to conduct to the open field of the World Two Centuries of Epigrammes, which, if they bee deign'd to march vnder the Banner of your Ho: protection, I doubt not, but that they may the safer, as they say, Passe the Mu∣ste. And the rather I build on your all-fa∣uourable patronage by reason of your Ladyships neere affinitie with that worthie, and Tresble Sir Phillip Sidney, whose golden Pen vouchsae fed to Apologize the renowned art of Poetry. If thi∣my Rurall, and vnacquainted muse Limm's no forth either in Matter, or Manner the viue ort
traitur of an Epigramme, your Ladyship may ea∣ coniecture, that it was rather Cherillus Pen, and not Apelles Pencill that shadowed it; but ho∣ping the acceptation, with your Ho: protection here∣of, if not for the Worke, yet for the names-sake, I euer rest Your worthy Ladyships most deuoted Votorie: WILLIAM GAMAGE.
Ad Ingeniosum, & modestum amicum, G. Gamage de Epig. ALpha Epigrammatewn per me sit noster Oënus, Hic primum, aut nemo est, dignus habere locum: Tuquotus es Gammagi? ex nominis indice, Gamma. Sed te Musa facit Beta Epigrammatewn. Ad eundem de eisdem. GRata diù fuerant quae linea-lanea, nostris, Gratatamen nostris tegmina, si qua diù. Talia tu texis (Gamage) Poemata, plus quàm Lanea sunt vsu Linea deliciis. Grata vt sint, dubitas, bruma at{que} aestate placebunt, His delectari femina, vir{que} queant, Hoc tantùm distant aestatem tegmina durant, Aetates durant haec tua texta, vale, Mo. Fortune in Art Mag. è Col. Ie. Hexasticon. In fideliss. amici G. Gamage Epigrammata. LAeta inuant releuando graues Epigrammata mentes: Sunt tua laeta satis, sunt tua casta satis. Ida nè metuas mordacis murmura Mo: Colladet Mous, vel meliora ferat.
documenta boni, ta futura Posteritatis erunt, scribere perge, . Ro Harris in Art Mag. Ad Cordatum amicum G. Ga∣mage de Epig. FAecunda est aetas, multos tulit ista Poetas, At tibi (Gamagi) non tulit ista parem. Aliud ad Lectorem. PErlege, quicun{que} es, decies repetita placebunt, Aut tibi, quicunque e, nulla placere queunt. Hen. Atho, in Art Mag. Ad amicum amantiss. G. G. in Epig. LAudibus excelsis tua sunt Epigrammata salsa, Digna, Legat Puer haec, haec legat ipse senex. Quamuis es inenis, tame experientia rerum Ingenique bnum, te facit esse senem. Sacre Sacra canis, resosque profana profanè, Vax quoquè cuique rei qulibet  sat. Apparet docta  lingua ,  coluisse Chros. Io. Vauhan, Art. Mag.
Idem ad Librum in Zoilum. SI te quis Zolus rabido vult rodere dente, Aetatem domini ponderet ipse tui. In Epig. cognati, & amici explorati Gu Gamage. SIcinè disparibus lusisti moribus orbem, Innumeris Numeris (trux Epigramma) tuis? Rustieus Vrbanus, quid vis? Bellosus, Amator, Magmatibus nitidis Aulicus? hoc & habet. Chaire suum cuique est, nec vot ludimus vno, His diuersa placent: quid culis? hoc & habes. In Zoylum. Tam benè compactos calamos vult dente repelli Zoylus edax nostrum? subfugat, hoc nec habet. Uult Numeris nostris includi moribus? ecce Rem teneat; numeret furcifer: hoc & habe. Gul Hughes, in Art. Bacc. Idem ad Librum. EIà agè per Genios faciles, Momos{que} per ignes: Per vari rerum faeces, per saxa, per vmbras.
Tetraichon. Ad suum amicum Gu. Ga. in sua Epig. LAdabunt omnes Epigrammata docta priorum, Hoc opus excultum vincit (amice) tuum. Haec mandes Scriptis; es Cedro digna locutus; Te presens aetas, posteriorque canent. Hop. Price Gener. Ad cognatum perchariss. G. G. in laudem Libelli. HIc liber est parvus, non parui: gratia paruis Est sua: sic libro gratia magna suo. Pergas; quid densis latitas, Philouse. sub vmbris, Aspiret coeptis aura secunda tuis. Io. Powel è Coll. Oriel. To his friend, and familiar W. Gamage of his Epigrams. OFt haue I fed on Epigrammes before, With which my appetites I ouerprest; Thy better wit hath kept me these in store, a sweet banquet to disgest the rest: 'd in with plates of Christall, scour'd so cleere, to each guest his picture may appeare,
Another to the same. If what Pythagoras hath wrote be true, Some antique Satyre liues in thee auew, Nature and Art are with themselues at strife, To whom thou hast giu'n greater praise or life; On both alike, for Nature first began, Then Art made perfect what from nature ran. W. Hughes. To my lo friend W Gamage in the praise of his Epigrams. THy ouerlooking of the pleasant fields, In sport abroad to spend some idle howres: Hath gath'red fruit not of vnfruitfull weeds; But set a Banke of sweet and fragrant flowers. Continue then both earl'e and late to rise To walke abroad, to vse this exercise. Another of the same. In my conceipt this thy conceipted Booke, Deserues the stamp of euerlasting praise: Feare no mans face that on his face doth looke, His forehead shines with complementall raies. Gamage thy name and of thy age the Game Thou dost deserue, tho not desire the same. Matth. Bennet.
The Author to the Praisers of his booke. IT feare me, that your kinde heroicall Layes Are too transcendent for my humble straine: And Load-stone-like drawe to themselues the praise; And so my Muse receiue a dull disdaine. No force, I hope your lines will sooth some one To read my Booke, and descant thereupon.
Linsi-Woolsie. THE FIRST CENTVRIE. Epig. 1. To his heroike, and splendent Patronesse. Katherine, Lady Mansell. THis stuffe of mine, I grant, is ouercourse, For your fine wearing Loadstarre of our Clime, Yet let it serue, I pray, tho few be worse As a course garment for this Winter time. Ere Sommer else, I do most highly feare, That Momus will my Loome in sunder teare. Epig. 2. On her Name. C CEll of vertue thou art rare, A Any with for to compare, T That doth dwell in Cambers Clime, H Hauing oble Sydneys Line▪ E Euer beautifie thy name, R Royall, worthy peereles dame: I In vertue still let be thy dwelling, N Neuer ill, in good excelling; E Eternizing so thy fame. M Might my praier be accepted, A Accept it, Lord, and graunt her Ishue: N Neuer none to be reiected
S Send her, children, cloathd in Tishue▪ E Erect her calling at thy pleasure, L Let her life be vertues Treasure: L Lead her soule where Angels are. Epig. 3. To the worthy founder of our famous Oxonian Librarie, Sir Thomas Bodley built in the forme of a T. THe forked Y, as learned Sages write, Containes in it deepe mysteries diuine: Thy target T if that I true endite▪ Doeth shelter in't more many a sacred Line Then all the letters of that * sage his name; Such is the Glory of thy Vaticane. a Pythagoras. Epig. 4. To the Reader of his Poëmes. SOme of these Poeme, some will Satyres call, What tho some be grim Satyres-like, and tall? Which Monsters be, pertaining to the Wood.) These do molest the Bad, but please the good. Epig. 5. On Zoylus, of his Booke. Oets doe stile thee oft a biting Mate; Which argues thee the eater of some Bookes:
Eate this withall, but leaue to Barke thereat, So that in fine this Morsell quite thee choakes. Epig. 6. A Courtizan, Etymologized. A Courtizan most fit deriues her name, By her conditions from a courteous Dame. What Nature did to her so gratis giue, With this shee will all such as begge relieue. Epig. 7. The Noone-tide Walker of Paules. WHat makes thee stay? Wel nie, since all be gone. Thou telst me, cause some verses thou wouldst make. Ist so? thou mai'st since thou art most alone, And cause all day thy Panch must emptie quake. Epig. 8. Garnet, with his Twelue Apostles. IOseph, with his Apostles twelue first plants, In Englands Soile, Religion pure to grow; But thou, and thy twise sixe infernall Wants, Didst this endeauour to supplant; and Sow
Thy Popish Drnell; but the season fail'd, And thou with thine, to Tyburns post was nail'd. Epig. 9. The sickmans Dialogue. SIcknesse what art? the Bodies schourging Rod; What else? the queller of thy lofty blood. Moreouer what? the path vnto thy God. And what in fine? Deaths message for thy good. Since thou art then the soule and bodies weale, Come when thou wilt from thee Ile ne're appeale. Epig. 10. On our Bacchanalians. To Magistrates. THunder as anc'ient Poets fabulize, Begate God Bacchus, Lord of all misrule: No wonder then his Nephewes, which Portize Till they be drunke, vse clamors like the Mule. Remoue the cause th'effect soone take away: Yee'll aske me how? lop downe the Iuie Bay. Epig. 11. To his deare interessed friend Mr. M Cradocke. AS I thy ground did compasse and o're-looke I compassed well nie, this triuiall Booke.
Epig. 12.  Buccis. To his . Mr Rob Lloyd. ORe many are, as we may daily see, That start too soone to Moyses sacred eat; Before they fit beneath Galiels knee, To sucke the Nectar of his flowing Teat. These Brohers be of schisme and heresie, Not skilling how to teach or edifie. Epig. 13. To the worthie Mecoenas of learning Mr. Anthony Guin, Esquier. AMongst the Scythians Anacharsis sage Was their sole Clearke, the Anacharsis ter Scytha. Prouerbe verifies. I will not say, in this our learned age, Thou art sole Phoenix, in arts Mysteries. But this I'le say, in this our barren Clime: Thou t the best Mecoenas vnto thine. Epig. 14. To the studious Gent, Mr. I. Carne. THy sdious Booke, thy blaed fame shall ring: When others pastime o great shame shall bri
Epig. 15. Un . To his respectiue fr. Mr Row Harries, of pious, religious scholler, Mr. Hop. Price, lately de∣ceased. SOme graue in yeares▪ in lore but childish yet, In stud'ing, fleering, fleeting, fading toies. But thou, yong Price, hadst cert's a grauer wit In conniug precepts of aye lasting ioyes. Let these alone t'enioy their fruitlesse art; Thou doubtlesse now hast chose the Luca 10. 42. better part. Epig. 16. To our Moderne Epigramatists, of his Poems. AL Arts, which latest come to common view, Are commonly the best without compare; But in these lines you cannot finde this true, Like timelesse fruits, vnmellowed right which are, For you haue gatherd all the Sommers flowers. Heere are but leauings mixt with Hyems showers. Epig. 17. One Mounser Elatus, deceased. IT lately seemd by thy aspiring mind, Thou totall wast compos'd of loftie fire:
Which vpwards tends, the place to it assign'd, But thy downefall vnto the basest qui cadit in , non habet vnde cadat. mire, Betokens now thy substance was but clay; Which should haue stoopt thy loftinesse alway. Epig. 18. A new Conuert. THy change was good, from bloody▪ killing sword; To Preach and Teach the euer liuing Word. Epig. 19. A rare Metamorphosis. IS it not strange in this our yron Age? To see one clime to Pulpit, from the Stage. Epig. 20. The Epitaph of the studious Gent. Mr. Hop. Price, To the worshipfull, his louing Father Mr. Wm. Price, Esquier. AS my true loue was loyall vnto thee, Whiles that thou breathst within this valty Cell; Which shall not end with thy mortalitie, But in the graue with thee shall euer dwell: So take these farwels as thy only due,
Of thy deare friend, thy death which doth . Farewell, bright Gem of learnings worthie grace; Farewell, great hope of all the Muses nine; Farwell, sweet Impe, with thy Angellike face; Farewell embracer of the Word diuine. Farewell, deere Price, whose price I cannot count: Farewell, vntill we meet in Sions Mount. Epig. 21. Duke Humfrey . THy Tombe has gratis more spectators e're Then those of Westminster for Coine I wote; 'Tis strange, therefore they doe not pay more deare, But as I gesse, they be not worth a grote. Epig. 22. Gullus, Grillus. Gu: HOw goes the world, my Grillus, now with thee? Gr: Comrade, my life naught is but slauerie; Gu: How so, a Freeman for to be a thrall? Gr: Free borne, but yet, Don Magnus Tenis Ball. Gu: Cashiere his yoke cast of his seruile Badge. Gr: Oh, no, for feare of his most furious rage. Gu: What World is this? must you be Rombus slaue? Gr: Yes; else for such, iust nothing we can haue.
Epig. 23. To I G. THy Crosses were full many in account; But, ay, one Insia. Manie, doth these many moun. Epig. 24. Tillage. To his fr. Mr. Ie. Cradocke. TIllage is good, the Husbandmans true badge; While youth remaines, still fructifies, Till Age. Epig. 25. The Symphie of Law, and Logicke. To his Aca∣dem Cousen, Io. Powel. THe subtile Logicke, and the craftie Law, Most equally within one yoke doth draw. Both vse . Deceipts, the one for glorie vaine, Th'other doth abuse it for his Gaine. Both Brawlers be, and doe for euer iarre. Th'one at Schoole, the other at the Barre. But of all  we must chuse the lesse; And from Impostors vs for euer blesse. To Logicks quipping tongue, I'ld rather stand: Then to Lawes cruell, shearing, shauing hand.
Epig. 26. Quicquid in  venerit. To Mir Futilis. THy Siuie breast can keepe no secrecie, But force all things thereut for to e: If there were vent to gable lie, or truth; Thy breast should be in lieu of open mouth. Epig. 27. Fides so . To Mr Wadams, the worthy founder of a new Co ledge in Oxford. THe Popi sect faire Colleges did Whereby they tho themselues to tifie; But sole true Faith we see doth now adaies, Produce Good daughters, workes of . Which caus'd, I thinke our Wadam so to wade, In building Columnes, which shall neuer fade. Epig. 28. On Curs, and Criosus. I Did forcee thee present my faultlesse Bll, And praid there thy hand to vnder-write; Thou toldst ay; for that t'was framed ill, d why? thou sst, cause faults it did not cite.
Thou differst then from Curiosus quite, Which will subscribe to all but to the Rite. Epig. 29. To Mnsier After. AFter, in what? in name, sure not in Lore, For most Sr. Iohns thou wentest bold, Before. Epig. 30. To King Iames, Brittaines royall Monarch. THe Vnicoe, and Lion ioine in loue, Which props the Armes of our most Gracious King; Tho enemies in all things else they proue Themselues vnto themselues; a wondrous thing; That beasts should be more humane in their kind, To  pearle; then mens Diuisions blind. Epig. 31. To the st illustrious Brothers, the Earles of Pem∣broke, and . WAles stiles you Both with titles great of fame: You pay 'ir alike, your Greatnesse mounts  Name
Epig. 32. To the learned and ingenious Diuine, Mr. D. Hall, of his Uowes Cent. SOme vow, and breake; thou vowstand dost fulfill; Such is the difference 'twixt good, and ill. Epig. 33. In the praise of Brasen-nose Coll. THy Nose more famousis, tho't be of Brasse, Then many a head of many a golden Asse. Epig. 34. To his louing fr. Mr. Ie. Price. Batch of Diuinitie. VVEll may we liken Gods most Sacred Writ, Vnto the forme of Alcibiades: Which outwardly lookt plaine, and nothing bright, But inwardly, most like faire Goddesses: So doth Gods Word seeme rude, in outward face; But the cleare Spirit yeelds a shining grace. Epig. 35. On perfidious Carle, the Loue-maker. CArle will not keepe promise, wote ye why? He thinkes by Law all Suiters well may ly.
Epig. 36. To his friend and Phisition Mr. Wm. Voyle. MY friend thou hast a griefe in Phisicks art, Called, Me noli tangere, by name; For being touch't it forthwith yeeldeth smart. How caust thou then to this a Med'cine frame? Each griefe, I thinke within thy His Studie. Bookish Cell, With this griefes name will be contented well. Epig. 37. To his golden Gildus. THe feign'd Vtopian Ex Mo. Vtopia. weareth in his eare A ring of Gold in lieu of infamie; But, Gildus thou, Gold eare-rings still dost weare, Which is thou sast, thy selfe to glorifie. What glorie ist? it serues to hide the sore, Which in thy eares the Pillorie did Bore. Epig. 38. To sober Mr. Beuans. SObrietie thou count'st a sinne, and why? Because thou seldome liuest soberly.
Epig. 39. The Sheepheards Calenders Arithmeticke. THou Kalender of Sheepheards farre didst err, In numbring Gods Commandements by rote; When Nine for Ten for Truth thou didst auerre, Leauing the second out, not least of note. This thy substraction serues no other Sheepe But thine; which basely to the Image creepe. Epig. 40. Perkin. THou sweet, profound Diuine, with one sole hand, Didst raze more buildings of the Popish frame, Then many a one, that seeketh to withstand With both at once the Gunshot of the same. Heere doth the Maim'd, (a wonder) as we see The whole o're-match, in Christ his Soulderie. Epig. 41. To Sr. Io. Stradling, Knight and Baroet, of his learned Epig. THy Muse fits not the vulgar in effect: For reading, sns conceit, is to neglect.
Epig. 42. Iewell, the Hammer of Heretickes. THou Iewel wast a iewel rare indeed▪ Of value more then is the Ophir gold: For this doth only decke the bodies weed; But thy most heau'nly words most sweetly rowld Doe decke the soule; and thy keene English Pen Did cut Hdings. his throat, that sung the Popes Amen. Epig. 43. D. Rainolds Ghost. VVHat made thee Atlas of our Church diuine? For to decline so vnder thy light paise: Which neuer stoopst to any Popish shrine In all thy life; but loth'st such Trash alwaies. Thy answer is hereto most right I doome, Burning to vs thou didst thy selfe consume. Epig. 44. To Mr. Blable the Tale-teller. DAme Nature gaue thee two eares and two eies, My wheel-tongu'd Gemy) which doth seldōe stay, And but one mouth (through her fore-knowledge wise) That thou shouldst more both heare, & see, then bray. But thou dost blab against Minerua's Law More then thy Eares did heare, or Eies ere saw.
Epig. 45. To the H: and most vertuous Lady, Barbara, Vice∣countesse de Lisle, the Omega of the Gamages. AL Riuers that do run to Neptunes Vast, Do loose their names let them be ne're so great: So thy great Gransiers names in thee at last, Do loose their stile, and Coyties royall seat. What tho? is not the sea of more renowne Then Riuers, which in him themselues do drowne? Epig. 46. Gabriel Goodman, heretofore Deane of Westminster. GOodman wast hight, (and lesse I misse to scan) Thou wast indeed a zealous right good man. Epig. 47. T Baccho, quam Vulcane. To Hugh, the Ale-Draper. THou art a Crafts-man good; yet all thy Craft Cannot detaine thee from too deepe a Draft.
Epig. 48. To the noble heroicke Gent: Sir William Sidney Knight of the place of his Natiuitie. ZEland did blaze thy birth, be like thy name; Then Sea, and Land, shal Trump thy Golden fame, Epig. 49. To Zutphen, a Towne in Gilderland, at the Beleagring of which, the renowned Sir Phillip Sid∣ney was killed. I Wist not which thy fame or infamie, Doth more exceede, in causing Sidney: fall: But yet, I rather thinke thy fame, for why? Before that time thou hadst no fame at all. Epig. 50. On Elizabeths Embleme, late Queene of England, Tanquam Outs. THou wast a Sheep, & Wolues thy Shepheards were; How didst thou then escape Deaths bloody hand? Another Psal. 23. 4. shepheard which doth rule the Spheare, Did these fell shepheards wondrously withstand.
Epig. 51.  Du Bartas praise, and his Transsator. RIght well Du Bartas may we call thy name, For God. D in Welch betokens more then Ma. So wast, I thinke, when thou thy Laies didst frame, Such Heaunly Muse sole Man could scarcely scan. And Iosuah thou that tookst this verse in hand To turne; for ere thy Ios. 10. 13. sunne of praise shall stand. Epig. 52. To wise Lusca I Wonder, Lusca, of thy foolish Pate, Which to thy husband hast so wise a Mate; He should haue powr'd into thy selfe being One Linkt to himselfe, some wisdome long agone. But, as I gesse, thy head is farc'd so full With folly, that no lore can pearce thy scull. Epig. 53. To publicke Lata, alias, Wh. VVHy do men call thee, Publicke? for I weene, What thou commit'st is not in Publick seene.
Epig. 54. On Fabius, to the Readers. THou didst resigne thy Office, wot yee why? Because thou sai'st thou hardst a Rat to Squeake: None would haue wondred at thy foolerie, In leauing it, if thou hadst hard her Speake. Epig. 55. Pilling and Poling, to Damon, and Damon. Da HOw ist Comrade? we both professe the Law, Therfore we should in one yoke equal draw. Da: We do; but in the Manner we disioine, I ciuill do, thou common dost Purloine. Da: No force, our Maners both shall Manours buy; Da: Why then Ile shaue, and sley thou Equitie. Epig. 56. To the most learned, and Heauenly Diuine, Doctor Holland, Doctor of the Chaire, lately De∣ceased. THy sacred Chaire did oft from Earth thee Mount: No maruell; for of Earth thou nought didst count.
Epig. 57. To Sir Hebes, the  Empericke. VVHat difference twixt the Papists Vnction, And thine? for both we see be quite extream; No great; they vse it when all helpe is gone, And thou hereby more kill'st then curst, I deeme. Epig. 58. To his louing friend Mr. Ie. Mayos, Preacher of Gods Word. IN the Church primatiue, Act. 4. 35. deuoted men, Did lay their Treasures at the Apostles feete; But the Derivatiue, alas, since then, Allowance poore allots to Preachers meete. But like their brother Ananias, they, Yeeld their poore Pastors, but a Act. 5. 2. part of Pay. Epig. 59. To his friend R. Loue. LOue oft is taken for blinde Cupids Game, So is allloue, thats only but in Name. Epig. 60. To the Illustrious L: Viscount de Lisle, brother to Noble Sir Phil. Sidney. THough not in Name vnto thy brother deere, Yet thou in Nature art his worthy peere;
His fame extolled, blazed forth his name, Thy name exalted, Trumpets loud thy fame. Epig. 61. To the worthy Mecoenas of learning, Oliuer, Lo: St. Iohn, Baron of Bledso. VVE Scholers may, St. Iohn, thee stile right well, Which gratis giu'st to Ephes. 3. 8. Saints what others sell. Epig. 62. The Gilden Mile. IF that same Mile were farced full with Gold, That's Gilden call'd, for her smooth-silken face; Then would our Mony Miners sure be bold Her path faire-superficies to deface. Then should she right her Gilden name forsake; And for the same a gauled name might take. Epig. 63. Ius, and Iurista Robbing poore Luscus. Ius: HOw ist colleague? how goes Don-Luscus case? Iur: Clean backwarts; sans of Angels bright a brase Ius: These heau'nly be, how then canst thou then haue? Iur: Friend, thou mistak'st the earthly I do craue.
Epig. 64. On Thrasco, the kill Cow. I Meete percase Dell Thrasco at the shore, As he came fresh from Irelands dismall warre; I askt what newes? He told me all, and more, How he himselfe did thousands kill, and skarre. I him beleeu'd, for he did beare about Whole multitudes of the Pediculos. rebellious Rout. Epig. 65. To his louing friend Mr. R. Tho. Spiritus, & Car. THese seeme in peace to liue in Gal. 5. midst of war, So blind we iudge when with 2. Cor. 4. our selues we iar. Epig 66. Brittaines Burse. To the famous late Earle of Sarisburie. FVll fraught with store shall be thy famous Bursse, When pnilesse shall be the Misers purse.
Epig 67. To the ingenious Epigrammatists Io. Owens, and Io. Heath, both brought vp in THough you were both not of one Mother bore, Yet nursed were you at the selfe same New Coll. in Oxenford. brest: For fluent Genious, and ingenious lore, And the same Dugges successiuely haue prest. Tis true yee are but Fosterers by birth, Yet brothers right in Rimes conceiptfull mirth. Epig. 68. To Blincke, the Archer. CVpid is blinde, yet neuer misse the white: But thou dost see, yet neuer shoot'st aright. Epig. 69. On franticke Fiscus. THe Prouerbe is, Pecunia potest omnia. Dame Mony can do All; It instigates the Theefe to kill and steale. It Spurres the Merchant On, to Round the Ball Of this vast Orbe, to'enrich his Common-weale. What can it not? It causeth vs runne mad, And Fiscus too, being therewith ouerclad.
Epig. 70. The capring Corde. To theeuish Lato, and Clownish Leto. VVHat wouldst haue done with that strong, halter Nick Which, Lato thought t'exchange for thy Gold Thou in it wouldst haue showne a capring Trick, And stretch thy Necke in that Racke, long of old. But since thou scap'st, giue Lato's Corde againe, His right, t'is pitty from him to detaine. Epig. 71. On the Worldlings question. THe common question now a daies doth passe, Not what shee is▪ but what sweet Mopsa ha's. Epig. 72. One the Natiuity of Qne Elizabeth▪ borne n the Eue of the Natiuitie of M. THy Virgin Birth vpon a Virgins Eue, Did true Presage thou should'st a Virgin Liue.
Epig. 73. To our Nauigators, seeking heare the Port of Rest. YEe Neptunes Plowmen, yeare cleane astray, Which seeke on Earth the Port of quiet Rest; Direct your course vnto Olympus Bay, This of all other Capes is sure the Best. But your calme sea must be the liquid Aire, Your ships, your sailes the wings not of Despaire. Epig. 74. A paire Royall of Fiends: IF friendship true did ere in Bad ones stay, It did remaine in Bengfield, Winchester, And Constable, three men of Hels array, Which sought Elyza'in in hir Prime to smoother. I may not tearme these paire of Royall friends But rather paire of most disloyall fiends. Epig. 75. To his louing Cosen Mr Rees Myricke. THou shalt now light on many a compleat frie, That will thee call, most louing Cosin, kinde, Which neuer skill'd it by arts Heraldrie; ake heed, this Cosin, mai'st a cousner finde. For Iudas-like hee'll Haile thee with a kisse; And to betray, such Cheaters seldome misse.
Epig. 76. On Fuke, the Gordiser. To his Cousen Row: Vaughan, student in Physicke. PHysitians sav, all sicknesse doth proceed From o're aboundance, or Vacuitie; Whereof, the first thou verifi'st in deed My Fuske, by gorging thy profunditie. And 'fore that nature should a Vacuum graunt Within thy Panch; Death-Surfeit thou wilt haunt, Epig. 77 On an Inne, Grac'd with the Flower-de-Luce. Th'art brauely deckt without, with Frānce faire Armes, But stain'd within with her most lothsome Harmes. Epig. 78. Coytie Castle, and Radyr house exclaiming on Time. WOrld wasting Time, thou worker of our woes Thou keene edg'd rasor of our famous name, That antique was but now obliuious growes, The subiect almost of contempt and shame. Yet doe thy worst, our names shall liue for ay, Altho our fame thou buried hast in Clay.
Epig. 79. Almes Deeds. On Pinch-Peny, Tent. SOme Treasures cast into the poore mans Box, Some slender Mites according to their state; But thou didst neuer (Tent) once o'pe thy Lockes, Thy Mydas muck for to anihilate. But stuff'st his maw with Roundings for to eate, To still his crie, which did for coine intreate. Epig. 80 To the studious, and noble Gent Sir R. Sidney knight of the Bath. THe waters giue thee Titles; but the earth Shall adde great Trophies to thy greater Birth. Epig. 81. Lalus, and Lelius. LAlus presuming on a dram of Lore, Did Lelius daughter for his Mate implore. Tush Princocke proud who scornefully repli'de, Think'st thou to haue my Darling, for thy Bride? La: I am a Scholler, so I may growe great, And may heereafter sit in princely seat. Le: What dost professe? what is thy facultie?
La: I study sacred deepe Diuinitie. Le: Tut, what a Priest? a Tenant but for life? Pack hence thou getst not my ioy for thy wife. La: Be patient Sir, let me win your good will, I am a Lawier, full of Playdons skill. Le: I'st so? why then I'le instantly thee wiue Vnto my child, for thou art like to thriue. Epig. 82. On Prudentius, a Christian Poet. TIs not thy name makes thee deale prudently, But thy profession, Christianitie. Epig. 83. To the most Reuer in Christ. Francis: B. of Landaffe on his THough no Record shall Register thy fame, Catalogue. Thine owne Records enrowled haue the same. Epig. 84. The Crab Tree. OF all the Trees, the Crab Tree, I thinke best; The Oake is strong great buildings to erect,
The Firre Tree faire to frame thereof a chest, The Ew most fit an arrow to direct) But this has in't a pretious Baulme to cure The poys'ned stings which womens tongs procure. Epig. 85. On our fleering, fawning, trecherous Gnathoes. THe temp'rat Zones, as 1. Meta. Naso testifies, Participate of heate, and cold commixt. Heerein I thinke, he vents out truth, not lies; Because that many in these Climat's fixt, Doe, as the Prouerbe saith, in either hand, Both carry Water, and a burning Brand. Epig. 86. On Golden Simonie. To his deere affectiue Cousen, Mr. I. Pralpth. AT first, I know, our ghostly Simonie, His name deriu'd from Simon Magus, iust, But now adaies, I thinke it verily, It tooke his name from See-money accurst. Heereby Sir Iohn gets him a liuing fat, That neuer knew the Latine for his hat.
Epig. 87. Heauens Diademe. To his fr. and familiar, W. Io. MOst wonder will to heare a beggars brat Should haue as good, as large an heritage, As the rich heire of some great Potentate, That whilome was, or is in this our Age. But so it is, the Heauens Hirarchie To Spade belongs, as well to Scepter hie. Epig. 88. Perkins cases, the Diuine. THy sacred Cases conscionable bee, And why not Fips because he nips the Fee. Epig. 89. To the most Reuer. Father in Christ, Anth. B of St. Dauids. Of his learned conceipts painted in his hall. SOme Pen conceips their ingine sole to shew, But thine doe wit, and sacred Lore containe: Which tho domesticke be, for priuate vew, Thy fame to publish yet, they doe pertaine. If any question why they secret lie, I say because the Pencill cannot flie.
Epig. 90. On his Brother buried in Zealand. VVHat though thy corps, as is the Gen. 49. 33. custome old, With thy forefathers doth not lie ingrau'd? I trust thy sonte with theirs be safe enrowl'd Within the Apoc. . Booke of life, most certaine sau'd. Epig. 91. To the hypocriticall Papist, wearing the Gospell of Saint Iohn about his necke. THou well this Book about thy neck mai'st weare: For, this, I know thy heart it comes not neere. Epig. 92. To his cordiall fr. Mr. Moore Fortune, heeretofore a Traueller. Of Virginia. THe Naturall Ex lib. Aug. Nau. Virginianist's beleeue, All creatures, both visible, vnseene; That were, or shall, or doe on earth now liue, To be composed of light water greene. A light beliefe, more light then is the water; To deeme that all was made of such a matter.
Epig. 93. In edio virtus. To his friend Rich. Iohnes. VErtue they say 'twixt two extreames doth stand, To separate Superlatiues in ill: Which true we finde in Brodefoord with her Strand, That parts Lauryddian, 'gainst Lanellies will. Else sure the bibbers of these famous Townes, Would meet full oft to cracke their giddie crownes. Epig. 94. To the learned, honest, and Pious Gent. Mr. Th. Leysons, Phisitian; of the Bathes. YOur Bathes partake of waters cold, hot too, A wonder 'twere, but that they wonders doe. Epig. 95. On the Orchadians with their Be∣stiall fellowship. IT ill befits for Man and beast to lie I one selfe roome without partitions shreene; Which the Orchadians hereof testifies. match ill made together as I weene. Vnlesse it be for loue of buggerie, The worst of kinde with beasts to multiply.
Epig. 96. To the Censurers of these vulgar Poesies, Epigrams. SOme carping Criticks doubtlesse will auerre, This kind of rime to haue a common hew, And therefore harsh, because it doth inferre No nouell forme; like to the fashion new; No maruell, for it is the worlds true guise, The new to loue the ancient to despise, Epig. 97. To ingenious Ben. Iohnson. IF that thy Lore were equall to thy wit: Thou in Apollo's chaire mightst iustly sit. Epig. 98. The Traller, COsting Catita, t'was my chance to meet Alumnus poore, whom kindly I did greet: And askt what newes? who, sighing, did impart, Which to vnlace, said he, torments my heart. But hoping, friend thou wilt condole with me: I will vnfold what I too common see. The vnderling in Church, and Common-weale, Must trauaile, trudge, of bondage the viue seale; And when his sorrie Sallarie would game,
He oft receaues his labour for his paine. The Poore Pedant, who liues a seruile life, Which euer toiles, turmoiles in endlesse strife; Must be to all, yea to the Clowne a Slaue, And for his owne, with cap and knee must craue. The needy student wanting meanes to liue, Detesting by the former waies to thriue: The Ocean furrowes, being quite out of hope, And either serues fierce Mauors, or the Pope. Alas, quoth I, is this the best reward? That good deserts reapes in this fertile soile? Yes certs, said he, but for the soules regard, T'were better farre at the Plow's taile to toile. Epig. 99. To long Megge of Westminster. ALl cald thee, long Megge, true; they did not misse; If broad Megge too, they had not fail'd, I is. Epig. 100. To the kinde Reader, of the Censure of my Booke. SOme will, no doubt, thee aske of this my Booke, Whither't be good; perhaps thou'lt say; so, so.
Thy iudgement giue not so, I pray thee, looke: But heereof rather answere him; no no. Then ile be sure to shun each curious frie: That nought but faults in Writings can espie. The end of the first Centurie. Patere, aut Abstine.
THE SECOND CENTVRIE. Epig. 1. To his worthy Ho: Patronesse, Catherine, Lady Mansell. THy splendent name, I doe not know right well, Or blazed fame, in praise doth most excell; But both vnite, and both shall equall be, Such is thy praise, sans partialitie. Epig. 2. On our vulgar Pie-Poets. To the Readers. AN Epigram, I graunt is common grown, Squis'd out of Coblers, Tinkers, base of Trade; (Whereby of yore the learned well was knowne, Whose warbling songs was not by Coopers made.) Such sordid stuffe we should cast of in hast, And will Sr. Sutor not to passe his Last. a Ne Suter vltra cripidam. Epig. 3. To the learned Diuine Mr. Francis Sydney. SOme of thy name doe braue Trill Pallas Lance; And thou most graue her Lawrell dost aduance.
Epig. 4. On the Mercilesse Niggard. To his decre Cosin, Edm. Basset. THe Base we see do commonly admire, And high esteeme the Baslings of this Earth: As Siluer Gold, Brasse, Yron Lead, and Wire, So that if famine fals, or pining Dearth, Scarse will they spare, yea to themselues one crum, Much lesse to Others, to their Doores which come. Epig. 5. To his lo: friend Mr. M. Hopkins. WIth dolefull sighes right well may we compare, The Leuit's liuing par'd on either side; By greedy Patron thence which culs his share, And Dunstus dumbe, in learning little tri'de: Vnto the Cheese, which Banbury doth yeeld, Which looks most poor, on both sides cleanly peeld. Epig. 6. The Naturalized Dutch-man. To his kinde Comrade, and lo: Cosin, Mr. Willi∣am Hughes. WE say, one fault marres somes good qualities; But Contrary in the right Flemming borne,
One Good'mends all his superfluities Of bad conditions, to be ere forlorne: His Bibbing, Rashues, Mercenary fight; But worthre praise, for A pure Protestant. seruing God aright. Epig 7. On the worldlings Auarice. To his lo: friend Mr. Io: Roberts, alaborious Preacher of Gods Word. THe faithfull Abr'am for his Heritage Did rest content with promise of a Land: Whereto the faithlesse Bastards of our Age, Words nought auaile without performance-Band. Yet see the difference 'twixt the Sonnes, and Sire, He Heauen gate, base Earth they sole Desire. Epig. 8. Agriculture. To his lo: friend Io G. LIke Nero, many do enbowell deepe Their Mother Earth, for White and yellow Mine: And others do into Her concaues creepe Like Pluto's swart, darke coles to digge that shine. But thou art farre more Naturall then They, Which dost but, Rase thy Mothers face of Clay.
Epig. 9. To one, declining vnder the yoke of Affliction. VVHat tho thy cofers be not stuffed hard With Caesars crosses, all of beaten gold: And all the crosses of the Popes be bard Thy house; yet faint not; but be euer bold. For thou hast had those crosses, that exceede Farre these; which be Christs crosses, best in deed. Epig. 10. a Babylon Metamorphosed. To his lo friend Mr. Math. Bennet. THou boastest proud, that thou dost rule as Apoc. 18. 7. Queene, Thou art mistake, 'tis rather like a Apoc. 18. 9. Quene. a Epig. 11. On Sir Phill. Sidneys Arcadia. THy workes are worthy praise, and why, I pray? Because that none can these dispraise, I say. Epig. 12. To his lo: friend Mr. M Hop: for the loane of Dod, and Cleauer on the Decalogue. DOd with his Cleauer cleaues the stonie rocke Of our hard hearts through their laborious pain:
And plaines the way most plaine for Christ his flock, That leads o're hils to the celestiall plaine. These paire of friends with thankes I send againe, Though two in Name, in Nature yet not twaine. Epig. 13. On the monstrous sin of Drunkennesse. THat S de Tranquil. im. stoicall sage did drunkennesse prescribe A salue most sure vnto a quiet minde; Which spuing potion most of euery Tribe, Now takes, which workes most brauely, as we finde. It causeth vomits, doth phlebotomize, And more, the dumbe doth cause to Rhetorize. Epig. 14. To the hopefull, and courteous Courtier, young St. Edw. Lewis. THe Court, thy Name may better, I confesse: But not thy Nature, lesse I misse to gesse. Epig. 15. Worm'shead. To his approued good fr. T. Rog. A Rocke there is that  shead has to name, Within whose Concaues, fish, and fowle do bred:
A wonder strange, which merits blazing fame, That stones, the selfe same Rocke, and eke indeed At the same time, the feathered bird, the fish Should feed, and stanch their appetites at wish. Epig. 16. Christ, and Apollo. To Physitians. BOth, sores of soule and bodie Christ doth cure. Which cannot Synthius, which you say is sure A God; and Mat. 19. 26. God, they say, can all effect, But certs, I thinke, your God has this defect. Epig. 17. On curious questionists. To his lo: fr. Har: Iohnes. TOo many are of curious Questionists, That proud demands what God himselfe did frame, before a'fram'd the World wherein consists All Cre'tures that both Sauage be, and tame. Which cannot yet their Pater noster say, Vnlesse perhaps in Latine cleane astray.
Epig. 18. To his lo: fr: Mr. W. Awbrey, an ingenious Aagr▪ matist, late turned a Minister. I that the Censure of the Gabalists true, which saith their lies in each mans name By the inuersion of Hieroglyphists, His fatall fortunes, or his blazed fame. Which in thy name thou didst, I thinke out finde When to that sacred coat thou gau'st thy minde. Epig. 19. Pengwin, the eight wonder of the World. To s Cousen Rees Griffith a Peregrinator. THe vniuerse, as we may reade, containes But only seauen wonders, strange and rare; The eight, to make the number eu'n, remaines, Which Disticke-wise, herein I will declare. This is a Bird, that Pengwin has to name, Which neuer slew, and yet was neuer tame. Epig. 20. To the courus Ge. M. Arth. Mansell. AS thou art Arthur excellent in Name, In Nature to, I wish thee eke the same.
Epig. 21. The Ile of the Crosse. I Gesse, Exilih. Munst. Cosm. Columbus gaue that fitting name To that same Clime, which he cals Crucis Ile; Because there Cannibals without all shame, Doe eate mens flesh, which they to them beguile. Which first they fix vnto a Crux to feede, Like to an Oxe, being fat they cause to bleede. Epig. 22. On curious Damaetas. To his Cousen H. Tho. studious in the Bible. TH' ignorant in this our curious Age, Or little lesse, some Asse of shallow reach, Will seeme to prate in myst'ries deepe, and sage; The greatest Clearkes which vex, that write, or preach And if you tell him, Mat. 10. doe this thou shalt liue, 'Tis nought, vnlesse vnto the depth you diue. Epig. 23. Iesus College in Oxford, speaking to King Iames. AL things, Arist. 1 Eth. they say, doe wish a perfect end, I being vnperfect, doe eke wish the same,
Thy Royall hand my ragged wals can mend, And perfect that what Priscious e'ne began. An easier taske, to ioine foure corner stones In me, then lincke in one foure Nations. Epig. 24. Mors, Sceptra ligonibus equat. Alluding to the death of the most renowned H. Fredericke, Prince of Wales. OFatall death, can none escape thy Dart? O gastly Ghost, must all obey thy Hest? Must Princes, as the beggar feele thy smart? Must great ones die, sans mercy, as the least? Henry was yong, therefore thou mightst him spare; Henry was sage, then shouldst his life prolong: Henry was war like touch him how could'st dare? Henry was learned, death thou hast vs wrong. Mauors farewell, and learned Mercury, Since Henry left too soone our company. Epig. 25. To the most famous, and Heroike Lady, Mary, L. Wroth. THy worthy husband Ladifies thee Wroth, Pray be not so with my poore pen, to place 'Fore R the O; then iustly Lady Worth I might thee stile, worth what? hie honours Grace.
Epig. 26. The a Canaries. THose Iles were wont to be cal'd fortunate, Haue now their names Canaries, for the Curres That breed therein (a Metamorphos'd state, And strange) which thinks her blest for beastly Burres. But Brittaines Ile should certaine more be blest, If with mad dogs she were the lesser prest, Epig. 27. Goddesse Fortune. TH' vnfortunate denominates his name And fortunate also, from fortune blind: In Polycrates, and Vlysses fame, Her constancy vnconstantly we finde. Th' one she euer cros'd by Sea and land, Th' other blest with her vnblisfull hand. Epig. 28. Hispana, in Hispanos. HIspana Ile, has in't a wonder rare, Which Serpents be without all poison strong; And do not hurt (as Ex Munst Cosm. stories do declare) Th' Inhabitants, which do dwell them among; Which should teach those that conquer'd first the Ile, To shun to kill, through veno's poisned guile.
Epig. 29. On Terhernes Sepulture. TErherne thou li'est enterd within the graue, Of a blind Monke, in those daies compted wise, And thou a foole; a Sepulture most braue, Which doth the idiot, and the Sage comprise. Yet, thou a foole to greater Blisse maist rise, Then the blind Monke, that was esteemed wise. Epig. 30. On the feminine Supremacy. I Often heard, but neuer read till now. That Women-kinde the Codpeeces did weare; But in those Iles, the men to women bow, Which do their names of Ex lib. Nauig. Aug. male, and female beare. I should therefore the woman iudge to be The vessell strongst, but 1 Cor. 7. 3. Paul denies it me. Epig. 31. To the right worshipfull and most courteous knight, Sir Lewis Mansel, of his he: a mariage, THe Porcupine, with launces sharpe, and keene, Doth now not seek to pearce the Fawchi'on faire, Nor is the Fawchi'on 'gainst the Griffon seene
To y, but ioies as friends, a Royall paire. What is the cause of this their league? thy a loue, Which doth the birds, that's strange, to vniō moue. Epig. 32. On Cottulus the vnconstant Professor. VNconstant Cottulus, which primly wast, Preciscian like, most curious of thy life: But thou that faction thou hast ouerpast, And turn'd a Papist, seeds man full of strife, I wonder, what thou thirdly wilt Professe, Camelion-like, a Newter, as I gesse. Epig. 33. To his Antiquious Academian friend Mr. William Ie. THe Swan, they say, doth sing before he die; But thine, I wis, did mourne most dolefully. Epig. 34. On the beloued Gossips, Laena, and Larga. Lae. VVHy wilt not Larga, Marry Mr. Steere? A poper man, & wise, no Meacocks Gul: La: I tell thee why, I hate a castred Pheere, nd rather chose my Suiter, Maister Bull.
Epig. 35. The Picture of a Paramour. MOst pretty Loue, of all our Loues, which louest Neuer to feed on one sole dainty dish; But many more do'st taste, and often pronest, Through sweat of Body, and a louely kisse. Thou euer lou'st variety of cares, Which honest Vesta and Maechaon hates. Epig. 36. To the gastly Ghoast of Terherne. SOme are, which haue grow'n famous by their lore, By dint of sword, and eke by Prudencie; But thou (Terherne) renowned wast of yore, For a pure foole, and nat'rall foolerie. But here's the difference 'twixt your brinted fame, Theirs, for their wit, and thine, of folly, came. Epig. 37. Cord Franke. Of the Knights of St. Denis Bathe, I Wonder why men did thee nominate Coed Franke, in Antique Brittains copious Tongue; Vnlesse thou got'st it through the French-mans fate, The gallian griefe, which blasted thee along.
If it be so, let fleshmen learne by thee To shun the Pox which burns the very tree. Epig. 38. Of the lamentable Deaths, of H. 3. and H. 4. the French kings, murthered by a brase of Fryars. IF Gen. 49. 5. Patriarches twaine, in Holy Writ be nam'd Gen. 34. 5. Brethren in euill for reuenging wrong; Then may those Brase of Friars well be blam'd, (Which burns sans Mercy, 'mongst the Hellish throng) For doubtlesse they were brethren in ill, Which trat'rously France Royall blood did Spill. Epig. 39. To his Sickly friend. STore is no sore, the Prouerbe verifies; Which thou find'st false, in store of Malladies. Epig. 40. To Reuerend vida, the filching Preacher. GOds zeale, (most zealous vida,) Prelate graue, Did eate thee vp, while that the borrowed oyle Of others Lampes, did furnish thee most braue,
With Budget Lore, to keepe a Preaching coile. What meanes thy silence? Sure the oile is out, And being thrust from Movses chaire, art Mute. Epig. 41. To plaine Io. the versificator. VVHat kinde of Poem's thine, I thee beseech? No wittie one, therefore a witlesse speech. Epig. 42. To Battus, the Catchiser. MAgister Battus of the A. B C. I do commend thy conscience for to teach Thy Punies Raw, without reward or fee; Th'wilt serue to catechise, but ill to preach. Whereas thou dost thy pupils teach for nought, Right well thou maist, thy Lore deseru's not ought. Epig. 43. On Mistresse Wag-taile. THy gadding head, my pretty Mysa sweet, Did cause thy taile to be most wagging still; Herein we see both head, and taile do meet Thy lust ne're satiate seeking to fulfill. 'Twas not thy Head that did thy Taile enflame, But t'was thy Taile, that did thy Head defame.
Epig. 44. Lex Taliouis, on Rot, the Tyrant. PRoud cruell Rot, which now dost rot in graue, That e're wast wont to tread on poore mens necks And force the harmeles Gull to be a Slaue, Vnto thy Threts, and eke commanding checks. These all requite thee now with Talio's Law. And on thy Head doe trample without Awe. Epig 45. The Cacademons Epitaph. Here Batcocke lies, a Cocke too Bad by kinde, Which euer wak't his Prentises to play At Cardes, he had a zelous minde, For them he bore insteed of Bookes to pray. Which being dead, a paire of Cards was found Vnder his head, to play with vnder ground. Epig. 46. Socrates. THou Socrates the wisest Sage foretold, That was on eath, while that on earth thou breth'st Wast not so wise yet, for to choose that Scold, To be thy wife; thou wisedome herein leau'st. Vnlesse it were thy patience, for to trie, If so, our dayes yeelds thee many a fry.
Epig. 47. To his honest kinde friend Mr. Edw. Andrewes, of the Epithit, Honest. HOnest, a word, I sweare an Adiectiue, For now a daies, it little stands in steed: But he that to the Depth of Crafts can diue, He is the Wiseman that doth now exceed. Epig. 48. An Anothomie for Husbandrie. PAterne for Husbands, Choake thou art of right, Which dost not choake thy good seed with the Thornes Of worldly care to be a Miser hight, Thy lands brings better fruit, then wild Acornes. This shining candle of thy husbandrie, Vnder a Bushell doth not hidden lie. Epig. 49. To the worthie and famous Earle of Not∣ingham, high Admirall of England. GReat number doe on the firme land beare sway, These thou excell'st, thou mak'st the Sea obay.
Epig. 50. The Flushing fray. To his Couser, Leiftenant Ie, Watkins. THe Flemmings fight is reasonable, yea; Being drunke. reasonlesse, he'ill but or sticke, or snee. Epig. 51. Omnium rerum vicissitudo est. Master, Messenger. Ma: VVHat's thy name? Messenger? for what I pray? Me: Tis Master kind, for your deere loue, I say. Ma: Tush, I doe hate, detest thy lawlesse bed, Me: You may helpe that, if you doe me but wed. Ma: Fie 'tis not fit for females for to sue; Me. Tut, let's conioine, it is the fashion new. Epig. 96. Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. To trustie M. Gage. THou faithful Gage, that wast a gage indeed. For loyaltie, and eke for seruice true, (Vnto that famous Qucene Elizabeth. Prince by God decreed To Quell the Pope, Religion pure to shew)
In her distresse; which few of thin owne name, To thy pure faith, themselues doe wholly frame. Epig 53. To the faire fac'd Margaret. WHat odd's 'twixt Margarit, a precious pearle, And Margaret, a sweet and peerelesse Girle. No odd's I see, for we must buy the one, And Gratis thee, I thinke possesse shall none. Epig. 54. The voluble wheele of Fortune. To the interne friend Mounsier Hie, and Mr. Low. Lo: THou clim'st the wheele of fortune Mounsier Hit And gap'st for glorie, and preferment great; Hie. True Mr. Low, and thou as fast do'st flie, And lowe descend'st from fortunes highest seat Despaire not yet if fortune, vnconstant. fortune be, Shee may thy name appropriate vnto me. Epig. 55. To the worthy Gent. Mr. Rawley Bussie, in voluing the earthly Globe, & tossing of the Tents ball, most expert. THy solace is to volue the Orbicke ball Of this round earth, and eke this Tenis Pile;
Th' one in sporting, which we pastime call, Th' other, when thy fluent Muse do'st file. Epig. 56. To Mistris Lightfoot. I Chaunc'd, as once I trauail'd to o'retake One Mistris Quick, being found'red, making mone: I ask'd, what did her pace so halting make, I did my foot quoth she, hurt 'gainst a stone. Tis nothing so, said I, kind Mistrisse Quicke, Your griefe I take, came rather of a pricke. Epig. 57. Uincit qui patitur. To his lo fr. Rich. Gibons, a Teacher. IF any wish his patience for to try, Let him, but practise sole thy Ministrie. Epig. 58. To his fragile firtree staffe. THe Prouerbe se's, tis better for to bow Then for to breake, a note of gentlenesse; But thou, my prop, dost scorne to stoope so lowe As bend, a signe, se'st thou of basefulnesse. But breake wilt rather (my most brittle Tree) Yet doe not so, I prethee, vnder me.
Epig. 59. On Stephen, the bloody Persecutor. GOod Gardiners doe vse for to supplant Their bad grow'n weeds, their fruitfull hearbes to saue; But Gard'ner thou the a flowre of Troynouant, Did'st thinke to weed, and burie in her graue. To heauens Reapers, far vnlike wast thou, To weed the wheat, and let the Mat. 13. 28. Euer grow. Epig. 60. To the worthy Knight, Sr Ro. Wroth, of his house call'd Durnnce. THy Durance keeps in durance none, I heare, 'Lesse be to pertake of thy A famous housekeeper. bounteous cheere. Epig. 61. On our Popish fugitiues. THey say, o'refasting doth procure a paine, (Virtigo hight) the turning of the head: Which true we find in male contents most plaine, When of preferments long they haue not sped. And Ex Eseb. Arrius like, which mist his Bishopprick, Th'ill change their faith, and shewe a Popish tricke.
Epig. 62. Mother B's Tranflation. GOode'n, most antique, zelous mother B, This salutation well befits your age: For while you liue, a vestall you decree To be, and shun the toies of Pupillage. And as of old, on Beds you lou'd to play: So now on Beades you wholy like to pray. Epig. 63. * Licentia Poetica. To the carping Criticke. IVdge not so hard, that Poēts still doe lie, For what they write, 'tis 'llow'd by Libertie. Epig. 64. On the Popes Holinesse. THe Romish Canons shamelesly auer, Their holy Father, God, nor man to be; What is he then? if that, I doe not erre, H'is no Angell, of heauens Hierarchie. Vnlesse be 2 C, 11. 14. Him, that puts on euery Hue For to deceaue, and this, I thinke, is true.
Epig. 65. To the Paracelfian Empricke. IF all the World were like to Socrates, That neuer stood in need of Phsicks hand; How then couldst liue, if this thy art should cease, Poore Iack, in this, or any other Land? Wouldst thou thenbe a graue Sr. Iohn by skill? So, sure more soules, then bodies wouldst thou kill. Epig. 66. Of H. 1 King of England, whose inuenomed braine, being dead, kill'd his owne Physitian. WHat men aliue, being sick, would oft fulfill, Thou being Ex lo Stovve. Chron. dead did'st thy Physitian kill. Epig. 67. To Mr. Monoculus, the Sagittarie. VVHat dire mishap befell you Mounsier Blinck? That you haue lost your most respected eie: You tell me, tush, you shall the better winck To hit the marke, and lt the arrow flie. I'st so? your shot I gesse, will be farre wide, When that you shut the other eie beside.
Epig. 68. To Zantippa the Scold. VVHat mary muffe, what makes thee sweet of hew And sowre of speech, most bitter, waspish, bad? I thinke, thon art a most detested shrew; Or with the Ague, or burnt feuer clad. Which euer fils thy tongue most full of Gawle, To all distastfull, but to ban, and brawle. Epig. 69. The Epitaph of his deerely beloued Schoole∣master, Mr. W. Edwards. HEre lies the picture of pure honestie. Here lies, the sire of many a learned Sonne, Here lies, the zeale of Christianitie, Here lies, the Patron of Religion. Here lies, that man, whose life was naught to none, Here lies, that friend, whom yong and old bemone. Epig. 70. To Rome, with her Romish brood. PAule 1 Tim. 23. saith, a Bishop should a husband be Of one wife, for to liue a sober life; But the great Bishop, of the high'st degree, Will haue his Bishops for to haue no wife.
I wonder how from all he cuts this band? They'are either Eunuches, or play vnder hand. Epig. 71. To Gill: the fingring Lawyer, and ambodexter. VVHat mak's thee, Gill, the perfect vse to haue, As well of left, as of thy right hand faire? Thou Galen-like wilt answer very graue, 'Tis o'remuch heat that doth from heart repaire. I thinke not so, but thy poore Clients gold Mak's thee to be an Ambodexter bold. Epig. 72. A new formo of finding out Petigrees To Don Stolidus. MY vpstart Gull, that would'st right noble be In Royall blood (thy labour quite is vaine In voluing bookes of old Antiquitie For thy base line, not worth thereof the paine) B' aduis'd by me, ope thou an old made Graue; There thou thy first Genologie shalt haue. Epig. 73. Tom of Christ Church in Oxford. To our ceremonious Papists. THe clapping sound of Antichristian Bels, They say, expels from them their airie Ghosts:
So, Tom thy sound which all thy mates excels, Doth thine Oxonians cause to flie their Hoasts. But if thy sound could sound as far as Spaine, Their bodies Ghosts, I thinke, would them refraine. Epig. 74. God, and the Pope. THe sacred Scripture doth for truth record, a Mat. 22. 32. That God is only of the liuing God, And of the dead, he claimes to be no Lord; But father Pope recalleth with a nod They say the dead, from Purgatories griefe; Th'are dead in sinne, that makes this their beleefe, Epig. 75. To glorious Mopsa, of her stolen feathers. WHy Mistris Noll, dost thou Adulterate (From others Royall lines, thy selfe to grace) Their noble birth, and titles high of state? That wast at first but poore, obscure and base. If each should pluck from thy patch't Pedegree His feathers of, right Aesops Iay might'st be.
Epig. 76. On Cornutus, the Monster. To his lo: friend Wil: Arne. OF all wilde Birds, I loth the monstrous Batte, Which is a bird, and eke a filthy beast; But of tame birds, I do most deadly hate, That's man in shape, yet hath a Beast-like creast. Which of these Monsters do'st abhorre the more? I thinke the tame, that with his Hornes doth Gore. Epig. 77. To Boorish Petita. THe Latine Quaeuis terra alit artem. prouerbe doth for truth relate, That eu'ry land doth Arts diuine embrace: Which euery where most true, I estimate, But in Petita, 'mongst that Rusticke Race. Which studies nought, but most the crooked Law; And will effect no goodnesse, but for Aw. Epig 78. To his Cosin, Lieftenant William Watkins, of Flushings Scituation. VVHere Flushing stands, the walkers Ile, t'was wel So nem'd for in't walkes many a Sentinell.
Epig. 79. On Nic: Herberts Posie, (Lle y Kymero. To his worthy Son Mr. Will: Herbert. Thy (Lle y Kymero) did well Sympathize, (Right worthy Nich'las) with thy noble minde: For where thou took'st, thou didst not temporize, But all thy friends did a sure Friend thee find. Thou wast not like the glosers of our Age, Which disagree most from their Posies Sage. Epig. 80. To the right Reuerend Father, Io: Kinge, Bishop of London, a most perswasiue Preacher. VVHat tho thy hand doth not the Scepter sway, Thy tongue doth cause full many to obey. Epig. 81. Tobaccho. To his respectiue good friend Mr. M Cradocke. THe maior part of our Tobacchonists, Tak's sole the shaddow of this smoakie weed: But thou hereof contrary often whift's The substance all of this prodigious Reed.
I grant the substance doth the shaddow pafse In all besides; saue in this Indian Grasse. Epig. 82. A paire Royall of Clerkes. To his frtend Tho: Prichard. THree sorts there be, which Clerks be call'd by nam The first of right is the superlatiue, The Bible Clerke, that doth expound the same; The next in Rancke is the Comparatiue, The Pen and Inkhorne Clerke; that bandeth men; The third, the positiue, that cries, Amen. But prowd comparisons were odious farre, 'Twixt these same Clerkes, for their Scholaritie; Yet my braue Scribe will make no bones to iarre, Yea with the best, in case of felonie. But poore Ding-dong will not offend his sire, For feare to loose his small collected hire. Epig. 83. Of the Ambitious. To his cosen Io: Vaughan of his fall from a Woreshead. SOme fall, whose falling doth their Deaths procure, Thy fall was great yet doth thy life remaine; The ods is, they themselues to climbe inure, And sithence, thou from climing do'st refraine.
Epig. 84. To Sir Humfrey the Recorder. THou Humfrey ke'pst a calender most streight Of others faulrs, by Word, or Deed, ere sure; But neere I thinke, most hatefull, carelesse weight, Kep'st true accompt of thine owne Crimes vnpure. I deeme thou could'st not, cause they did surmount The'others slips, which thou so nigh didst count. Epig. 85. To Morus, the Baldepate. GOod Mr. More, what made your pate be bawle? You say, you were borne vnder Venus starre, Whose Constellation made your haire to fall, And eke the credit of your crowne to marre. But, as I cast, of this your great mishap, You lull'd were rather vpon Venus lap. Epig. 86 Cupid the blind God. To his lo: friend Mr. William Williams. WHy is't that Poets stile the but a boy? Since that thou art a thousand yeares of age; No maruaile, for thy Senes his pueri. dotage loue, thy oy, With childish youth doth euen equipage.
Epig. 87. To Caecus, the painefull Preacher, of our Dumbe Dogges. THou seest not yet makest other see Their hainous sinnes, through thy laborious paine: When Linx-ei'd Drones, which euer idle be, With taking paines doe neuer one soule gaine. Thy sight, their liuings eke, I wish to thee, So that thou wouldest then not idle be. Epig. 88. To his louing friend Io: Spencer, skilfull in Arith meticke, of Mounsier Mutilus. THy numbring art the plurall number loues, And doth casheere the singular, as none: But Mutilus, Grammarian-like stout proues The singular; as Lapis, his sole stone. Epig. 89. On bibbing Belgieus. To his cosin Io: Watkins Ensigne bearer. FLemmingo vseth after euery whiffe, His kinde Comrade to take fast by the hand: He se's, it is to shew his kindnesse rife, But 'tis, I gesse, because he cannot stand.
Epig. 90. On Del Lucifer. To his friend Mr. Edw. Robinson, Cler. What though Superbus from the Dunghill crept, Thy holy function scornes with open throat: Yet be content, forgiue and eke forget, Sith Christ himselfe did dignifie thy coat. Yet suffer Cinicke, when that he is dead, To Hearse him, where the Cuckoe first was bred. Epig. 8. The Imparatiue Moode. To my Lady Myso. I Wonder greatly what thy Mood should be, Indicatiue? no, that doth reason shew, But thine is madd; nor Subiunctiue I see, That should depend sole on thy husband true. But thine, sans doubt, is the Imparatiue, Which makes thee dayly with thy Mate to striue. Epig 92. To the ingenious Poet, Mr. William Herbert of his booke intituled the Prophesie of Cadwalader. THy Royall Prophesie doth blaze thy name. So Poets must, if they will merit fame.
Epig. 93. To the snarling censurer. REader, perhaps thou wilt my Muse dispraise Of Barrennesse, which was a curse of yore; It is not so, note thou her fathers daies, A yongling, able to beget yet more. If idle, vaine, thou deeme it, and vnfit: An idle vaine becomes a childish wit. Epig. 94. On Moneanus, the Bibber. To his louing friend Mr. William Thomas. THy Nectar, Quondam, was but whiggin small, Alias sowrew hay, how is't that nought but wine Thy slippery palate now doth taste at all? That ne're was Prest in Boeas freezing clime. No maruaile, for thy body is so bet With cold, which thou dost seeke with Ale to Heat. Epig. 95. On Simon Magus, Roman, To his lo. fr. and familiar, M. I. Vaughan GOd gratis giues his Grace most liberally, But man will not without a Simons fee. Which was the cause, as farre as I perceaue, Tat caused thee sweet Oxford for to leaue.
Epig. 96. On Luke-warme loue. To his lo. and approued good Cousen Mr. Edw Gamage. LOue now adaies is neither hot, nor cold, Th'wilt aske me then, what i'st? I say luke-warme; Why then 'tis Bet, thou se'st, then that of old, O, no, this warme has in't the greater harme. Epig. 97. Tempus edax rerum, To the learned Historian, his lo. friend, Mr. W. Meyricke. TIme doth in time they say, all things devoure, And eke forgets each learned Mercurie, Saue the Historian, only times fresh flowré, Which neuer fad's, much lesse doth euer die. For't cannot be that time can blot his name, Which doth of time Records most antique frame. Epig. 98. On Iudeas the Vsurer. To his louing Cosen Iohn Stradling. WHat makes that Beggars in thy neighbourhood, Poore silly wtetches, numberlesse to swarme? Tis not I weene, for thy deuotion good;
But rather 'tis for thy purlonging harme. Which suffer'st uone to thriue that liues at hand; But begger'st all, by purchasing their land. Epig. 99. To the Readers of his Epigrams. IN the Popes tongue I list not to endite: Cause of my time all men should haue the sight. Epig. 100. To the Printer, of Detractors. THe Captaine presse the Souldier to repell The furious force of foemens cruell hand: So do'st thou Presse some papers, that excell, Yet must they cankred tongues of men withstand. A wonder t'is, the tongue for the hand, right Should warre; no force, t'is but a womans fight. The end of the second Centurie. Patere aut Abstine.
Disce aut Discede. W. G. FORLORNE HOPE, SAY∣ling, and Salling forth, vnder the duskie Colours of the enuious vniuerse. Epig. 1. MArch forward, Muse thy Patronesse is great, And if she proue as good, I feare no ill. But spac'ious fields has Taes as well as wheat, Besides the Dolphin, Sea has Crocodill. If one Mecaene yet, vnder Heauens Cope Thou find'st; th'art not a quite forlorne hope. Epig. 2. On Tricongius, who was made by Consull Ty∣berius Caesar, only for his Drinking. IF that our Bibbers now a daies, should haue As large a Guerdon, as thou hadst of yore; I thinke we should, of euery Tankard slaue, Great Magistrats, then priuat men, haue more. Epig. 3. On conscionable Surdaster. THouse'st, that all thy hearing thou hast lost, That's true; withall, I thinke, thy feeling too;
How then canst liue? fo this maintaineth most Within vs life, as often reade we doe; And yet thou liu'st tho quite without remorse, So, many doe, to sin that nothing force. Epig. 4. On Lollus loftie Tombe. WHat made thee build thy statue eu'n'so hie? Whereas thy stature low on ground did lie? This was to grace a stupid, liuelesse stone More then thy selfe; t'was well, for thou hadst none. Epig. 5. On Cherillus the Poet. PAn is not dead, since Pas began to sing. Who all excels in consorts iarring string. Epig 6. To his louing, and beloued Cosen, M. I. Pralph Cler. of the Sager, a Hill scituated in parish, apud Heref. MOses, before the heauenly Canan saw, Did first ascend the top of Vlt. Deut. Nebo's Mount; Where from he might a viue description draw Of hly Canan, the first's Type in compte.
So maist thou climbe to Sagers loftie Hill, And Canan vew as t'were, a pleasant plaine; To meditate of heau'nly Canan t'will Thee instigate assured, as I faine. Vse to ascend this hill most pleasant, hie: So, Heauen on earth thou mai'st see, ye thou die. Epig. 7. Nusquamtuta fides. To Firmus, The Camelion. I Wonder, Firmus, why thy faith is fraile To some? whose name approues a constancie; Tis certs, because they be not head, and taile Thine; both in falsehood, as in veritie. Epig. 8. To the Holy Well, on Maw∣verne Hill. WE often read that Myracles haue ceast, Which otherwise seemes by thy golden fame, (Blaz'd farre and wide: almost to East and West) Which curest all, the vlc'rous, blind, and lame. These myracles, God grant, they be not Mould In the Popes forge; as Counterfeits of old.
Epig. 9. To Mr. Heauen of Heauen, in the Countie of Heref. THou happie seem'st, two Heauens which possest, Thy dwelling one, the other is thy name; Striue to enjoy, (and sure thou shalt be blest) The third, which was that a 2 Cor. 12 4. Saints, of greatest fame. Epig. 10. To the Ministers of Gods Word. THis Decimae Minutae. phrase you vse for your small Tithes by rat: And for your greater too, you may vse that, Epig 11. On Cressa's feminine flatterie. PErfidious wretch what made thee cracke thy faith? Which once thou vow'st for to obserue and keepe: But that is true, which the old Prouerbe saith, Beware a woman when she gin's to weepe. Epig. 12. On Acts 13. 6, Bariefus, the Magician, and his Sectaries THy hatefull name agrees with thy black art; Who v's it, bar's quite Iesus from his hart.
Epig. 13. On the whore in Graine, Helen of Greece. ONe staine, we read, did staine thy sunnie face; But thy stain'd life, thy corps did more disgrace. This one spot did not more, thy sweet face marre, Then thy lust Ilion did; in Troian warre. Thinke not therefore it shame to haue a staine: But count it shame, to be a whore in Graine. Epig. 14. To his lo. fr. M. W. Galloway, an Irish Gent. a student at Grayes Inne, of his fortunate escape of shipwracke at Gorwer'sland. THe drowning waters, and the burning fire, Are elements, sans mercy, as we say; Whose foamers foing rage, thou didst admire, When shipwrack thou sustaind'st in a pro rossilie. Sillies Bay: Yet mercifull was Neptunes God to thee, Which Selde is cruell to Scholaritie. Epig. 15. Blind affections picture. To Dunce the Pesaunt. WHat mak's thee, Dance, Dick Truncus to commend? Of no Deserts a Boore, a Corridon;
Thou saist, because he is thy worships friend, And, whom the current of thy loue runnes on. But wherefore do'st Nick Ls. so dispraise? A Gentleman of fashion, and of sort. Forsooth, thou sai'st, thou canst not brooke his way His comely carriage, or his seemely port. See then affection, whether good or ill: Laud's or defames according to his will. Epig. 16 The Epitaph of Sir Will: Herbert of Swansey. To his right H: brother Sir Iohn Herbert second Secretary of State. IF home-bred knowledge, or yet foreigne skill, If sundry tongues, or Physickes Princely art, If noble carriage, eloquence at will, Could thee haue kept from Deaths pale-Ebone dart, Thou yet hast liu'd, a glory to thy name, The poore mans prop, and eke thy countries fame. Epig. 17. To our wise Brittish Barde, Mr. W. Mathew, Esquire; for wit, and iudgement excellent. I Wote not which thy outward sense, thy eare, Or inward els, thy braine, doth most excell;
For, as we say, the former is the chaire Of Iudgement, the other is inventions cell, Thy braine, doth thine owne litterature invent, Thy eare, on others labours, doth comment. Which most excell's I cannot well impart, But leaue it thee, the fi'st for Logick's Art. Epig. 18. To his louing Cosin H. Price, of Nep∣tunes Purgation. IF thou art sicke, and wouldst a vomit take; If thou art well, and willing wouldst be sicke. The Sea for both will thee a med'cine make, Killing the whole, the dead reuiuing quicke. This brackish purge excells farre Hellobore, For nought, besides perbraking, pai'st therefore. Epig. 19 The Papists, and Anabapstis Sympathized. THrough Imitation, the Anabaptists say Their sinnes proceed, from their forefathers old▪ The Papists eke their sinfull fect obey: Because their Sires were hattcht in the same fold.
Epig. 20. To his old friend and Schoolefellow, Mr. D. Ienkins, a worthy Barrister in the Lawes. OVr famous Ploydon we as yet Embrace, Since thou dost liue to plead graue Ploydons case. Epig. 21. Patience is a Vertue. To his lo: Cosin, and deere alismar, Hop: Thomas. PAtience endures the brunt of all assaults. Eor frowning fortune can it nought displease; Nor, can it  base feigned frindships faults, Nor yet, being wrong'd, from constancie will cease▪ Therefore, a peerelesse vertue, patience is, Whereto nothing, at no time, comes amisse. Epig. 22. Of the wonder, in Herefordshire; being a Peece of ground, that mou'd of it selfe. PHilosophers, for truth doe testifie, Our Mother earth immouable to be; But thy selfe motion strange Philosophie,
These Sages wise, proues liers, as we see. If this thy motion had continu'd ay, Our Est Aristotelus. Aristotle we might iust gainesay. Epig. 23. To his lo. and constant friend Mr. Moore ALtho Fortune. thy name might thee vnconstant proue; The contrary we finde in thy firme loue. Epig. 24. An Adonicke. On Mysa and Mopsa, two Honest Scoulds. Yow both togither Iarring a sunder: Farre should be rather Birds of one feather. Since your pure liuing, Ioin'd in one trading: Neuer omitting Your Mates defaming. Epig. 25. Semel insaniuimus omnes. To his Cosin, Mr. I. P. THe Prouerbe se's, that all the best of any Hath once bin mad; that once is certs too many; But, after once, we come to perfect wit, Worth small dispraise, I deeme that franticke fit.
Epigr. 26. To the best Indenture drawer, Titubus, the night∣walker of Fleetstreet. VVHat mak's thee walke so late against the law? Kind Mr. Chach I doe Endendures Draw: Indentures drawe, in the darke gloomy night? Whose Manuscript require a brighter light. You are mistake, we feld vse light or hand: We write e're Best, whenscarse we see, or stand. Epig. 27 To the euerliuing, and never dying memory of the most Reverend fatther in God, Io: Whitgift, late Archbishop of Canterbury RIght reverend Prelate of our Church diuine, Strong, sollid Piller of Gods holy Arke, Bright Beacon, which incontinence didst shine, ole, chiefest Scholars comfortable Marke. Thy name Whitgift, for nought was sure not hight: For both in life, and lore thy Gifts were Whit:
Epig. 28. On the most ho: and worthy lo: Lord Viscount de Lisles Posie. Quo me fata vocant. THy splendent Posie, well agrees with thee, Renowned Lord, bright Sydney's shining Lampe: For where so e're th'art call'd by Destenie, Thou ready art for Court, or els for Campe. In one, or both thy praise doth most surpasse; Such euer, Sidneys Trophies noble, was. Epig. 29. To the Malevolent, and Taxing Censurer, of his Epigrammes. IF thou of glory vaine wilt me accuse, These worrhlesse lines in promulgating out; Beleeue it then, I will not, Mome refuse The lye to giue thee, if a Souldier stout. Twas friends, not Fame that these made publik then In Lethe's lake, els drench' had bene my pen. Epig. 30. To his friend the Printer of his Booke. Some volumes bring in Folio to the Presse, In Quarto some, according to their lore;
all the learned; I w am the lesse ring th all any store. ie it not fould in sexto Least, as the Tome, his  a little grow. Respect the paper, though a p worth small; Twill s for one  thee at thy stall: ig. 1. On the thers  period of his  Hope. THy hopelesse name, stiles thee with no good hap, Thy Numbers od approues thee happy yet: For ioy therefore thy Plaudities forth ap; Thy one and thirty right the Game has hit. Disce at Discede. FINIS.
