11727 99838777 3165
The troubles of Geneua. With the warres which the Duke of Sauoy hath made against it these three yeeres space. And the great victories which God hath lately giuen to the Citizens of Geneua. Trulie translated according to the French copie. by W. P. map of Geneva and surroundings The Map of Geneua. GENEVA LEMAN-LAKE THONON BALIADGE DE GEZ Printed at London for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold at his shop at the great South doore of Paules. 1591.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lordes of her Highnesse most Honorable Priuie Councell. IT is a thing of ve∣rie great conside∣ration (Right Ho∣norable) to behold The Woonderfull worke of almightie God, in strengthe∣ning and preser∣uinge those that continuallie fight for the defence of the true & sincere Religion of Christ Iesus: as hath beene seene within this Island, which in com∣parison to the worlde, is but as a handfull: yet is the same so defended (by the prouidence of almightie God) from spoiling & subuerting, that neither forrain practises abroad, nor ciuil discord, or priuy pretended treasons at home, or the inuasiō of the mightiest enemie can once preuaile against it: as hath of
late yeares bene manifested, to the great amazement, ouer∣throwe, and confusion of the chiefest complotters of such bad actions. And this (right Honorable) is not seene onely in this Island, but generallie euen in all Nations, Cities, or Townes, where Gods truth is aduanced, preached, & preferred before Idolatrie and superstition: as appeareth by that famous City of Geneua, where God is rightlie honoured, and his worde sincerelie preached. Of which Cittie, (right Honourable) this discourse ensuing trulie describeth, and aswell laieth open their troubles, sustained by the inuasion of the Duke of Sauoy and his forces, for the time of these three years, as also the bat∣tels and vnlooked for victories which almightie God hath giuen the Cittizens of Geneua, against the Sauoyans theyr deadlie enemies: Thus presenting the saide discourse vnto your Honours, beeing trulie published in the English tongue, according to the French Co∣pie, I humblie take my leaue. Your Honors most humble T. N.
¶The description of the Towne of Geneua, with the troubles that happened therevnto by warres which the Duke of Sauoy made against the said Towne, from the beginning of the yere 1589. vntill this yeere 1591. GEneua is a most ancient Citie, lying between the Countries of Sauoy and Swiserland, whereof Caesar in the beginning of his Commentaries maketh mention: which towne euer since hath (by the prouidence of God) bin preserued and defended from all dangers, euen in the midst of all the wars and troublesome times, which vntill this latter age haue happened in many Countries enuironing the same, and now of late hauing receiued the reformation of the Gospell, it hath beene more renowmed then euer it was, by diuerse meruailous actions & euents, which the Almightie God hath shewen in the defence and conseruation of the same. It hath for a long time ben a free imperiall Citie, scituated at the ende of one of the most great and notable Lake in the world, called Leman-lake, in bredth at the largest part, eight English miles, and extendeth in length thirtie or two and thir∣tie
mile, which Lake aboundeth in great store of fish, and is verie commodious for all the Countrie, by rea∣son of the traffique vppon the same, specially for the carriage of their woods which they fetch from of the mountaines. This Lake serueth in place of a rampire vnto the Towne on the North side thereof. On the East part it hath the balliages of Thonon, of Chablais & the Countrie of Fossigny, within two, three, foure and fiue leagues of the gates, which Countries are borde∣red with great and high hils, being enuironed with the Alpes. On the South part there is a most fertil & plea∣sant hill named Saleue, at the foote whereof lieth the balliage of Ternier, in a most rich and goodly plaine, extending in length three leagues, and in bredth two leagues, which balliage is bordered on the South part with the riuer of Rhosne, and on the North parte with the riuer of Arue, little more than a quarter of a league distant from Geneua, and lieth at the foot of the moun∣taine of Wache, which runneth a long by the end of the towne, separating the same by a bridge from Saint Geruais, a borough verie well fortified and strengthe∣ned. On the one side of the riuer of Rhosne towardes the South lieth the balliage of Gez, containing in length foure leagues, and in breadth two leagues, in∣closed with the mountaine of Iura, on the further side of which mountain lieth the Franche Counte. At the one end whereof is the towne and castle of Gez, two great leagues distant from Geneua. At the other end to∣wards Lions is the straight and narow passage of the Cluse, a place both by arte and nature verie strong, sci∣tuated betweene two mountaines and the riuer of Rhosne. Thonon is fiue leagues distant from Geneua, lieng
vpon the Lacque, extending it selfe towards the coun∣trie of Valois, in such manner that Geneua is found to be enuironed with the three balliages aforesayd, which vpon certain conditions were restored vnto the Duke of Sauoy by the Lordes of Berne in the yere 1567. map of Geneva and surroundings The description of Geneua. GENEVA LEMAN-LAKE THONON BALLADGE DE GEZ In these three balliages (the territories of the Lordship of Geneua being comprehended) which are inclosed within the same, there hath in times part beene almost 300. good villages, besides the hamlets and hou∣ses standing scattered in diuerse places, barnes, and a great number of Castles, whereof more then the halfe of them haue bene burnt, destroyed, and ouerthrow∣en
in these last warres. Part whereof are herevnto a∣nexed. Long time since, as it were naturally, and by inhe∣ritance, from the Father vnto the sonne, the Dukes & Earles of Sauoy haue vsed many meanes, and sought di∣uerse occasions both by practises and violence, to make themselues Lords of the towne of Geneua, the most faire and greatest Citie (whatsoeuer) in those partes, and is the key, whereby (if they coulde in∣ioy the same) they might enter into Switserland. The Duke last deceased, hauing obtained the three ballia∣ges aforesayd, during the time of his life, did greatlie molest and trouble (although verie subtilly) the com∣mon-wealth of Geneua, yet not minding to enter into an open warre with the sayd towne, the discommodi∣ties whereof he had otherwise oftentimes assaied and experimented. But Charles Emanuel his sonne, not long after his entrie into the estate of the Dutchie of Sauoy, did presently discouer and make knowen his euill wil and hatred vnto the sayde Citie of Geneua, by seeking to surprise the same in the yeere 1582. and at that time shewed his forces before it, threatning them with a greate armie, vnder the conduct of the Earle of Raco∣nis, Piamontois. Not long time after hauing espoused Ladie Katherine, the yongest daughter of the king of Spaine, he tooke a further matter in hand, that was, to inuade all the Countrie lying about the Lake of Le∣man, which appertaineth vnto the Canton of Berne, thinking by that means in short time to become Lord of Geneua, which Towne in the meane time did not cease to be much molested and troubled, not onely by his foragers, exactors, and commissaries, but also to
be solicited and tempted by diuerse means, both with faire promises and threatnings. To the which end he had appointed Francis Melchior de Saint Ioire, Baron of Ermaus, with other his adherents, that they should secretly practise in the Countrie of Vaut, the winning and taking (at a certaine daie appointed) of the castles of Chillon, Veuay, Lausanne, Morges and Nion, princi∣pall places scituated about the Lake. Hee had like∣wise made a view and muster of all his forces, and had alreadie caused a part thereof to passe the mountains. Hee helde a great garison within the Castle of Gez, as also in the countrie of Cluse, and the castle of Thonon. And within the forte of Ripaille about a quarter of a league from Thonon, he kept a garrison of fiue hundred Piemontois, men purposely chosen out, where he had likewise two gallies, great & sufficient inough to hold two hundreth men in each gallie besides their furni∣ture, which were readie at all times to be lanched into the Lake if occasion should serue. During these prac∣tises, the Duke fell in hand with another enterprise, in the moneth of October 1588. vsurping vpon (the crowne of France) the Marquisate of Salusses in Pia∣mont: which in short time hauing brought to effect by meanes of the intelligences hee had within the same, hee caused his pretence to bee put in practise a∣gainst the states of Berne and Geneua, who in the meane time continued verie peaceable and quiet, although Geneua indured great iniurie by meanes that the traf∣fique and victuals were hindered and kept from it. V∣pon this occasion the French king, Henrie the 3. being moued with the vsurpation of his Marquisate, by his Ambassadors solicited the Seigniors of Berne and Ge∣neua,
together with some of the Cantons of Switsers, the Valoisons and Grisons, to aide and assist him a∣gainst the Duke of Sauoy, by whom he alleadged him∣selfe to be vniustly assailed and despoiled. The con∣clusion was, to inuade those countries which he held about Geneua, meane time that the king shoulde giue him somewhat to doe out of Daulphinois. This reso∣lution finished, on wednesdaie the second of Aprill 1589. the horse and footmen of Geneua issued forth, and marching towards Fossigny wanne the Castle of Monthou, & a little towne called Bonne, brake down certaine bridges vpon the riuer of Arue, and marched as farre as Saint Ioire, a castle belonging vnto the Ba∣ron of Ermansse, wherein they found (and sent them to Geneua) all the papers, remembrances, letters and commissions of the Duke of Sauoy and of his princi∣pall officers, concerning the secret enterprises deuised against the states of Berne and Geneua. These troups conducted and lead by Monsieur de Quirry, a Gentle∣man of France, and knight of the order, turning their course the monday following, marched on the other side, wanne the town and castle of Gez, together with all the balliage: and hauing assaied (although in vain) to force the passage of Cluse, returned with their ar∣mie vnto Geneua, being in number aboue nine thou∣sand men, whereof the most part were footmen. These exploits caused a great rumor and meruai∣lous astonishment in all the Country of Sauoy, which the Duke himselfe and his secret friends reioyced at, saying, that the occasion by him & his so many times sought and procured, did now voluntarily offer and pres;ent it selfe vnto them. Which hee neglected not,
but with great diligence imbraced the same, as by the gathering of his forces (which in few daies after he had prepared and made readie) easily appeared: for that the French Kings armie entering into the passage of Thonon, hauing taken the towne, which is not verie strong, and the castle yeelded by composition, layde siege vnto the fort of Ripaille. The Countie of Mar∣tineugue, with the bastard of Sauoy, resolued to raise the siege, hauing gathered aboue twelue hundreth lances, fiue hundreth Argolettiers, and about fifteene hundreth foot men, marched ouer the mountaines, and did so much, that on tewsdaie the nine and twen∣tith of Aprill, they descended without resistaunce, within the countrie, verie neere vnto the Towne of Thonon, from whence (after a few skirmishes & char∣ges giuen on both sides) the Countie Martineugue being wounded, they retired to their shame and dis∣honour, without succouring or deliuering the assie∣ged within Ripaille, who hauing greater want of cou∣rage then of victualls, or of good meanes to defend & keepe the place, not long after yeelded it vp, their liues and goods saued, leauing the two gallies behind them, which with two frigats (other kinde of vessels for the water) were burnt, and the fort destroyed and layd wast. That done, they marched into the Countrie of Fossigny, which the Duke of Sauoy vnderstanding, caused part of his forces, as well horse as footmen, to make hast thether, to keep the passage, which country of Fossigny is a territory or Lordship comprehending about ten or twelue leagues (as well mountaines as plaine ground) in breadth and length, and beginneth about the towne of Bonne, hauing the Alpes on the
East part, the Countie of Geneua on the South part, & Geneua it selfe within three leagues: The Lake on the west part, & Thonon with the Country of Vaut on the north part. The winning of this countrey gaue an entrie vnto these of Geneua to passe further: and is a verie strong keie or passage into Sauoye. The balliage, of Chablois, Boige, with other places adioyning. Wher∣of those of Geneua holde the towne of Bonne, which is as it were the gate or entrie of the same. Meane time, the Barron of Ermansse, which not long before, had by composition recouered his Castell of Saint Ioire, knowing of what importaunce the said place (beeing within two leagues of the towne of Bonne, and so farre within the mountaines) was vnto all the Countrey, caused a forte or skonse of earth to be made vpon the mount of Castels, betweene the high mountaines of Maule, & those of View, & Estaux, placing in the same a companie of Piemontisians, vnder the which fort, he raised a platforme of earth, wheron he placed foure field peeces, each peece bearing a Bullet of the bignes of an egge. On the further side thereof vpon the way going to saint Ioire, he made a Barricado, and vnder in the way, leading from Vieu vnto saint Ioire, not far from a barne called Warnoz, an other strong Barrica∣do, kept by a company of Harquebusiers of Fossignie. The rest of the Countrey being straight, narrow, and difficult to be entred, might easilie bee defended and kept by very small force against a puissant armie. This notwithstanding, the Baron did so much, that besides the companies, aswell of horse as foote men, wherof he had sufficient to defend the Country, pro∣cured an aide of 500. Launces to bee sent vnto him,
which were paid by the townes and Contrey of Pie∣mont, & conducted by the Countesse of Valpergue, and S. Martin: wherewith he being ioyned, they de∣termined (trusting vnto the fort aforsayd, and of their foot companies, which they might easily place in am∣buscado betweene the Barne of Warnoz and the vil∣lage of Latour,) to shew themselues in the field which lieth betweene that village, and the Castell of Tyer: hoping of two thinges, that one woulde take effect, which was, either that the armie of Berne, consisting of thirtie eight or 40. Ensignes approching, might ea∣silie be ouerthrowen by them, (for they estemed not of the companies of Geneua) or els, hauing feared & astonished that armie, they should constraine it to re∣tire. So that on saterday, the 16. of Iuly 1589. they be∣ing incamped in the field, betweene their fort and the Castell of Tier, (the armie of Berne lying at Pillonay, about halfe a league from that place.) They deuided their horse into 3. Squadrons, a bow shot distant one from the other: The last of their troopes being in the houses of the village of Latour, and the first part neere vnto the said houses among the brackes. The Lanciers of Piemont were in two other Squadrons, at the end of the three first Squadrons: there was likewise a squa∣dron of Argolitiers of Fossigny, conducted by the Baron of Ermansse, which made a halt couertlie vnder the trees and houses of the villages of Latour: part of their footmen were set in diuers places for their most aduantage. The Lord Vateuille Auoier, Generall of the armie of Berne, considering and beholding the coun∣tenance and maner of the Sauoyans, caused all his ar∣mie to be raunged in order of battell, betweene Pillo∣nay
and Vieu, choosing out of the same three com∣panies of Harguebusiers and Musketiers, vnder the leading of Captaine Berole, Bossey, and N. with the number of twentie Argoletiers or thereabouts, and a companie of harguebuses of Geneua, lead by captain Iaques, to march forwards, which made the point, be∣ing seconded by the shot of Boisioli, he therewith se∣conded by the Sauoyans footmen to forsake their am∣buscado, and Boisioli at that instant ceazed vppon the castle of Tier. On the other side captaine Guinet with one hundred shot taking the lower waie, sodainly set vpon the baricado of the horse of Warnoz, where he slew all such of the Fossigniers as resisted him, and put the rest vnto flight. Captaine Iaques with his bands, following likewise after the companies of foot, which had left their ambuscado vnder a hedge. The Duke of Sauoyes horsemen perceiuing that, began to retire, which the horsemen of Geneua (beeing placed in the side waie betweene Vieu and Tier) being descended into the plaine field, and perceiuing the Dukes foote men to flie, trauersed forcibly among the Dukes horse which because they were inclosed on each side within a straight and narow lane, neere vnto the village of la Touer, had neither time nor leasure to turne their hor∣ses, so that of al their troups there was not aboue three rankes, which couched their lances against the enimy, into one of the which captain Bois (lieuetenant to the Lord of Varro, Colonell of the horses of Geneua) en∣tered, where being hurt in the mouth, he was constrai∣ned to turne on the left hand, but he was so wel secon∣ded by 120. lances and fiftie argoletiers, with certaine cōpanies of footmen, that the Countes of Valpergne
and of S. Martin, with the greatest part of the Piemon∣toisians horses, hauing receiued the ouerthrowe, re∣mained dead vpon the place, the rest being scattered fled in great disorder vnto the top of the mountaine, whereas many of them were lost, the rest with great danger saued themselues within Bonne ville & other places of Fossignie: which the Dukes footmen percei∣uing, forsooke their fort and fled into the mountains, but the Baron of Ermansse with his Argolettiers saued themselues with the first, not once offering to fight, by which means the honor of the field, together with the fort, the foure field peeces, & all the barricados remai∣ned vnto the companies of Berne and Geneua. The Duke lost at that time almost 300. horse and foot, & the Bernors not aboue fiue men at the most, whereof cap∣taine Bois was one, who not long after died of the wound receiued in his mouth, beeing verie much la∣mented for his valor and prowes. Which done (those of Berne hauing the field, yeelded thankes vnto God for their great victorie) the Generall Vateuille caused the armie to march towards Saint Ioire, whereas the castle within few daies after yeelded by composition, which they burnt. Vntill that time the affaires of Ge∣neua seemed to prosper and go forwards: but not long after the Switsers and Grisons changed their course, & marched toward France by the waie of New castle, & the Franche Counte, by which meanes Geneua itself was forced to sustaine the whole charge and burthen of the wars, wherwith the Duke of Sauoy being verie wel pleased, thought therby to attain vnto the effect of his desires, he failed not to approch nere Geneua with a puissant armie, consisting of more then 16. thousand, and great store of ordinaunce for batterie: his Vaunt∣guard
hauing done certaine smale exploytes in the Countrey of Fossigny, so that about the beginning of the moneth of Iune, he entred into the balliage of Ter∣nier, whereas with his Canon shot he battered an old towne, the souldiers whereof in number about fortie or fiftie, being readie to yeeld the same vnto him, hee promised to saue their liues, but hauing entered, con∣trarie vnto his faith and promise, he caused them all to be hanged. From thence, to the end he might astonish those of Geneua, and so constraine them forcibly with all humilitie to yeeld vnto him, when they should see so puissant an enemie, with thirtie canon shot vnder their wals, hee enterprised to batter a little mount of earth, which they in great hast had raised by the bridge of Arue, whereas fiue times one after the other he gaue the assault, but to his shame and dishonour, both he and his army were repulsed and driuen backe, with the losse of many of his valiantest souldiers, which tru∣ly was done more by Gods hand then by the force & industrie of those of Geneua, which had theerin but a verie small number of men, and those fighting onely by handfulls and without order, yet with an incredi∣ble courage and boldnes, and with an extraordinarie successe and euent. He seeing himselfe to receiue such a repulse, tooke another course, & after certaine small exploits went & assieged the towne of Bonne in Fos∣signy, wherin lay three companies of Geneua, which yelded vnto him by composition: but the same was as well kept with thē, as it was with those of Ternier, for that the Duke at their issuing forth caused them all to be cut in peeces. This done, he recouered the castle of Thonon, from whence he marched with all his forces vnto the country of Cluse, a Countrie scituated be∣tweene
two hils neere vnto the riuer of Rhosne, wher∣in the Duke held a fort named the Cluse, the scitua∣tion whereof is as followeth. Mount Iura being about foure or fiue daies iour∣ney to trauell out-right, beginneth in the West about foure leagues distant frō Geneua, stretching towards Lions. At the place where it endeth, there lieth right against it in the South the mountaine of Wache, be∣tweene the which two ends of hills (as neere one vn∣to the other, as a musket shotte) the famous riuer of Rhosne hath her course, which by diuerse turnings & windings runneth vnto Lions. Farther within at the foote of mount Iura, it is bordered and prospected with an high hill named Cresdo (a worde signifieng, a mount of earth raised on high) vnder the which lieth a little plaine aboute halfe a quarter of a league in breadth, at the ende whereof there is a village called Longeray. Passing along the rocke or stones of this mount Iura, about the end thereof there is a straight and narow waie, winding in forme of a serpent, vpon the which a cart may verie well passe, and by reason of the steepnes of the same, hauing the riuer of Rhosne verie swiftly running at the foot thereof, is verie easie to be kept. In the midst thereof, which is about two musket shot in length, there standeth a fort, part wher∣of is by maine force cut out of the rock it selfe, the rest builded of hard stones, specially on that side which butteth vpon Geneua, and halfe couered with earth, in manner of a wall, about the length of eighteene or twentie paces towards Geneua, all the foot of this fort (before that time being hollow, and seruing for a pas∣sage vnto carts & horses) was filled with earth, & that horse & men might pas. There is a draw bridge made
which commeth out of the Fort, and stretcheth along by the same, which although it should be taken by the enemie, doth not any thing at all hinder the sayd fort, but might easilie be wone againe, by reason that it can not be held but by those within the Fort, not possible to be scaled, wherein you maie not enter, but one by one, and that verie hardly. Within this Fort, partly out of the Rocke, and partlie builded of free stones, there are lodgings for a Captaine and about 60. Souldiers, with certaine places for their prouisions. On that side which butteth vpon Le-Vache and Longeray, it lieth more open and discouered, & is easier to be battered: but very difficultly vpon Geneua side, by reson the ar∣tillary may not be placed nearer then within 100. pa∣ses of the same: although that they of Geneua, about the moneth of April, in the yere of our Lord 1589. did assay with their Canon to batter the same. This Forte the Duke minding to fortifie, and make it of greater strēgth, caused another fort to be made, naming it the litle Cluse, being on the other side of the riuer of Rho∣sne ouer against the place where those of Geneua had battered it the yere before, right against the other fort. Which done, he entred into the balliage of Gez, wher without resistance, he tooke both the towne and Ca∣stel: meane time, pacifiyng the Lords of Berne, he be∣gan to make a fort at Versoy, therby to hinder on that side the passage to Geneua, both by water & by land. A description of the fort of Versoy. This Versoy is a little Bourg, conteining in it about seuentie houses, hauing Geneua, (frō whence it is di∣stant 2. French leagues) on the South part, the balliage of Thonon & the Lacque of the East part, mount Zura
on the west part, & the country of Vaut on the North part. It is scituated on the side of the Lake, hauing two gates, and a riuer issuing out of the mountains named Versoy, the which by one of her braunches runneth through the midst of the bourg, & by the other passeth along before the gate which goeth vnto Geneua, be∣sides this, there is the proportion of an olde castle, the wals whereof are yet standing, with an high tower. This place the Duke perceiuing to bee verie fit to bri∣dle those of Geneua, resolued to fortifie the same, which he did with great diligēce: his armie being lod∣ged therabout, the better to bring it to passe: first ther∣fore he caused the entries and feeble places to be ba∣ricadoed, the old castle to be new repaired, & a trench towards the West in forme of a spur, hee stopped the breches, erecting a platforme on the side of the Lake, whereon were placed two field peeces, which hinde∣red the passage of all barkes & gallies that would passe vp vnto Geneua, in such sorte, that by daie it was not possible without great danger to passe by water vnto the towne (notwithstanding that the Lake is halfe a league broad in that place) by reason the peeces caried so farre, and that the streame (whereby the boats were carried vp) ran principally in the midst of the Lake, which fort being made, he cōmitted the custodie ther¦of to the baron of de la Sarra, esteemed for one of the best souldiers of Sauoy, leauing with him 600. chosen soldiers, vnder the leading of old Captains, to keep & defend the same, furnishing them with all manner of munition for warre and victuals in great abundance: and besides the two field peeees placed on the water side, he caused foure Canons to bee brought thether,
with great quantitie of bullets and pouder. Hee lefte likewise with the said Baron seuentie gally slaues, both Turkes and Christians, (which had serued in the buil∣ding of the fort of Sonzy) for to make an end and fi∣nish that which was begun at Versoy, where they to∣gether with the Countrie men and some souldiers, v∣sed such diligence, and made so great expedition, that in short time the sayde Bourg became meruaylous strong, and by them was named Saint Maurice: which puffed the Duke vp with such pride & assurance, that he called his Canons the keyes of Geneua, and at his departure he desired the said Baron verie earnestly to doe his indeuour. This done, in the moneth of Octo∣ber 1589, for that there happened diuerse newe and strange diseases in his armie, hee retired with his soul∣diers (in verie pittifull & languishing estate) vnto Sa∣uoy, and from thence vnto Piemont. All this he did in the moneths of Iune, July, August, September & Oc∣tober, with extreame desolation of all the Countrie round about Geneua, specially in the balliages of Gez and Ternier, wherein hee caused all actes of hostilitie to bee vsed and exercised against his owne sub∣iectes, for that the seconde daie of September hee caused the frontiers of Colonges to be burnt and de∣stroyed, which was done and executed by the garison of the Cluze, wherein they murthered, massacred, de∣flouted, drowned and hanged of men, women and children to the numder of one hundreth and two and twentith persons well knowen, besides such as were not found, and remaine as yet vnknowen: and vpon the thirteenth daie of September he being in the balliage of Gez, the daie before, his troups marching
vnto Croset, tooke one Gead Barbir Minister of the word of God in the sayd parish, beeing about the age of 70. yeares, whose feete they cloue in two, and setting him verie contemptuouslie vpon an Asse, his face towardes the Asses taile: They led him in suche manner before the Duke himselfe, in whose presence hee affirmed that hee had preached nothing but the truth: and wherein he was fully determined to perse∣uer vntill his end, wherevpon they brought him back againe, & cast him vpon a litle straw before his house, where hee gaue vp his ghost and died, a spoile beeing made of all his goods and substance: in the which vil∣lage they likewise spoiled, murthered, and destroyed eight other poore and aged persons: whereof the names are exstant to be seene. And about the fiftenth of the same moneth, the said troupes being in the pa∣rishes of Gez, Diuonne, Villars, Plaus, Aberoz, and Petigny, they massacred, burnt, and destroyed by di∣uers torments, to the number of one and twenty per∣sons, with fourteene houses which they burnt in the parrish of Villars, besides all these herein specified, & manye other whiche are not as yet come to light or knowen. It were hard to number the women and Maids that were forced and deflowred by them, with∣out anie respect of age: for that many graue Matrons, who were to bee reuerenced for their yeares, and di∣uers Maiden children to be respected for their tender age, could haue no assurance against the rapes, violen∣ces, and furies, of these inraged Diuels incarnate. For it may bee said truly, that fewe of all the Women or Maides that fell into their hands, haue hardly escaped dishonesting, and such as resisted their violence, in so
much as that they could not force them) were mas∣sacred: and (which is a thing most execrable, wherof the like hath not bene heard of among the barbarous Scythians.) Some women being hurt to death, & rea∣dy to yeeld vp their ghosts, (those villains desirous to enioy their companies) departed out of their liues, as they lay vnder them. They likewise burnt diuers Vil∣lages, and manie Farmes, neere the forte of Cluze, so that in a manner, they left dessolate, and made waste the most part of all the Villages thereabouts, depopu∣lating the Countrie by their barbarous and inhumain cruelties. By which murthers it may be gathered, how manie Orphants and fatherlesse Children they haue made, liuing in great miserie and pouertie, howe ma∣nie Families ruined and subuerted, and how manie honest houses impouerished and beggered. The Ba∣ron de la Sarra in the meane time lay not still, but day∣lie skermished, and beat the boats which passed vp vn∣to Geneua, and had diuers times bragged and boa∣sted, aswell by his Letters which were intercepted by those of Geneua, as by worde of mouth, that in short space he would force the town to yeeld to the Duke. They of Geneua, perceiuing themselues abandoned of all men, considering likewise and feeling very wel, that Versoy, remaining in that estate, dailie fortifieng it selfe, would be such a yoake vnto them, that in the end, it would bee their vtter ouerthrowe and confusi∣on, concluded to vse some meanes (by Gods helpe) wherby they might breake the same, and after diuers small attempts, (procuring an assurance rather then a feare vnto the enemie,) The seuenth of Nouember, 1589. keeping their gates shut, that no man might
passe out: In the Euening they caused their small troupes to bee assembled, in number about fiue hun∣dred footmen, with some hundreth and fiftie volun∣tarie Souldiers: two companies of Argoletiers, and two of Lances, vnder the conduct of the Lord of Lur∣bignie, (commanding the sayd troupes, in the behalfe of the most christian King, together with diuers wise and expert Captains,) making their praiers vnto God with a full deliberation: about ten of the clocke in the night, issued forth of Geneua, cariyng with them cer∣taine Lathers, and peeces of woode, thereby to passe the riuer, within halfe a league of Versoy. Not long before their issuing foorth, there appeared in the Ele∣ment a great white circle which shone very bright, af∣ter the which followed certaine fierie Pillers, whereat those of Versoy were astonished, and being in a feare, sayd that they of Geneua would come and visit them. But because they had beene in armes all Thursdaie at night, hauing watched vntill two of the clocke after midnight: betweene Fridaie and Saturdaie, the most part layed them selues downe to sleepe: In the meane time, those of Geneua marched forwards, and on Sa∣turdaie after midnight passed the riuer, close by a mill without any resistaunce, comming about two of the clocke before Versoy, where hauing receiued a briefe instruction from their Generall, they deuided them∣selues into four parts, the greatest part of the footmen went towards the gate, opening vpon the countrey of Vaut, there to vse their engine which they had purpo∣slie brought with them, and the most part of the Ar∣goletiers, and Lances, made a halt vppon the waies to the fort, part of thē descending on foot, wer ordained
some to go vnto the scaling of the fort, & the rest (be∣ing seuenteene in number) followed a peisaunt, who with a Leauer on his shoulder, led them very quietlie, and expertlye betweene the Bourg and the Lacque, where he brought them vnto a certaine easie passage, beeing the entrie (through a little lane or streat) into the fort, he himselfe shewing them the way, mounted first vppe, incouraged those that followed him to doe the like, which being perceiued by the senturell, they sone preuented by killing him: that done, those seuen¦teen armed men, each man hauing a Partisan or cour∣telas in his hand, entred into Versoy, where they be∣gan to make a marueilous boucherie of the Dukes sol∣diers, hauing supprized them in Peir, Corps de garde. Which certaine Captaines hearing, awaked, and be∣gan to make resistance, but being slaine, as the Baron thought to haue ioyned vnto them with the rest of his troupes: they of Geneua, with their engine forced the gate of Copet, persuing the exploit already begun by the seuenteen men aforsaid. Those likewise which scaled the walles, entred at the same instant. But as in speedie executions, it is impossible for men to see into all places at once, and that against all hope, the place was so sodainelie wonne, (daye as yet not appearing) The Baron, with the rest of his Souldiers, and part of his slaues, found meanes with speed to enter into the Castell, wherein there stoode two Tentes, the Dukes 4. Canons, and great store of warlike munition: but the victuals wer within the bourg which was present∣lie taken, and almost three hundreth Sauoyans, Pia∣montisians, and Italians, remaining dead in the place and in the houses, not accounting such as were burnt,
with others sore wounded, which saued them selues by night, (leaping ouer the walles) and so gotte vnto the Castell of Bastie, and of Gez, about a league and a halfe distant from thence, wherein the Duke held ga∣rison. The Barron, who had diuers times threatened those of Geneua, that he would constrain them by fa∣mine, with halters about their neckes, to kneele before the Duke, and submit them selues vnto him, then found him selfe to be inclosed with his Souldiers, for the most part being in their doublets and hoase, with∣out either bread, wine, or water: yet neuerthelesse, ma∣king of necessitie a virtue, to astonish the victors, and mooue the Garisons about him, as Thonon, Bonne, Sonzie, and Gez, to come vnto his aid and assistance, as also to hasten the Lorde of Sonnas, not farre from thence, with foure or fiue Cornets of Lances, (for the Duke had promised him by letter, that he should want no succours:) began most furiouslie to thunder with his Canons, (their bullets waieng seuentene pounds) against the houses of Versoy, which hee continued vntill three of the clock in the Euening, in which time he did litle or nothing at al indomage those of Gene∣ua, which had meanes to chuse suche places for their safegard, as were out of the force of his battery. They lost in all foure or fiue Soldiers, and about sixteene or eighteene hurt, and those almost all by their own fol∣lies. The Baron that day hauing discharged at the least 35. or 40. shot, yet ceased not to doe the like all the next day being sonday, (expecting his succours, wher∣of those of Gex had made him a signe,) and hurt with Musket shot such as discouered themselues. But in the Euening, the water being cut from him, whereof he,
and his began to haue want: no succours appearing, he desired a treatie of composition and yeelding vp, which was granted vnto him, and that more graciou∣slie, then either he or his, had anie waies deserued, by reason of their insolencies committed, whereof the Historie at large can well declare and shew forth: for they were suffered to depart, with such Armes as they had, their matches not lighted, their Drumbs at their backes, two Ensignes wrapped vp, with all their bag∣gage light inough for them to carie: in which maner, they were safe conducted vnto Gez, being in number about 200. men, in verie poore estate, and altogether astonished, to haue bin so rudelie awaked and com∣pelled to receiue the same intertainment, which they threatned to giue vnto those of Geneua. The foure Canons, and the two other of the Dukes peeces, were drawn vnto Geneua, with fiftie barrels of powder, di∣uers Iron bullets, and great quantitie of Lead, as also the remainder of their meal, wherof the soldiers made great waste, for that at the taking thereof, it was more then 200. Quintals: They likewise brought awaie with them two Ensignes, and all the Gally-slaues, to the number of three-score and ten, wherof the Lords permitted some to depart where they would, the rest willingly staieng there, (being curteouslie vsed) were imployed in such seruice of their wars as neede requi∣red. The fort of Versoy was soone after pulled down, and raced to the ground, the wals of the Castle ouer∣throwen, the Tower vndermined and ouerwhelmed, and the most part of the houses burnt, thereby taking all meanes from them, for euer after that to fortifie a∣gaine in that place: Of the which yoake, the towne of
Geneua beeing freed, (yeelding thankes vnto God,) they found themselues to be greatlie eased, by reason that victuals began in great store and aboundance to be brought thither out of the Countrey of Vaut, and so hath continued euer since, their nauigation beeing free vntill this present, God bee thanked. This done, they tooke diuerse other places about them, which a∣noied thē verie much, they threw downe diuers brid∣ges and castles. And in the yeere 1590. hauing ouer∣throwen the Baron of Ermansse, taken the towne of Gez, & beaten down the castle, where the Duke lost a great number of souldiers, they troubled the Dukes garisons in diuerse places: at the last they perceiuing and considering the scituation of the place of Cluse to be verie strong, and that it would bee a meanes to bridle their towne & keepe it in subiection (although, they esteemed it but lost labour anie more to assaile so difficult a place as that was to be wonne, as also being wonne, of so great and dangerous defence vnto such as are not maisters of the field, and specially on the o∣ther side of the riuer of Rhosne: although at other times they had determined not to enterprise the same) occasion then being offered to thinke thereon, they tooke the matter vpon them in maner follow∣ing. About halfe a league from that fort on Geneua side, there standeth a little castle somewhat strong, na∣med Pierre, within the which a Sauoyan called the Lord of Arsene, held a garison of fortie or fiftie soldi∣diers, which daily issuing forth, spoiled and wasted the poore country men inhabiting in the balliage of Gez, and specially such as dwelt in the villages that were appertaining vnto the seigniorie of GENEVA.
with them likewise: there issued ordinarily out of the Cluze, about twentie Souldiers, who spared neither man nor woman, but violated both women and vir∣gins, committing infinite other extortions. The Lord of Lurbigny, and those of Geneua, (hauing taken and throwne downe the Castle of Gez, with other places anoying their towne,) seeing the insolencies of those of Berne, (which thought them selues out of feare, by reason of the distance between them and Geneua, & trusting to their aid when time shuld serue,) determi∣ned to abate their pride. To the which end, they tooke with thē 2. of the Canons which they had taken from the Duke at Versoy, & two other field peeces, where∣with, they ment with all speede to batter the said Ca∣stle. And on Thursdaie the 16. of Aprill 1590. they sent a troupe of fortie or fiftie Argoletiers before to discouer the place, and to shewe themselues vnto the enemie: the same day there were about twentie eight or thirtie Harquebusiers issued foorth of the Cluze, and running as farre as the village of Farges, (a good league distant from their fort, towards Geneua:) they tooke downe the Bell out of the steeple, and carried it with them, but in the end, it cost them verie deare: for that they were no sooner departed from thence, but the Argolatiers of Geneua arriued at Farges, and vnderstanding what had happened vnto the Village, presentlie made after, and hauing ouer taken them, within a Musket shot of the Castle of Pierie, set vpon them, and entring among men, ouer-threw them all: of whome, they slewe about fiue or sixe and twentie, without any domage or losse vnto themselues, onely that the Sargeaunt of their Companie was hurt in the
Arme, (whereof, neuerthelesse he died not,) and the Captaines horse slaine vnder him. The Lorde of Ar∣sene, and those of Pierre made a show as though they would haue succoured their companions, but the ex∣ecution being so speedilie done, and they perceiuing that the Argoletiers made towardes them, entered a∣gaine into their fort, wherein they were presently in∣closed by those of Geneua, and vpon Saturday after, without anie resistance, yeelded vp the Castle vppon composition, heerevpon, the Lord of Lurbigny and those of Geneua, finding so good an occasiō, present∣lie sent three companies of their Souldiers, on the o∣ther side of the Cluze, to breake the bridges, and to keepe certaine passages, that thereby, those of the Cluze might not bee aided with fresh men from the Garisons lying about them. The Captaine within the same, beeing a Piemontois, with about a thirtie Soul∣diers more, hauing intelligence of the ouerthrowe of his men, which they thought had beene taken prison∣ners, was much amazed: yet in the end after great grief (by reason he had lost the best Souldiers he had) hee determined to stand in defence, expecting aide from other places, presentlie after the yeelding vp of the ca∣stle of Pierre: The peeces were drawne beyond Co∣longs, for to batter the two fortes, and men were sent vp vpon the mountaines, not onelie to keepe the pas∣sage, but also to pull great stones out of the rocke, and to roule them down vpon the enemie within the fort, with the which, and with their canon, hauing broken the walles, ouerthrewe their inclosure and barica∣do, or platforme before the Rauelin. On Saturday the 19. of Aprill, the said Rauelin was taken by those of Geneua:
Notwithstanding the furious resistaunce of the fort beseiged, and the Musketiers which shotte out of the fort of Saint Victore, and down from of the hill of Wache. The next day, those of Geneua hauing got∣ten vnderneath the foot of the fort, ceased not to mo∣lest and greeue the Souldiers in the same with engins, Miners, and artificiall fiers of diuers sorts, and that ve∣rie often: They within hauing gotten into the strong∣est places of their fort, vpon whome, those of Geneua threw & rouled down gret stones from of the moun∣taine, which indomaged and hurt them very sore, and in the end, would haue spoiled them altogether, from beneath, they made a great smoke which ascended vp into the fort, deuising al meanes they could to plague them within, to incourage the assieged: Those of the fort of Wache cried vnto them, courage, courage, as∣suring them that their aid approched, as in truth it did and that on all sides of the mountaines, and speciallie on sonday at night, the enemy made great signes and showes of fire vnto those that were besieged: this not∣withstanding, the Lorde of Lurbignie peceiuing his smal troups (although they were but hardly furnished of victuals) to increase in courage, and to be earnestly bent vnto the fight, resolued to assay al means possible wherby he might force the fort, by mining, by throw∣ing down stones from the mountaines, and with fire, wherevpon on monday at night, hee caused a mine to be made with great diligence at the foot of the tower. They within hearing a noise therof, & hauing assaied (but all in vaine) to driue the miners from their place, which wrought out of their danger, the better to find out the mine, they fained to parle for an accord, but
for that in place of making a composition, the captain began to speake very high and proudly: The Lord of Lurbigny caused him quickly to retire, & therewith continued the mine: whereat they within, required him to sursease, promising him, that if their succours did not come vnto them the next day within an hour after the appearing of the daye, that then they woulde yeeld vp the place, and depart with their armes & such necessaries as they had, which was granted vnto them. Meane time, the Sauoyan forces were assembled with great diligence from al places, & vpon monday the 20 of April, came vnto Chastillon in Michaille, within 2. leagues of the fort, marching towardes the same, but the craggines of the waie which they had marched, had so wearied their footmen, that they were constrai∣ned to lie all that night within a league of the Cluze. On tusdaie earlie in the morning they entred into the field, being in number about 1500. men, & were com∣manded by their leaders, to deuide and raunge them∣selues into fiue Squadrons: whereof, one should take the way, leading along the riuer of Rhosne, the second should goe close vnder the mountaine: (These two were Lanciers, Pistoletiers, and Petronels al horsmen) and the other three Squadrons al footmen with mur∣rions, should march through the plaine, leading right vpon Longeray, where they hoped to inclose and o∣uerthrow the footmen of Geneua, who hauing disco∣uered their forces by litle and litle began to retire, fee∣ling themselues to weak for their enemies, not hauing any horsmen to defend them. The Sauoyans, hauing sent forth 2 spies to discouer their enemy, & vnderstā∣ding, that the cōpanies of Geneua began to dislodge,
made hast after them with a great noise and out-crie. While this happened, the time appointed for the yel∣ding vp of the fort was now expired, and the Lord of Lurbigny, who had made the composition, vnder∣standing of the enemies approch, made a great noise with drums and trumpets, to the ende that the Cap∣taine of the fort should not heare the cries and shouts which those within the fort of Wache made at the ap∣proching of their aide: and therewithall wrought so speedily, that hee caused the Captaine and eight and twenty souldiers which he had left him, with two wo∣men and fiue or sixe of the Country men, which they had taken prisoners, to issue out of the fort, & in their place caused certaine pikes and muskets to enter in & take possession of the same, speedily cōueying the cap∣taine and his souldiers (all wearied, and parte hurt as they were) some part on their waie. At the same time that the fort was yeelded vp, the Sauoyans began in great number to come downe vnto the fort, and per∣ceiuing the retreate of three companies of Geneua, began to spread themselues abroade, as they thought best, making their account that not one of them shuld escape their hands, specially trusting to the succour of the fort, which they as yet esteemed to bee theirs, and whereof the Duke of Sauoy made so much account, that he bragged, that with the same Fort & thirty men he had driuen backe, and coulde bridle a whole armie of Frenchmen and Switsers. Beeing thus dispersed, they began verie boldly to discharge against those of Geneua, who hauing by good happe, recouered the side of a hill, made them so hard an answere, that their footmen in the end were constrained to retire, but be∣ing
ranged in order, they began a fresh charge, meane time that a great troup of their horse men, with certain armed men on foote approched verie neere vnto the fort, calling the Captain by his name, & displaied one of their banderols, hauing a red crosse vpon the same, but the answere that they receiued was with musket shot, which ouerthrew diuers of them, besides a great peece which so played vpon them, that it slew diuerse of their horse men, wherewith the foot men of Gene∣ua which were on the one side, gaue them such a fresh charge, that they retired with al speed, & being a good distance frō the fort (perceiuing that they had staide ouer-long) in as good order as they could, they tooke the waie leading vnto the mountaine, leauing diuerse of their companie dead in the place, and all the wayes couered with their bloud, in such manner, that it see∣med a butcherie or slaughter of cattell. The Lorde of Lurbigny and those of Geneua were not a little raui∣shed with admiration, not onely to see themselues so soone to be deliuered of their enimies, and that with∣out anie losse but onely three men slaine, & foure or fiue hurt, but also that they were with such speed be∣come masters of the strongest fort in all that countrie, for the which both there and within the town of Ge∣neua they yelded heartie thanks vnto God: in the be∣sieging wherof they lost about seuen or eight men, but presently after they perceiuing that the sayde place could not verie well be holden by them, not hauing sufficient forces to keep & defend so many passages & waies, as well on the one side as the other of the fort & of the riuer of Rhosne, caused the fort of Cluse to bee blowen vp with pouder, which within certain weekes
after, was again ceased vpon by the Dukes forces, cau∣sing it to be made somwhat longer, and asmuch vnder the couert of the mountaine as he cold deuise: but yet in such maner, that whosoeuer hath the plaine on that side which butteth vpon Longeray and the Wache, maye easily compell them within the fort to abandon the same. The Dukes garisons lying in Fossigny, being moued with the good successe of those of Geneua, a∣bout the 20. of May, and the 22. of April 1590. assem∣bled themselues togeather, and entred into diuers vil∣lages on that side within a league of Geneua, and be∣longing vnto their maister, where they most furiously and in great rage fell vpon the poore Countrey men: whereof they slewe a great number, not sparing anie one, no not the women great with childe, nor yet litle children, for that they slew, murthered, and destroied by diuers torments, to the number of 62. persons. On the other side, the Duke againe hauing taken, & new built the Forte of Cluze, vnder the conduct of the ba∣stard of Sauoy, sent an armie of 5. or 6. thousand men into the balliage of Gez, which armie in the moneth of Iune, after they had slaine about 250. men of Gene∣ua, made a most horrible waste & destruction through out all the balliage, slaying such of the Countrie men as they found, to the number of 27. persons, whose names are recorded, committing such villanies as are not to be rehearsed, and before their departure, burnt more then 60. good villages. On the side of Ternier, in the yere 1589. about the month of Iune, they made a fort (in a village named Sonzy,) calling the same S. Katherines fort, wherein the Duke left his great shot, wherewith, in fewe moneths, hee threatned to batter Geneua. The garison of this fort, hath ruinated & de∣stroyed the most part of those villages, which at this
day are not inhabited: there remaineth onelie the bal∣liags of Thonon, wherein there are sixe or seuen score villages, which the baron of Ermansse, and his compa∣nies do by little and litle spoile and destroy, attending the comming of the Spaniards, Piemontoisians, and other of the Dukes troupes, to set them all on fire, as they haue doone the rest, following their pretended resolutiō, which is, to make a desert within six leagues round about Geneua, if otherwise they can not bring their purpose about, to get the town into their hands. Thus, one of the most faire, and fertile litle countries of Europe, hath in the space of eighteene monethes, bene fourraged and spoiled by their owne Lord: and yet, all this notwithstanding, those of Geneua, in the middest of so many discommodities, haue continued without spoiling, being susteined by a speciall fauour from God himselfe, and aided by certaine friendes, both far and neere, speciallie the most Christian king, who in diuers sorts, accompanied with good effects, hath shewen a most great affection towads them. Let this suffice you (gentle reader) as a scantling or small proportion of one of the most memorable Histories of our age, vntill such time as it shall please God to giue the meanes vn∣to some others which thinke thereon, & whose memories may serue them, to collect and gather it in order more at large, to the end, that now you your selues, and your posteritie after you, may see and behold the wonders and miracles of almigh∣ty God. Vnto whom be all honor, praise, and glory, for the pre∣seruation of Geneua, as vnto him onelie it appertaineth. Written at such time as the troupes of Geneua, assisted by those of the most Christian king, ouerthrew three cornets of Spanish and Neapolitane horsemen, belonging vnto the Duke, and therewith tooke the strong castle of Buring in Fos∣signy. FINIS.
