11879.2 24498611 27739
GUSTAVUS ADOLPHVS KING OF THE SWEDS, GOTHS, & VANDALS, GREAT PRINCE OF FINLAND & etc. Behold the beames of this bright Northen starr Enflam'd by Mars, but sweetned more by Ioue. He hands, and Lands subdues by dint of warr▪ But farr more hearts by goodnes win̄ing love. By both before he came, he overcame. Owing of Victory as swift, as Fame. Etiam juriusquam venj, vicj MD sculpsit, Sold by R Mylbourne at the Greyhound in Paules Church yard
THE NEVV STARRE OF THE NORTH, SHINING VPON the Victorious King of SVVEDEN. LONDON, Printed by AVGVSTINE MATHEVVES for ROBERT MILBOVRNE, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Greyhound in Pauls Church-yard. 1631.
THE NEW STARRE OF THE NORTH, Shining vpon the Victorious King of Sweden. IN the yeere one thou∣sand fiue hundred se∣uentie two, there ap∣peared in the heauens a new strange Light, exceeding in the ap∣parant bignesse thereof all the fixed Starres, and shewing forth a bright and Maiesticall lustre, which was beheld, not onely in the night time, but also by some at Noone day, and became at that time the gaze of the world, and taske
of all the Astronomers of Europe: ma∣ny of them in divers Countreyes pub∣lishing their Observations and Opini∣ons concerning the nature of this Star, and future events fore-signified there∣by: but none comparably with the most famous Astronomer of our time, called Tycho Brahe, a Nobleman of Den∣marke: who, by the advantage of his large and curiousBy a strange instinct of pro∣vidence were those admira∣ble Instrumēts made and ere∣cted by Tycho a little before the appearing of this Starre, as if either the star had stayed for his tooles, or he had fore∣seene the birth of that starre. Instruments, and vn∣cessant paines in Astronomicall Obser∣vations, more exactly then any other set∣teth downe the true Place, Forme, Mo∣tion, and Height of this wondrous hea∣uenly Lampe. Whereunto hee addeth also his Iudgement what euents it por∣tendeth, like to befall in the yeeres neere following the said Apparition. Accor∣dingly hee treateth of the sayd Starre in aboue 500 pages of his Booke called by the name of Astronomica Progymnas∣mata, which Booke in the yeere 1593 was honoured by the Attestation of King Iames our late Soueraigne of bles∣sed memory, in manner following.
James by the grace of God King of Scots, to the No∣ble Tycho Brahe, Lord of Knudstrup, the chiefe A∣stronomer of this age. WHereas Wee haue vnderstood as wel by your letters written to Vs, as also by Our seruantSir Peter Young some∣time Tutor to King Iames in his minoritie. Young, that you intend to publish those Workes of yours, which with in∣vincible paines, and manifold wat∣chings haue been composed by you, namely, those your excellent Astro∣nomicall Exercises, stiled by you, Astronomica Progymnasmata: Towards the publishing whereof you haue made suite vnto Vs, that Wee
would vouchsafe thereunto our Commendation to be written by vs in Ʋerse, as also our Royall Priui∣ledge to the Impression of them. We haue thought fit to affoard both those fauours to your singular good Deserts, and admirable Learning: whereof wee are not now to take no∣tice by other mens report, or by the only view of your Writings, hauing in presence with our owne eyes and eares been made spectator and hea∣rer, in that veryThis house is scituated in the Iland called Huenna in Denmark & is furnished with exquisite In∣struments and Engines for Astronomie, which King Iames did be∣hold in his voyage into Denmark, whē hee went thi∣ther to bring home his Queene Anne. House or Tower erected and dedicated by you vnto Vrania the Heauenly Muse, where We receiued such content by that goodly spectacle, & by the lear∣ned conference which you had with vs, that it is hard to determine whe∣ther be greater, the delight, or the
admiration wherewith we now call the same to remembrance, &c. Then followeth the Tenour of the Kings Priuiledge, that none for the space of thirtie yeeres, within the Do∣minions of Scotland, presume to Print the said Workes, without the consent of the said Tycho, or his heyres. This Letter of Priuiledge is dated from his Maiesties Court in Halyrood∣house, that last of Iuly, 1593, in the sixe and twentieth yeere of his Raigne Then the Latine Verses, with this Title. The commendation of Tycho Brahe his Astronomicall Treatises by Iames the 6. King of Scots. In which verses, after the description of the artificiall modell of the motion of the Planets, & fixed Starres represen∣ted in those incomparable engines ere∣cted in that house by Tycho Brahe, fol∣loweth
also the intent of Astrologicall prediction in these words. Vt miti, aut torvo aspectu longe ante futura Praemonstrant, Regnis{que} Tonans quae fata volutet Tychonis pandunt operae. Lege, disce: videbis Mira: domi Mundum invenies, Caelumque libello. &c. Iacobus Rex F. manuque propria scripsit. Great Tycho's labours also doe fore∣show Events, which shall befall on earth below, And by disasterous, or faire aspects What destinyes on Kingdomes God directs. Reade heere, and learne. If you for wonders looke, Loe heere the world at hand, the hea∣vens by booke. Made by King Iames, and written with his owne hand.
Tycho in this his booke after generall observations of the motions of the hea∣vens, treateth at large of this much admired newe Starr, (whereupon that whole Treatise is intitled De nova Stella anni 1572.) giving the descripti∣on of the forme, place, motion, and durance thereof, and demonstrating out of his owne and other Astrono∣mers experimentall observations, that it was not seated in the aire, but aboue in the throne of the highest Heavens, being fixed in the very chaire of Cassio∣peia (a figure of Starres so called) he very certainly concludeth that it could not possibly be any Comet supposed to arise out of the vapours of the Earth elevated into the vpper Region of the ayre (according to the vulgar errour of some Philosophers) but that it was a true and proper Starr, made of hea∣venly matter, being none of the origi∣nall
first borne lights made by the hand of God in the Creation (which pos∣sesse an indefeisible freehold of their station to the worlds end) but a kinde of adopted childe of the heavens, admit∣ted onely for a Termer in that habita∣tion, which he possessed about sixteene Moneths. This Starre, as it was scituated in that part of the heavens, which is cal∣led via lactea (the milke white way) so it is not vnprobably supposed by Ty∣cho to haue beene composed of the mat∣ter of that part of the heavens. Where∣in Tycho avoweth that he beholdeth since the vanishing of that Starre a kind of vacuity or diversity of colour in that very place where the Starre stood, as shewing the consumption and absence of so much white ethereall matter as was vsed to the composure of that Star. By some it was deemed to be the very same Starre, which appeared vnto the Sages of the East at the birth of our Saviour, and thereupon coniectured to
be the neerefore-runner of the second comming of Christ, as that was the attendant of his first comming. Accor∣dingly (as Tycho in this booke recor∣deth) Vir admodum celebris, & de literis tam sacris, quam philosophicis praeclare meri∣tus, de hac stella eleganti Epigrammate sic lusit. Theodore Beza a man famous in this age for his great abilities in lear∣ning both of Humanity and Divinity, made an elegant Epigram, which thus endeth. Et, qui nascenti praeluxit, nunciat idem Ecce redux reducem rursus adesse Deum. Hinc igitur felix ô turba applaude piorum Tu vero Herodes sanguinolente time. That lampe, which at our Saviours birth did burne, By this returning light shewes Christs returne. O therefore now reioyce ye sonnes of God: But bloody Herod tremble at this rodde.
As then Tycho, so much more we now may say that Master Beza heerein did not so much intend Historicall cer∣tainty, as morall application in this his pious Poeticall rapture. And therefore well may we take vp his conclusion, as applyable to the event of Gods mercies to his Church, and iudgements against the enemies thereof. Our learned and noble Tycho Brahe in the conclusion of this his worke set∣ting downe his Astrologicall iudgment professeth the same to bee but coniec∣turall, ascribing vnto God onely the cer∣taine foreknowledge of all such events vpon earth, as are caused or intimated by extraordinary apparitions of Comets or new Starres in the Heavens. And in the leading motiues to his opinion heerein he proceedeth not boldly like a rash heathenish Starre-gazer, but mo∣destly, warily and in generall. First, he layth this ground, most pro∣bable in it selfe, that, if there be any cer∣taine portending inclination in such
rare and admirable apparitions, surely most in the most rare and extraordina∣ry. But none like this (sayth Tycho) was ever testified by any monument of anti∣quity to haue bin seene in the world, except that which Pliny avoweth to haue beene seene and observed by Hipparchus, who lived toward the end of the Grecian Monarchy about 120. yeares before the birth of our Saviour. Now if, by interpretation of event, & consent of the learned, that new starr then appearing id foreshew the decli∣ning of the Greeke Monarchy & the rise & strength of the Roman Empire, why may not this new Star being of the like kind, foreshow also rarissimos, ingentes, at{que} improviss ffectus, strange, great, and vnexpected effects to come in the neare succeeding times in the estate of King∣domes or Common-weales Which what they will be in particular nulli mortalium satis perspectum iudico.Pag. 802. I thinke no mortall man is of counsayle.
Then stepping forwarder to the nea∣rer view of the kind of effects to come, he gathereth out of the Ioviall lustre of it ending in a more fiery and Martiall glaring rednesse that it promiseth pros∣perous successe,Ibidem. but intermingled with violence and trouble: as also by the place of it in the Aequinoctiall Colure (vbi sacrorum indicatio) that some great al∣terations are like to befall in matter of Religion,Pag. 803. so that those devises, which by out∣ward shew and Pharisaicall hypocrisie haue long time bewitched ignorant people, shall come to their full poynt and end. And because the Star fixed neere the Colure, yet possessed the first degree of A∣ries being the place of the Spring when the day getteth advantage of the night, therby is portended some new light which shall abate and vanquish former darknesse.Ibid. These generals leade but a little way vnlesse some direction follow of quando and vbi by the maine index of this Dy∣all pointing vnto time and place. As for the time,Quando. hee proiecteth first
by the direction of the Poles of the world,Pag. 804. Si ex Astrologicis temporum men∣surationibus prima initia quando aliquate∣nus huius Stellae significata pullulabunt con∣iectare licebit ex directione Coniunctionis maximae (cui Stella haec Prodromus) &c. If we take leaue by Astrological calcula∣tion of time, to make coniecture concer∣ning the first beginning of that which is portended, we guesse it will be in the bud about nine yeeres after the great Coniunction following shortly after the appearing of this Star. And so in Com∣putation with the place of the new Star, this designed time wil fall out at the ac∣complishment of the third Septenary of yeeres, (viz. the 21. yeere after the first appearing of the Star) being the yeere 1592. But if one and twentie yeeres complete, (which Tycho seemeth to intend) bee added, the time will reach rather to the yeare of our Lord, 1593. The second way of this Calculation of the time,Pag. 805. is by the Direction of the Zo∣diaque,
from the place of that Great Coniunction by the Longitude of the new Starr vnto the seuenth Degree of Tau∣rus, which Coniunction happeneth neere the ende of the seuenth Septenary, 48 yeeres after the first appearing of the New Starr, viz about the yeare, 1620. About that time, saith Tycho, in all probabilitie will inure the vigour and operation of this new Starr, Annis praesertim aliquot se∣quentibus, especially some yeares after that time, post, viz. completum a nato Christo annum. 1632. aut circiter, namely after the yeare of Christ 1632. or there∣abouts. As for the designing of the place where the influence of this Starr shall worke,Vbi. first in generall it must needs concerne the Northerne part of the World on this side of the Aequator, be∣cause the Starr appeared and dwelt in this Hemisphere: and consequently must be held to haue most operation where it was most verticall; that is on
those parts where the Star was most di∣rect over the head, and sent forth the beames of his influence most perpendi∣cular. Not that mutations must needs happen in those places onely, or necessa∣rily in those very places, but (as may well be noted out of the words of Ty∣cho) prae caeteris aliquid ominis those parts are ominous aboue the rest:Pag. 808. insomuch as INDE mutationum tantarum occasio at{que} author expectanda: from thence are to be expected the occasion and author of so great alterations. Which much conduceth to the interpretation here∣after following. Now because the fixed seat of the new Star was in distance from the Aequator Northward about 62. degrees, that tract of the earth which lieth in the Northen latitude of 62. is to be taken as principally intended: which in our part of the knowne world rangeth a∣long from the West through Norvegia, Swedia, Finlandia, Livonia, Moscovia, and Tartaria. In all which Countries those
parcells which lye vnder the forena∣med latitude, had once every day that new Starre in their Zenith, that is iust over the head. But in this Diurnall motion how and vpon what poynt of this circle to fixe the dint of the in∣fluence, Hic labor, hoc opus est. There lies the businesse. Learned Tycho guided his Contem∣plation by the very first New Moone after the first appearing of the Starr: which New Moone fell vpon the fif∣teenth of Nouember, seauen houres thir∣teene minutes ⅔ in the afternoone, ac∣counting the time by the Meridian of Tycho's Iland: at which instant the new Starr was in the Meridian of 53 De∣grees from the West, and so became in that instant verticall and highest to that place of the earth, which lyeth in the longitude of 53, and latitude of 62: being situated in respect of the Citie of London twentie Degrees more Easterly, and about ten Degrees more Nor∣therly.
So now, in regard of the ayme of this eiaculation of prediction, the parallell of 62 may be called the Butt, & the Me∣ridian of 53, (where it cutteth that pa∣rallell) the white, or marke designed. For the finding whereof, and touching it with the finger of Evidence, we need no other guidance, then Cogimur è tabula pictos ediscere Mundos. Of all the world the seuerall parts by name, Wee cannot chuse but learne by tabled frame. View we therefore our most appro∣ued and current Mapps, whether Vni∣versall, or Nationall and particular, wherin the severall Countries are Geo∣graphically distinguished by the regu∣lar lines of latitude (which is the situa∣tion from South to North) and of lon∣gitude (being the respect vnto West and East) and therein shall we find, that the very place of this forenamed posture is either a part of Finicus Sinus, the Bay or Gulfe of Finland, or some border of
the Land and Townes seated vpon that Gulfe. If we take counsell of Gerad Mercator in his Atlas Major either by viewing his Mapps or reading the numbers desig∣ned in his Alphabeticall tables, he affor∣deth vs at least 4 degrees to spare, whereby the verge of Finland is exten∣ded Eastward in the parallele of 62. beyond the Meridian of 53. as evident∣ly appeareth by the situation of Kinaveb Egrepe, Iegaborg, and other Townes neere bordering. Some other Mapps draw those parts a little more to the West: which is not to be accompted strange, when as in many parts of the world (especially those that are lesse fre∣quented by travellers, or lesse furnished with inhabitant Astronomers) the true longitude is not so certainely knowne, as the latitude. And therefore a small diversity of this kind occurring in va∣riouse Mapps is not much to be stood vpon. True it is that our Tycho expresseth
that designed concurrence of longitude and latitude, as lighting vpon Illam Moscoviae plagam, qua cum Boreali & or∣tum simul respiciente Finlandiae parte con∣iugitur: That coast of Muscovy, which bordereth vpon the Northerly and Easterly part of Finland. Whether ledd thereto by the composure of Mapps in his time, pulling Moscouy more West: or thinking that huge continent of Moscovy and other Eastern parts more fit for the title of Magna septentrionis domus, The great house of the North hereafter mentioned in Sybills prophe∣cy: or lastly (which is most likely) for that divers distasts and quarrells happe∣ning between his Soveraigne the King of Denmark,Tycho once was faine to hide his head for bringing too nere home a praediction, which after∣ward proved true. & the neighbouring King of Sweden, it had bin over open to envy and iealousies to haue deuoted in direct termes any part of the Dominions of the Swde for the seminary of great and violent alterations: and so he chose ra∣ther to expresse the place by the phrase of Russia bordering vpon Finland, then
of Finland bordering vpon Russia. Sutable heereunto is that his modest or cautelouse demurre, wherewith the events of this signe are by his penn ten∣derly tacked vpon the designed place, with submission to other mens iudge∣ments, in these words. An igitur HINC tantarum turbarum & mutationum,Pag. 810. quae per hoc insolens ostentum innuebantur, primae oc∣casiones pullulabunt, at{que} post-modum in alias Mundi Plagas late magna & diuturna vi disseminabuntur, aliis expendendum deci∣dendum{que} relinquo. I leaue it to be weigh∣ed and determined by other mens iudg∣ments, whether or no the first occasions of those great turmoyles & alterations implyed by this extraordinary wonde∣rous Starr, shall budd foorth out of this place designed by me, and shortly after be shed abroad thence into other Regions of the world farr and wide, with great and durable forces. Thus Tycho Brahe. It is a true saying, that in predictions (especially humane, and coniecturall)
event, and experience is the best Com∣ment. If therefore about a place and time thus decyphered there now ap∣peare evidence of vnexpected immuta∣tions, being the streames issuing from a fountaine lately breaking forth and get∣ting more strength with full Tide of prosperous successe, why may not we acknowledg herein Gods extraordinary handy-work as performed in the event, so also fore-described in the heavenly Characters of such miraculous signes? If Eclipses of the two great lights, and coniunction of Planets vnder some portions of fixed star, haue at any time, or may portend events vpon earth, much more may new Starrs moulded by the hand of God in the highest hea∣vens challenge the like propheticall lan∣guage. Those Eclipses and coniuncti∣ons are meerly naturall, and haue their certaine revolution, and concurrence, which many yeares before their appa∣rition may be infallably set downe by the observation of Gods ordinary
Power in the motion of the creature: but this admirable Sarr in the essence, and place thereof sheweth the finger of God, reaching higher then to the support of Naturall agents: and there∣fore much more probably may be pre∣sumed to be an obiect, not onely of the eye by beauty and lustre, but also of the vnderstanding, in being a mes∣senger of Divine future operation. In the times now mentioned by the learned Tycho, and in and about the places, whereupon he especially fixeth the influence of this new He∣rald of Heaven, we can finde no o∣ther fit subiect of application then the new risen Starr radiant in virtue and goodnesse, sparkeling with the beames of Martiall Valour, the pro∣sperous and admired Gustavus Adol∣phus King of Sweden, who by his manifold and sudden Conquests is now made the spectacle of the Chri∣stian World, beheld and spoken of with no lesse admiration, then that
new Starr of the North, which see∣meth to be his fore-runner. As for the time, the three termes of re∣volution intēded by Tycho, viz. the yeares 1593. 1620. 1632. or therabouts may deci∣pher him, the first (well neare) his Birth, the second his Ingresse, the third his Pro∣gresse in successefull Conquests. Then likewise the place pointed at by the Heavens, or rather appointed by the God of heaven to be the Seminary or Nest, which shall send forth the Au∣thor of great alterations is found to be the Countrey of Finland, a part of his Dominions belonging to the Kingdom of Sweden, and recited in his Title, Great Prince of Finland Seeing that time and place so conve∣niently concurr with incomparable successe in his Victories, (wherein he deporteth himselfe so admirably, that it is hard to say, whether be greater his Valour in subduing, or his Iustice in the vndertaking, and well vsing his Victo∣ries to the reliefe of the oppressed we
shall not need here to describe the par∣ticulars of his Atchiuements blowne a∣broad by the Trumpet of publique Fame, and ecchoed vnto vs by the weekly tell-tale Corantoes Such cleare beames of Vertue and Glory Envy it selfe can neither out-face nor suppresse. Yet to set vnder one view some part of that, which otherwise may disper∣sedly be gathered by certaine Informa∣tion, we will take leaue to shadow out some few lineaments of his worth and happinesse. Gustavus Ericus King of Sweden (the first crowned Protestant of our Age) was his Grandfather: to whom that Kingdome oweth their liberty from the yoake of the Danes: whose sonne Charles likewise freed them from the pressures of the Polacks. This Charles marryed the daughter of Adolph Duke of Holstein, and by her begate this Gu∣stavus Adolphus, borne at Stockholm the last of November 1594, stilo vet. Who thus by two descents is in blood and ge∣nerous
disposition qualified to be a Re∣storer of Liberties. About the seuenteenth yeare of his age, Anno 1611, he was by his Father Charles made Colonell of a Troope of Horse in the Warrs against Denmarke. When hee had setled Peace in his owne Countrey, by composing of dif∣ferences and quarrells risen betweene him and the King of Denmark, about the yeare 1614, vpon refusall made vnto him of re-imbursment of lrge summes of money layd out by the State and Subiects of his Kingdome, and lent to the Emprour of Muscovy, he vnder∣tooke vpon that iust quarrell to make an Inroad vpon the adiacent Domini∣ons of that potent Emperour, and ta∣king his March from Finland with pro∣sperous successe he in a short time con∣quered the mighty Province of Ingria, or Ingerland: and among the rest hee took the famous strong ort of Kex∣holm, and shortly after by the medtion of King Iames our late Soveraigne con∣cluded
a Peace betweene himselfe and the Emperour of Muscovy vpon very good and honourable Conditions: whereby he not onely held that Coun∣try which hee had seized on, but also received of the Moscovite a great summe of money for his expence in that warr. So that now hee is possessed of some part of that vast Continent of Moscovia, whitherward our Tycho Brahe (as be∣fore is noted) would seeme to extend more Easterly the poynt designed by this Calculation. And consequently if (supposing, but not graunting) we should stretch the foreinstanced longitude of 53▪ into this border of Muscovy, then may we thus vnderstand these words of Tycho, inde initia mutationum, thence or from that place shall issue out the beginnings of alterations, namely, that other alterati∣ons shall be produced in other places and regions, but by him, who shall very there in Russia make the Commence∣ment of his exploits and Conquests.
For that footing and ground gayned there may well be accompted the first stepp to his greatnesse,In this con∣struction Fin∣land may be the place a quo whence, and Russia the place both in quo and a quo where, and whence great alterations may be sayd to have their cruption. and foundation of his other conquests, not onely in or∣der of time, but also in the inhabling him and fleshing his hardy Finlanders for further vndertakings. About the beginning of the yeare 1618. he entred Livonia against the Polonian, and proceeded in that inva∣sion so prosperously by severall con∣quests, in divers places, that by the yeare 1624. that whole countrey was made subiect vnto him. About the yeare 1626. he entred Prussia, and surprised the Fort of Pela∣via, at once making himselfe Master of all the trade of the rich Cities of Conings∣berg and Elbing:The Finlan∣ders and other Sweds are his toughest helps, being best able to endure the cold and hard∣ship of Win∣ter-warfare. which enterprise he vn∣dertook with his owne natiue Sweds & Finlanders (who in that employment did not exceed the number of 9000. men) but with so wonderfull successe, that this achieuement may rightly be coun∣ted the rise and growth of his greatnes.
With this small force he marched to∣wards Elbing, and whilest the Burgers of that Towne were treating a neutrality with his Counsell in the Tents, he, with some few Musketers attending him, boldly entred the city, which with feare and amazement admitted him vpon the onely command of his word, and con∣fident Maiesty of his countenance: the walls thereof being at that instant laden with armed men well appoynted for defence against him, who then behol∣ding his entrance durst not discharge a bullet, or make any other resistance a∣gainst him. This City he made his Magazin for the warr, and departing thence he took the great Castle of Mariburg, being the seat of the Teutonique Order of Knight∣hood. Where not having eight thou∣sand foot he entrenched himselfe, fight∣ing in the face of forty thousand Poloni∣ans, and ten thousand Imperialls: and so tyred and wore out the great army of the enemy, that they not onely by the
mediation of our dread Soueraign King Charles, in the yere 1629, submitted vnto his conditions of Peace very honorable on his part, but also yeelded vnto him a great part of that Territory of Prussia. The Emperour hauing thus made war against him in Prussia, and oppres∣sed the King of Denmark, the Duke of Pomerania, & Mechlenburg, and the King of Swedes enemies being likely to make themselues Master of the Baltique Sea, not only to his ruine, but also to the en∣dangering of Denmark, and endamma∣ging of Great Britaine and Holland, the King of Swedens subiects being vniustly spoiled of their goods, and forbid com∣ming on the German shore to trade, the Towne of Stralsond hauing formerly grieuously complained vnto him of the wrongs and danger wherewith they were encompassed; vpon these and o∣ther necessary causes (as by his published Manifesto may appeare) he entred Ger∣many in the yeare 1630, and took from the invading Imperials the Isle of Rugia,
a place of great importance, which ser∣veth him for a safe station for his ship∣ping. And then winning a strong Fort on the maine land (on purpose by the oppressors of the liberties of Germany then built against him,) himself landed at Stralsond in Iune, 1630. In December following he took the Townes of Griffenhagen, and the Fort of Gartz in the face of the enemies Army, and following the Victory chased the Army of Walensteine Duke of Frieland, which having possessed the Citty of Franckford on the Oder, and Lantz-bergh, he took the one by assault in the open day, when it had 6000 old Souldiers in Garrison, and the King not aboue se∣ven thousand to attempt it. From thence marching without de∣lay the very next day to Lantzbergh with two thousand foot and a thousand horse he tooke that strong passe by composition yielding to him vpon the onely motiue of his reputation, out of which Marched foure thousand foot,
with shame and astonishment behol∣ding so small a number, to whom they had yielded themselues. In this present yeare 1631. the de∣feat given by him (ioyning with the Duke of Saxony) in open field and pitched Campe, may bee called the downe weight of his valour, casting on his side the ballance of predominant successe: which was atchieved vpon the seuenth of September last neere Lipsich in Saxony, in a field called Godsacre, be∣ing the selfe same plot of ground wher∣in the Emperour Charles 5. tooke Fre∣derick Duke of Saxony, and Philip Lant∣graue of Hessen prisoners in battell, de∣vesting thereupon the Duke of Sax. of his Duchy and Electorat; which is now by revolution of Time repayed by this Defeat vpon the very same place. Tillies Army consisting of 44000 fighting men, the King of Swedens and the Duke of Saxonies Army in all of 38000. In which battell the Duke of
Holstein leading the left wing of Tillyes Army, gaue the onset vpon the Kings Army, and was taken prisoner within short time; the Duke of Sax. being hot∣ly charged by Tilly, left him elbowroom in the field together with three of the Saxon Regiments that stood to it. And so the King hauing now not aboue 18000 fighting men, set couragiously vpon Tilly, putting him to flight, entred vpon his Ordnance, Wagons, and Tents as they stood furnished with meat vp∣on the Tables prepared by them, who now had no list to returne to that Sup∣per, but rather left it to those for whom God had provided it. The flying enemy was shrowded by the black mantle of the night, so that the conquering King could not further pur∣sue his Victory till the next morning, when drawing out a thousand horse he in person followed them eight Dutch myles, cutting off 1000 of the foot, and taking prisoners 3000 more. The losse on Tyllies part is esteemed
at 18000, whereof slaine 8000, and taken prisoners 10000. The losse on the other part not aboue 1200 men as by the more strange & truer Computa∣tion is avowed. The Kings Motto or Word was Deus nobiscum, God on our side. Tillies Word, Sancta Maria, Saint Marie. I think more foreboading coniecture might haue been made out of the vne∣quall counterpoise between these two tutelary Patrons or protectors, then out of the auspicious flying of a great troop of birds in that field, by some observed vpon that very morning, instantly be∣fore the Armies set vp their rest in the place, namely overflying the place of Tillyes army, and lighting in the place of the King of Swedens army. The ancient Latines called that au∣gustum, which was bonis avibus gestum, acheived according to the foresignifica∣tion made by the lucky and prosperous flying of birds, and in that sence may this victory be called augusta, though
contra ipsum Augustum in his principall commander of his forces defeated, and ruined. Some haue obserued the symbolizing and easy transmutation between the names Augustus and Gustavus, inferring thence that whereby his friends would heap vpon him more glory, and perhaps his enemies more envy. But those that looke vp higher to reade Characters written in the Heauens, and guilded with the beames of new Stars, will not so low, and vpon so light ground, as Anagrams are, lay the foundation of pre∣dictions: and therfore neither will we insist vpon that menacing sentence, Te debellabit aversus DEVS, denoting the SVED. And because the late coniunction and association between him and the Duke of Saxony, hath bin & is a strong means of the late further growth of his strēgth and progress in Victories, it is here to be obserued and accounted no small part of the fore-spoken alterations, that the
said Duke, (formerly being a kind of dormant Neutral, & therby giving way to the encroachments of the enemy) is now awaked, & not only seeth the dan∣ger whereunto the Liberties of Germany were cast, but also reacheth forth his hel∣ping hand and ingageth his strength to∣ward the recovery of the ancient & iust Liberties, therin commenting by action vpon the Prognosticall speculations writtē about sixty yeares agoe by Paulus Greb∣nerus, a man of the same Astronomicall profession with our Tycho Brah; but what authoritie or reputation his wri∣tings deserue, I leaue to the iudgment of others Penes authorem esto fides This Grebner wrote a lrge book of predictions which he is said to have gi∣ven to Queen Elizabeth, our late Sove∣raigne of blessed memory. The origi∣nall wherof written by the hand of the Author, was by the worthy and Reue∣rend Doctor Nevil giuen and put into the Library of rinitie Colledge in Cam∣bridge, whereof hee was Master, and a
most generous and edifying Benefactor vnto it. In the 261 page of that Book he thus, Bohemia Tumultus et bellicosos strepitus magna cum defectione suorum sen∣tit. Tempore ill Caesar Electoris Saxoniae naso Hispanica, fraudulenta, dolosa, blanda, insidiosa imponit conspicilla, quorum naturā tandem ipse pernscit, proprio{que} edocetur ex∣perimento, quod haec Austriaca conspicilla pop∣pysmata et phalerata verba sceleratae et pro∣ditoriae sint practicae: quibus si vltra fidem habere duceret, seipsum, conjugem, natos, & vniversos Christianismi confederatos in perni∣ciosum praecipita et exitium. What revolt of Bohemia may here be intended, let others make construction: but sure this present Duke of Saxony being now himselfe a grand agent both in opposing Tilly, and also since that in vnyoaking the chiefe City Prague, with other Townes in Bohemia, demonstra∣teth that he hath recovered the right vse of his eyes, by casting away those false Spectacles, which were put vpon his nose by some cunning hand.
Out of this Grebner diverse other par∣cells haue bin transcribed and much en∣quired after, as applyable to these times and to the mutations present or proba∣bly expected in Germany and other coun∣treys. But I forbeare inserting them, be∣cause they conteine confused and ambi∣guous matter, and may happily seeme as well to poynt at other times,Greb. Pag. 173. as this, in which Secus felicisimo successu classe & suo populo terra mari{que} in hostem vtetur, The Swed shall with most happy suc∣cesse employ his Navy and people by sea and land against the enemy. Yet verily the attribute of felicissimus successus may by this Gustavus, for the vnmatchable prosperity of his attempts, be challenged as a proper Character, in which neither any other Swed, nor man for many ages can pretend partnership with him, much lesse eminency aboue him. Whilest these things are vnder the pen, the further processe of his victories comes to our eares, and, among the rest, his entring of Francford vpon the Mein
being the chiefest Mart-town of Europe, and the seat of the Crowne of the Em∣peror. Which Towne he rather won by loue, and respect to his honour, then subdued by force; The gates whereof willingly opening to admit him, he made entrance thereinto the seventeeth of November, Through which Towne he passed with all his army in aray; but with so good order and discipline, without violence or wrong to any of the inhabitants, that it seemed rather a pomp of a natiue King, then an enforce∣ment by a foreiner. Of this, and the like his seisures, or entries into the many other yeilding ci∣ties and townes it may be said, that he speaketh by action, what formerly was vttered by the pen of one of his prede∣cessors, Theoderick King of the Gothes (& sharer in Roman Empire with Iu∣stinian) He in one of his Rescripts, or let∣ters Missiue thus,Vide Aurel. Cassiodorum variarum lib. 3. Ep. 43. Aliorum forte Regum praelia captarum civitatum aut praedas appe∣tunt, aut ruinas: nobis propositum est (Deo iuvante) sic vincere, vt subiecti se doleant no∣strum
dominium tardius acquisisse Warrs vndertaken by other Kings for the most part tend to the destruction, or sackage of those cities, whereof they get the ma∣stery: but our purpose is, by Gods assi∣stance, to conquer in that manner, that the subdued may think themselues ill a∣payed, that they did no sooner cast themselues into our hands. Add we hereunto, for conclusion of this present application, the happy pro∣tection which hath accompanied him in the midds of extreame dangers, which argueth that the hand of Gods providence hath both appointed & safe conducted him to become an instru∣ment of great mutatiōs in melius for the bettering the estate of some parts of Christendome. Warfare is to all militant men a perpe∣tuall contexture of the netts of danger, but most to Princes vndertaking in per∣son: With this enemy hath this King often grappled. First in the ruiments of his prowesse, and budd of his strength, when he was
but seventeene yeares old, in the warrs between his father and the King of Denmarke he was hard put to it, fighting vpon the yce, when he very hardly esca∣ped drowning: and being then put to the worse, hath made good that obser∣vation of an ancient warrier, that none can be a good leader in the warrs that hath not sometime bin well beaten by the enemy. This hansll therefore may well be accounted the apprentisage of hardship to him. Some of the Indian people distinguish their Noble from the Vulgar by raced marks and figures imprinted in the skin; Surely more proper markes of noblenesse in warriours are the scarrs of wounds casually inscribed on the body. Nam{que}Sidonius Apol∣linaris Carm 23. in corpore fortium virorum Laus est amplior amplior cicatrix. The summe of honor in the Warrs Is scor'd by characters of Scarrs. The badge of this acquired honour this King beareth in his Royall limbs, peirced with shot more then once: such
rude messengers frō the enemy hauing dared to make forcible entry in his belly, and shoulder, where they yet con∣tinue their lodging, and haue the honor to enter with him into many a surprised or yeilding City and Castle, like the dull bittle, that mounted high by cleaving to the Eagles wing. These vneasie guests cannot by their gravity slack his Martial motion, but rather by the sense of them add a spur to his valour, and more force to the bullets, which he sendeth back in requitall. In his warrs in Prussia at Darsaw he was surprised by some that issued out from an ambuscado, and so twice within a few houres fell into the hand of the enemy: and was again as often rescued by his owne, partly valor, partly ingeni∣ous and nimble sleight, as also by the ca∣sual approach & assistance of one of his souldiers, by whom, for concealment of his person, he was in the action called Brother. And this souldier presently after being himselfe taken by the enemy, was
by the Kings owne hand mutually re∣scued: who thereupon by the rescuing King was saluted in these friendly words, Quit brother, now you and I are euen. Of which accidnt may be made this typical construction, that he is ordeined to relieue those that defend and assist him: and that his abiding the adventure of captiuity, tendeth to the redeeming of others out of bondage. Moreouer, in this or some other con∣flict audacious danger aspired so high, as to strike at his head: but missing the ayme it hit his Hat: which being stric∣ken off it came into the hand of the ene∣my, and being knowne, was afterward sent to Vienna the chiefe City in Austria, and receiued there with ioy and con∣gratulation, as a Trophey of victory a∣gainst him, and pledge of fuure getting the head that wore it. Quo nunc Turnus ovat spolio, gaudet{que} potitus. When Turnus gat young Pallas in his power,Virg. Ae∣neid. 10. He from him hent the bssed belt he wore. And thus possesse of that hostile spoile In triumph beareth it about a while.
But what followeth hereupon? Turno tempus erit &c. The time wil come, when he shal curse the day Wherein he tooke and bare that spoile away. That Hat is like to be purchased at a dearer rate, then some Kings have sold their Crownes. Ille oculis postquam saevi monumenta doloris Exuvias{que}Aeneid. 12. ad finem. hausit, surijs accensus, & ira Terribilis, Tune hinc spolijs indute meorum Eripiare mihi? Aeneas, when he spyed that well knowen Belt, Revived griefe, and anger inly felt: And flaming with revenge, Shalt thou (quoth he Clad with my friends aray escape from me? The bloud of heroical Aeneas boyled at the triumphant possession of a piece of furniture surprised from, not him∣selfe, but his friend; not living, but slain; How much more may a generous vi∣ctorious Spirit resolute by strong hand and Martiall inroad to recover that vp∣per couerture of his owne head? It hath bin reported that thence it is transported into Italy, and bestowed on the wooden Lady of Loretto, for whose weare it is as fit, as the Gowne bequea∣thed to her by that Father of Critiques, of
whom it is fitly said, that Criticus virilem Virgini togam legans In morte fecit Lipsius soloecismum. A dying Latinist of great renowne Vnto the Virgin Mary gave his Gowne. And was not this false Latine so to joyne With Female gender that case Masculine? But now leaving this digression con∣cerning his Hat, and returning to the Crowned head that wore it, we referr to the contemplation of iudicious men, whether a man thus armed with prote∣ction for escape of many more capitall hazards, then here are, or can be, reci∣ted, admired vnto astonishment for his great & suddē Victories beloved for his virtues both Christian, Morall, & Military, iustly stiled the releever of the wronged, and restorer of oppressed Princes & Li∣berties, concurring so neere in time and place with this fore-described Celestiall calculation, be not to be accounted that Stellae filius, & aureus Coeli partus, the child of that priviledged Starr, and the golden issue of Heaven, glittering with the beames of high attempts & match∣lesse Honour.
Do not these present alterations make way to a fuller accomplishment in the time now by computation approach∣ing, namely the yeare 1632. and the yeares instantly following after the same? wherein may be made good not only the generall predictions of our Astronomer, but also in particular (a∣mong other redresses befitting this Conquerors greatnesse, and goodnesse) the restitution of some other devested and deiected Princes to their natiue dignity, and vndoubted inheritance. But (may some say) do all the hopes or feares of the future successe of these great alterations depend vpon the weak string of such Apparitions, whose activity in such events perhaps is either none at all, or vtterly vnsearchable by the witt of man? And if searchable, why not rather fetched from some later Comets or pretending Starrs, which since this haue appeared within our Horizon? Respon. 1.Not meerely on such farfetched and
coniecturall premises relyeth the expec∣tation of the consequents betyding these times. For if, abstracting all coniectures from aboue, and supposing there were no such fore-significations, wee confine our thoughts onely to the consideration of neere by-passed, and now present e∣vents, and thereby in the balance of hu∣mane probability weight out the expec∣tation of the future, we shall need none other bond of assurance then the pledge of Gods providence, wheron we are to rely: and whereunto all forenamed coniectures are but accessory and super∣numerary. As for the operation, or portending signification of superior lights, (what∣soever doubt may be made of the ordi∣nary lamps of heaven, and the aspects resulting out of their regular motions) it cannot be denyed but that extraordi∣nary wonderous visibles may haue, and haue had their attendant significations.Ioel 2. 30. In which sence it is no impiety literally to interpret those words I will shew won∣ders
in the heauens and in the earth, partly of that flaming sword-like Comet, that appeared, as a forewarner of the destru∣ction of Ierusalem. Sutably hereto why may not some significant power bee graunted to this high heauenly, more then ordinary, spectacle? Why not thence modest, and sober collection, and probable inference be made? The prin∣ciples whereof, and manner of deduc∣tion from them are not here suppressed, but, according to our authors processe, layed out fairely aboue board: To which way of inference the Christian Reader may affoard what parcell of cre∣dit hee shall thinke fit to meat out by the rule of piety, and liberty of opinion. Valeat vt valere poterit. Let it float as farr as this water will beare it. Lastly concerning other later Co∣mets, or appearing starrs, it may truely be avowed, that among them all none was so remarkeable for height, bignes, and lustre, all concurring, as this the el∣der brother and Captaine of them: in
comparison whereto they may be con∣tent to be called, as puisnees, and after∣lings, so also minorum gentium, petits of a lower forme. Diverse of them were obserued by our Tycho in his life time, and surnamed by him rather Comets, then starrs. But this especially he iudged to be forespo∣ken of by one of the Sibylls in that pre∣diction,Sibylla Ti∣burtina. which in the yeare 1520. was found vnder ground in Suitzerland en∣graven in a marble stone in very anci∣ent latine characters,Vide Cornel. Gemmam de divinis cha∣racterismis. in this manner of Orthography Orietour sydous in Euro∣pa soupra Yberos ad magnam septentrionis do∣mum: colus radii orbem terrarum ex impre∣viso illoustrabunt: &c. A starr shall a∣rise in Europe over the Iberi at the great house of the North: whose beames shal suddenly (or vnexpectedly) enlight∣en the whole world. In regard of the heauens the seat of this admirable starr (whereof wee haue treated) is evidently domus Sep∣tentrionis, being in Cassiopeia, not aboue
eighteene degrees distant from the North-pole: to which neernesse none of the later did approach: and in res∣pect of the subiect place in the earth, correspondent thereto, that tract, wher∣of formerly we haue discoursed, is by as good right magna domus Septentrionis, the great house of the North. It befits not (nor is it easie) to deter∣mine who are these Iberi, and accor∣dingly how supra may be diversly con∣strued, nor what is meant by the other words of Sibyll, Eodem fere tempore, hoc demorso sydere, coaevum quoddam eious lou∣men longe ardentioribous Mavortis igni∣bus exardescens Antipodum finibus occlu∣det Imperium. But vndoubtedly in this Sibylline prediction must be intended (as the following parts shew) not so much (or not onely) portentum coeleste, a bright visible in the heaven, as Stella Moralis a radiant, admirable, potent atcheiver on the earth. Which who, what, when, or where he is, or shalbe is certainely knowne onely
Stellarum domino, stellifici{que} Deo. to him that framed this new great light in the heavens, and ordained the same vnto ends best knowne to his heavenly Wisedome. Prase him all ye Starrs,Psal. 148. 3. and Light. Theodahadus Rex. COgnoscite arma nostra pro salute vestrâ destinata,Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 13. ep. 18. vt, qui vos tentaverint appe∣tere, divino auxilio manus eis Gothorum-de∣beat obviare. Bee it knowne to you, that our Army is ordeined for your safety: So that whosoever shall bee so bold as to set vpon you, shall finde that the warrlike troopes of the Goths are prest and ready by Gods helpe to en∣counter them. FINIS.
