11843 99856951 22599
¶ A discription of Nortons falcehod of Yorke shyre, and of his fatall farewel. The fatal fine of Traitours loe: By Iustice due, deseruyng soe. OF late (alas) the great vntruth Of Traitours, how it sped Who list to know, shal here e How late allegeance fled. ¶ If Riuers rage against the Sea. And swell with soddeine rayne: How glad are they to fall agayne, And trace their wonted traine? If fire by force wolde forge the fall Of any sumptuouse place, If water floods byd him leaue of, His flames he wyll disgrace. If God command the wyndes to cease, His blastes are layd full low: If God command the seas to calme, They wyll not rage or flow. All thinges at Gods commandemēt be, If he their state regarde: And no man liues whose destinie By him is vnpreparde. But when a man forsakes the ship, And rowles in wallowing waues: And of his voluntarie wyll, His owne good hap depraues: How shal he hope to scape the gulfe? How shal he thinke to deale? How shal his fansie bring him sound To Safties shore with sayle? How shall his fraight in fine succede? Alas what shall he gayne? What feare by storms do make him quake How ofte subiecte to payne? How sundrie times in Dangers den Is throwne the man vnwyse? Who climes withouten holde on hye, Beware, I him aduize. All such as trust to false contracts, Or secret harmes conspire? Be sure, with Nortons they shal taste A right deserued hire. They can not looke for better spéede, No death for such too fell? God grant the iustice of the worlde Put by the paynes of hell. For such a pensiue case it is, That English harts did dare To passe the boundes of duties lawe, Or of their cuntrie care. And mercie hath so long releast Offendours (God doth know) And bountie of our curteous Quéene Too long hath spared her foe. But God, whose grace inspires her harte, Wyll not abyde the spight Of Rebels rage, who rampe to reach From her, her title quight. Although shee flowe in pitifull zeale, And loueth to sucke no blood: Yet God a caueat wyll her lend T'appease those Vipers moode. A man that sées his house on fire, Wyll seke to quench the flame: Els from the spoyle some parte conuey, Els seke the heate to tame. Who sée a penthouse wether beate, And heares a boistrouse wynde: But héedefull sasetie of himselfe, Wyll force him succour fynde? The pitifull pacient Pellican, Her blood although shée shed: Yet wyll shée seme her date to end, Or care her young be sped. The Eagle flynges her yong ones downe That sight of sunne refuse: Vnperfect fowles shée deadly hates, And rightly such misvse. The Crane wolde flye vp to the Sunne, I heard it once of olde: And with the kyng of byrdes did striue By Fame, I heard it tolde And do woe she wolde not fal fe no, But higher styll did mou: Til past her reach (saith olde reporte) Shame made a backe recour I touch no Armes herein at all But shew a fable wyse: Whose morall sence doth repr Of clymers hye the guyse. Who buyldes a house of many , and laith not ground work But doth ertorte the ground g, His buildyng can not dure ¶ Who sekes surmising to disp a Ruler sent by GOD: Is subiect sure, deuoide of grace The cause of his owne rod. A byrde that wyll her nest defyle By right should loose a wyng: And then is shee no slying fowle, But slow as other thyng. And he that loseth all at games, Or spendes in fowle excesse: And hopes by haps to heale his harme, Must drinke of deare distresse. To speake of brydles to restrayne This wylfull wayward crewe: They care not for the booke of God, To Princes, men vntrue. To cuntrye, causers of much woe, To faithfull fréendes, a fall: And to their owne estates, a styng, To others, sharpe as gall. O Lorde, how long these Lizerds lurkt, Good GOD, how great a whyle Were they in hand with feigned harts Their cuntrye to defyle? How did they frame their furniture? How sit they made their tooles: How Symon sought our englysh Troie To bryng to Romaine scooles. How Simon Magus playd his parte, How Babilon bawde did rage: How Basan bulles begon to bell, How Iudas sought his wage. How Iannes and Iambres did abyde The brunt of brainesicke acts, How Dathan, Chore, Abiram séemd To dash our Moyses facts. How Romaine marchant set a fresh His pardons braue a sale, How alwayes some against the Truth Wolde dreame a senceles tale. Gods vicar from his god receaued The keyes to lose and bynd: Baals chaplein thoght h{is} fire woe Such was his pagan mynd. Good Lorde how hits the ter their ts That saith such men shall bée In their religion hot nor colde Of much varietie. And sundry sorts of sects sur Diuision shall appeare: Against the father, sonne shaue, Gainst mother, daughter e. Is it not come to passe trow you? Yea, bastards sure they bée, Who our good mother Quéene Withstand rebelliouslie. Can God his vengeance long reta Where his true seruants féele Iniuriouse spights of godlesse men, Who turne as doth a whéele? No no, his suffryug long (be sure) Wyll pay his foes at last: His mercye moued once away, He shall them quight out cast With sentence iust for their vntruth, And breakyng of his wyll: The fruits of their sedicious séeds, The barnes of earth shall fyll. Their soules God wot sore clogd wt crime And their posteritie Bespotted sore with their abuse, And stand by their follie. Their liuyngs left their name a shame, Their deedes with poyson sped: Their deathes a wage for want of grace Their honours quite is dead. Their flesh to feede the kytes and crowes Their armes a maze for men: Their guerdon as examples are To dash dolte Dunces den. Throw vp your snouts you sluggish sorte You mumming maskyng route: Extoll your exclamations vp, Baals chapleines, champions stoute. Make sute for pardons, papists braue, For traitours indulgence: Send out some purgatorie scraps, Some Bulls with Peter pence. O swarme of Drones, how dare ye styl With labouryng Bées contend? You sought for home from the hiues, But gall you found in end. These waspes do wast, their stings be out Their spight wyll not auayle: These Peacocks proude are naked lefte Of their displayed tayle. These Turkye cocks iu cullour red, So long haue lurkt a loofe: The Beare (although but slow of foote) Hath pluct his wynges by proofe. The Moone her borowed light hath lost, Shee wayned as we see: Who hoped by hap of others harmes, A full Moone once to bée. The Lyon suffred long the Bull, His noble mynd to trye: Vntyll the Bull was rageyng wood, And from his stake did hye. Then time it was to bid him stay Perforce, his hornes to cut: And make him leaue his rageing tunes In scilence to be put. And all the calues of Basan kynd Are weaned from their wish: The Hircan Tigers tamed now, Lemathon eates no fish. Beholde before your balefull eyes The purchace of your parte, Suruey your sodeine sorrowful sight With sighes of dubble harte. Lament the lacke of your alies Religious rebells all: Bewepe that yll successe of yours, Come curse your sodeine fall. And when ye haue your guiles out sought And all your craft approued, Peccauimus shall be your song Your ground worke is remoued. And looke how Nortons sped their wills Euen so their sect shall haue, No better let them hope to gayne But gallowes without graue. {que} William Gibson. ¶ FINIS. ¶ Imprinted at London by Alexander Lacie, for Henrie Kyrkeham, dwellyng at the signe of the blacke Boye, at the middle North dore of Paules church.
