1356 S100661 99836492 769
EXCHANGE WARE AT THE SECOND HAND, VIZ. Band, Ruffe, and Cuffe, lately out, and now newly dearned vp. OR A DIALOGVE, ACTED IN A SHEW IN THE famous Vniuersitie of CAMBRIDGE. The second Edition. LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Myles Partrich, and are to be sold at his shop neere Saint Dunstones Church-yard in Fleetstreet. 1615.
RVFFE, CVFFE, AND BANDS COM∣PLAINT AGAINST THE PRINTER. VVHen th' Printer read the copy of our Iarrs, He attacht vs streight as authors of some warrs: And like a Iudge th'arraignment did begin, With guiltie (yea or no) of such like sin. We that had words, yet knew not how to crie, Not guiltie, Sir, condemned were to die: And since in silence thus our plea did rest, According to the lawe hee'd haue vs prest.
THE OWNERS APPEALE FROM M. PRINTER HIS FALSE IVDGEMENT. PRinter, you are mistaken in their fault, And though he sweares, that Band, Cuffe, Ruffe are naught, Yet thus the cause hee'd have you vnderstand, He was bewitch't by this same Cuffe, Ruffe, Band. To doe him Iustice, then he doth desire, Condemne this Ruffe, Cuffe, Band, vnto the fire. So shall you see your Iudgement will proue right, And so their faults shall sooner come to light.
A Jurie of Seamsters, and their ver∣dit vpon Band, Ruffe, and Cuffe. 1. I View'd my wares, and found Bands case was good, And Ruffe and Cuffe, if rightly vnderstood. The fault the Printers was; for he mistooke, And made a writ of Error in the booke. M. Pus. 2. LEt Iudgement trie to whom the faults belong, 'T wil say, the Printer did Ruffe, Cuffe, Band wrong. M. T. 3. I See no fault for which I iudge it meet, That Ruffe, Cuffe, Band should here stand in a sheet. M. A.
4. THe work's well viewd, each man in it doth pry, It cannot scape the very Needles eye: Yet this be sure, if ought had beene o'reslipt, The fault by me should not haue scap't vnript. M. H. 5. NOt for to cleare you, Ruffe, Cuffe, Band, come I Hither to th' Tearme: but rather here to buy A prohibition for to make no more, Lest by this art, we Seampsters grow but poore. M. L. 6. MY verdit's this, The accuser is in fault: To picke a hole in Ruffe, Cuffe, Band, 'tis naught. M. O.
7. THey presse Ruffe, Cuffe, & Band: (what reason's in't) And yet desire, they still should stand in print. M. B. 8. THinke not your face so good, as need no band: Dare not to spoile great Ruffe; set not your hand, Cuffe to disgrace. All Linnen els will take Vp armes for Ruffe, and Cuffe, and Band, and make Their enemies like Friers, wool-ward to lie, Or weare a Dishclout, yet afore they die. M. H. 9. THe faults in Ruffe, Cuffe, Band, are whose, doe you thinke? The Printers? I. He spoild them with his Inke. M. I.
10. WHat though the Printer Ruffe, Cuffe, Band hath stayn'd? Ile get it forth, or else let me be blam'd. For all his blacke foule fingers neuer feare, But that the Landresse she can make them cleare. M. D. 11. IF this Ruffe, Cuffe, and Band condemned are, Weele looke vnto the Linnen, that we weare. Did you desire good Ware, you'd rather plead, The owner sure hath spunne a goodly thread. M. D. 12. WHē Cuffe at the Barre is forst to hold his hand, And there condemned is with Ruffe & Band, You that can see in them there's such defects, High time it is to looke vnto your necks. M. E.
The Owners desire. THe faults that may in Ruffe, Cuffe, Band be nam'd, Will surely make the Owner more then blam'd; You will condemne him for what he mistooke: Yet still he craues, you'd let him haue his booke. M. Stitchwels sentence. THe Printer seekes some way to bring about, That he the second time might set Ruffe out, With Cuffe and Band. The Owner doth begin To seeke some way, that he may call them in. Thus to please both, & grant them their request, My sentence is, The Booke shall be represt. Vpon the second Edition. BAnd, Ruffe and Cuffe, at first so well did goe Through Stitch, as nought might added be therto.
Yet in my mind they now seeme well enrich't, Since by the Printer, they haue bene double stitcht. M. Burse. WAre ne're the worse for wearing? 'twas much afore. But now new washt and starcht, 'tis thus much more. You'le not lose tweluepence by it (marke what you giue) Weare it and vse't, as long as ere you liue. M. Exchange. To the Cheapner. DOe you heare, Sir? one word more: Pray let me know, What is the vtmost farthing youle bestow? To sell at such a rate, there's none can liue. But since no more y'are minded for to giue, Harke in your eare (I hope you'le not reueale it) It cost me so, or I in trouth did steale it.
A Merrie Dialogue betvveene BAND, CVFFE, and RVFFE. ACTORS. Band, Cuffe and Ruffe. Enter BAND and CVFFE. Band. CVFFE, where art thou? Cuffe. Heere at hand. ENTER RVFFE. Ruffe. WHere is this Cuffe? Cuffe. Almost at your Elbow.
Ruffe. OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou haddest beene worne out of date by this time, or shrunke in the wetting at least. Band. What? doe you thinke I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know that there be men of fashion in place, as well as your selfe. Cuffe. Good Band, doe not fret so. Band. A scurvie shag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Punie, a Freshman, come vp hither to learne fashions and seeke to expell me? Cuffe. Nay: if you bee so broad with him, Band, we shall haue a fray presently. Ruffe. He iustles B. and C. stayes him.Sir, Ile pull downe you Coller from you. Cuffe. It was fit time for mee to stay you vp, for I am sure you were a falling Band. Ruffe. Well, Band, for all you are so stiffe, Ile make you limber enough before I haue done with you. Band. No, Hodge Poker, its more then you can doe. Ruffe. Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let mee catch you in another place, and I will make cut-worke of you. Band. Ther's ne're a Spanish Ruffe of you all can doe it.
Cuffe. Sfoot, if these two should goe together by the eares and hurt one another, Cuffe would be in a fine plight: would he not? Ruffe. Well, Band, looke to thy selfe, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee roundly. Band. Lace me? thou wouldest be laced thy selfe, Ruffe: for this is the very truth, thou art a plaine Knaue. Cuffe. If they talke of lacing, I were best looke about my selfe. Ruffe. Darest thou meet me in the field? Band. In the field? why? thou art but an ef∣minate fellow, Ruffe; for all thou art so well set: but at what weapon? Ruffe. Nay, I will giue thee that aduantage, bring thou what weapons thou wilt, I scorne to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle-worke. Band. Sfoot, thou shalt know, a Gentleman and a Souldier scornes thy proffer. Ruffe. A Souldier? Cuffe. Did you not heare of the great Bands went ouer of late? Ruffe. Where did you serue? in the Lowe Countries? Cuffe. It may be so, for I am sure he is a Hol∣land Band. Band. Where I haue serued, it is no matter: but I am sure I haue beene pressed oft. Cuffe. Truely, his Landresse will beare him witnesse thereof.
Ruff. Presse mee no pressings: Ile make you know that Ruffe is steeled to the backe, if I had my sticke here, you should feele it. Band. Nay, bragger, it is not your great words can carie it away so; giue Band but a hemme, and hee will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and houre of our meeting. Ruffe. The place, the Paper-mills, where I wil teare thee into Rags, before I haue done with thee: the time, to morrow in the after-noone about one: but doe you heare? wee will fight single, you shall not be double, Band. Cuffe. Now I perceiue, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly. Ruffe. But doe you heare? once more doe not say at our next meeting you forgot the time. Cuffe. No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more carefull of the time then he: for I am sure he hath alwayes at the least a dozen Clockes about him. Ruffe. Farewell then. Band. Then farewell. Cuffe. Nay, you shall not part so, you will go into the fieldes, and know not what fighting meanes: a couple of white liuered fellowes, your Landresse will make you both as white as a clout if shee list; If you lacke beating, shee'l beate you, Ile warrant you, shee'l so clap your sides toge∣ther, that they shall bee beaten out in once or
twice hādling; why? I haue known her leaue her markes behinde her a whole weeke after, sheell quickely beate you Blacke and Blew, for I am sure shee'll scarce wash white before shee starch. Band. Well, remember the time and place, Ruffe. Cuffe. Well, remember your selues and Mi∣stris Stitchwel, one to whom you haue beene both beholding in your dayes. Band. Who? Mistris Stitchwell, by this light I know her not. Cuffe. No, nor you neither? Ruffe. Nor I, I sweare by all the Gumme and Blew-starch in Christendome. Cuffe. I thought so, why its the Sempster, one that both you had beene vndone, had it not bene for her: but what talke I of your vndoing? I say Mistris Stitchwel the Sempster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little doe you re∣gard her: but it is the common custome of you all, when you come to bee so great as you are, you forget from what house you come. Ruffe. Sfoote, Ruffe careth not a pinne for her. Band. Nor Band a button. Cuffe. Well, Band and Ruffe, you were best both of you to take heede of her, you knowe shee set you both in the Stockes once before, and if shee catch you againe, it is a hundreth to
one, if she hang you not both vp, for she hath got strings already. Ruffe. Meet me, if thou darest. Band. The place the Paper-mils, the hower to morrow at one. Cuffe. Since you will goe, goe; but heare me, if you goe, looke at me well; as little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuffe you both out of the fields; if I doe not, say, Cuffe is no man of his hands. Ruffe. Alas poore shrimpe, thou art nothing in my hands. Cuffe. If you goe, you shall neuer say that Cuffe came of a sleeuelesse errand: Ile binde your hands (I warrant you) for striking. Band. Say and hold. Ruffe. Remember the Paper-mils. Cuffe. And you bee so chollericke, Ile euen pinne you both in, as soone as I come home: can you not decide the quarrell betweene your selues without a field? I had thought you had beene a little more milde, Ruffe. You were a horrible Puritane the other day, and very pre∣cise, Ruffe. Ruffe. Hang him, base Rascall: would he not make any man mad, to see such a — that durst not (scarce) peepe out, before Collar came to Towne, now to swagger thus? Cuffe. Come, you shall be friends, Band.
Band. Friends with him? such a base Rascall? he is a very threed-bare fellow: I scorne, but my man Collar should goe as well as hee euery day in the weeke, and be friends with him. Ruffe. Thy man, Coller? thy Master, thou wouldest haue said, I am sure hee is thy vphol∣der. Cuffe. Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Maker: for Bands make rags; Rags make Paper, Paper makes Past-board, and Past-board makes Collar; and I thinke that this is a stiffe argument that he is his Master. Ruffe. Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, Ile cut him in iags, let me but claspe him, and Ile make him for stirring. Cuffe. But you shall not. Haue you not Friends and Neighbours ynow to end this con∣trouersie, but you must goe into the fields, and there cut the threed of your liues? wee'l haue none of that: come choose you an Vmpire, Band, for it shall be so. Band. Since you will force me to it, if Ruffe be content, I am willing. Cuffe. Ruffe, you shall be content. Ruffe. If I shall, then I must, let him name him. Band. If I may choose, Ile haue Master Hand∣kerchiefe. Cuffe. Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Sni∣veling
fellow, & a notable lawyer; he will wipe your Nose of all, if you put the case to him: but what say you to Shirt? Ruffe. He is a shifting knaue, and one, to whom Band, a little before hath beene much beholding. Why, they were ioyned a long time together in friendship. Cuffe. Why, then goe to Master Cap, the headman of the Towne. Band. No, I denie that, he is a very bad Iustice, you may haue him wrought on any side for mo∣nie. Ruffe. Ile tell you what, then we will goe to my Lord Corpus himselfe. Band. He is not in Towne. Ruffe. He is, for I saw Sock, his chiefe Foote∣man heere yesterday. Cuffe. Heer's adoe with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed, I would you were both hanged about his necke for me. But I see, this strife will neuer be ended, til I be Arbitrator my selfe, you know, I am equally allied to you both: shall I be Moderator betweene you? Band and Ruffe. Content. Cuffe. Well then, thus I pronounce. Ruffe shall be most accounted of amongst the Clergie, for he is the grauer Fellow. (Although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him, hee hath such a deale of setting, and they loue stan∣ding
better.) As for you, Band, you shall bee most made of amongst the young Gallants (al∣though sometimes they shall vse Ruffe, for a fa∣shion, but not otherwise;) how euer, you neede not regard the giddie headed multitude, let them doe as they list, sometimes respecting one, sometimes the other: but when you come to the Counsailors, and men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging both your Worths to be equall, they shall preferre neither, but vse the kindnesse of you both, wearing both a Band and a Ruffe; how say you, are you both content? Band and Ruffe. We are. Ruffe. Then goe before me to the next Ta∣uerne, and Ile follow after with a Band of your friendship drawne, which I hope these Gentle∣men will seale with their hands. Exeunt Band and Ruffe. Cuffe. Claw me, and Ile claw thee, the prouerb goes, Let it be true in that our Muse here shoes, Cuffe graceth hand, Cuffes debtors hands remaine, Let hands clap me, and Ile Cuffe them againe. Exit Cuffe. FINIS.
