13926A 99842689 7366
THE SEIGE OF BREDA BY THE ARMES OF PHILLIP THE FOVRT VNDER THE GOVERNMENT OF ISABELLA ATCHIVED BY THE CONDVCT OF AMBR. SPINOLA Louanii ex officina Hastenii M. DC. XXVII.
TO THE MOSTE EXCELLENT LORDE AMBROSIO SPINOLA MARQVES OF THE BALBASES. KNIGHT OF THE MOSTE NOBLE ORDER OF THE GOVLDENFLECE. One of his Maiesties consell of State. Captaine general of his Army, vvhiche intered in Germanie: Master de Campe General of, theis States and Captaine General of the sea Ar∣my of the same. Moste Renowmed, Glorious and Victorious PRINCE, MAny vvere the reasons and motiues vvhich moued me to set forth in the In∣glish tongue, the illustrious seege, and vvorthy regayning of the tovvne of Bre∣da, by thy so prosperous, and potent arme, and to dedicate the same vnto thy Excel∣lencie. First, so to diuulge vnto the vvorld (as much as I vvas able) the inuincible povver of that Great and Migh∣tie Monarche, the Catholique Kinge of Spaine. Second∣ly, to spread abroade and to proclaime, the fame and pie∣tie of that Pearle of the vvorld, the most Excellent Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spaine, such and so vvorthyà
Princesse, vvhose very ēnimies approue of her iust, deser∣ued and undeniable praises, being such indeed, as hardly any mortall pen canset, them forth as they deserue. Thirdly, that both friendes and foes might vnderstand, the true vndanted valor, and inuincible courage, of such an incomparable Generall, as thy selfe, vvho for thy ar∣dent zeale and feruour to the Catholique cause, I may for a briefe and summary abridgment of thy vertues, rightly call, the Captaine of Captaines, the triumphant Palme of all those vvho beare armes, the scourage of re∣belles. Terror of Heretiques, suppresser of seditions, succour of Religious. Protector of virgins safegard of Monasteries, Bulwork of the lowcontries, and inuinci∣ble Champion of the Catholique Church. oneill and odonel those famous warriers of great renoome, pru∣dent. and braue conductors. their notorius actes so re∣douted that their enemies so feared them, ey, and as. I ha∣ue heard say, mootheres to cause there children to houlde there peace when they cried, feared and affric∣ted them. withe this very name. resultinge of the renoo∣me of there rare victories, sore and blooddy encounters and notorius executions. But the name of Spinola, dan∣teth and maketh to tremble, not babes or children, but euen the proodest, hautiest, and most insulting enimie of the greatest Monarche, of all Europe, the King of Spai∣ne, vvho as he is the greatest and most incomparablest of all the rest, and vvhose only name al other Kinges of Christendome (enemies vnto him) do redout: so of all the Captaines and Commanders of this most Catholi∣que Kinge, no Captaine, nor no Commanders name is more redouted, then that of Spinola. For this is that right worthy Spinola, which no Scipio, no Pompeo, no Ce∣sar, did euer surpasse, in prudence, valor, vigilance, fideli∣tie,
and all other vertus. This is that Spinola vvho by his Heroicall facts, manifested to the world by so many most famous victories, hath accquired to him selfe euerlasting glorie, and left to all posteritie, perpetuall memorie. This is that Spinola, vvhome the hand of the highest asisting, conquered and subdued, that almost impregnable towne of Breda. notwithstanding almost all the Princes of Eu∣rope, conspired with their vttermost force to oppose him. This is that glorious flower of all Italie, which contry, as it hath brought forth many rare and incomparable war∣riers in former ages, so hath it now brought vs forth a Spi∣nola, no way inferior to his worthy predecessors, but ra∣ther such an one, in whom alone, all their former virtues seeme to be reuiued. This is that Spinola, or rather to spea∣ke more properly, that thrice renowmed Spine or pric∣king Thorne, which hath pricked the harts of all warlike Nobilitie, vvith the Spine or prick of emulation of his in∣comparable vertues: But principally, this is that Spinola or right vvorthie Spine, vvho hath pricked the harts of the present rebells and enimies of the Church of God, vvith such a prick and deadly dart, as hath vvounded them all e∣uen to the hart. Fourthly and lastly, I vvas moued hereto, that in relating the inuincible povver of that mightie Monarch the King of Spaine the vnspeakable pietie, zeale and deuotion of the most Excellent Infanta, the in∣comparable vertue, valor, prudence, and braue conduc∣tion of this their so noble Generall, togither with the vnited loue vnspotted loayltie, and rare iudgment of other his Maiesties Nobles and faithfull subiects in these executions, in all occasions, I might (with thy Excellencies leaue) both enlighten my beloueded contrymen, with thehonor of thy Heroicall Acts, with the rarieties, of that famous siege, and with the innu∣merable
plots and stratagemes of war, practised as well on Thine, as thy enimies side. And the rather, for that not only my selfe, but other Captaines of my nation, with many of our contrymen, serued in this siege vnder thy co∣lors, euen from the first to the last of the same, receiuing, at thy Noble handes such infinit honor for our seruice, as hath and euershall, iustly oblige our liues vnto thee, when∣ce I douted not, but that as by publishing the same, I should (as both my dutie and desire was) perpetuat thy excellent praises to all posteritie amongst my nation; so they would reape to them selues, much frute therby, in contemplation of thy vertues, and would with as willing mindes receiue the same, as I willingly employed my pai∣nes in setting it forth, principally for thy honor, secon∣darily for their vtilities, such in particular as ar more in∣clined to warres; and ar desirous to learne some curiosi∣ties in the profession of armes. Raigne, Conquer, and e∣uer Ouercome (inuincible Prince) which thy Excellen∣cies seruant and moste loyal Captaine, and humble Ora∣tor, shall euer pray for during life. CAPTAINE GERRAT BARRY. IRISH.
THE SIEDGE OF BREDA MAny thinges with theare greatnes, haue made the siedge of Breda famouse, abo∣ue the memorie of forepassed warres first, the suplies of greate socoures, that were on euery side gathered toghiter by the e∣nemye, The great ex¦traordinarie socorres, and emulation of strangeres. as though the contention had beene not for the sauegard of one towne, but for the prin∣cipalitie of the whole empire: the endeauoures of foraine nationes, so much augmented the fame therof, as that e∣mulation it selfe, encreased the renoume of the victorie. Next the wonderful, and vnheard greatnes of the fortifi∣caciones The admira∣ble trinches. whiche was made, by the enuironinge of a dou∣ble trinche, against bothe an enwarde, and an outeward enemy, suche a one as hardlie anye forepassed histories ha∣ue left in writhinge moreouer an incredible multitude of The multitu∣de of fortifi∣casiones. batteries, trinches, redutes, and fortes, and other fortifi∣casiones of like Kinde, whiche bothe were perfected in that cruel time of the yeare, and in auerie short space, the∣re greatnes considered. Furthermore, the greate dificultie Great diffi∣cult in tran∣porting of vitualles. of transportinge prouision Safely, in so longe a iourney, bothe in winter time, and also in deepe VVayes, the space of aleauen monthes, when in respect of the costly cariad∣ge by Vituales and cariadge des∣re.
wagones, imposed vpon the willing prouinces, the deuastation of viladges and plases of defence, the prices of all marchandise were very greate, nor any wages payed to Vituales and cariadge des∣re. any soilder, but verie seldome and haulfe payes. Lastly a∣certeine peculiar helpe of the diuine power, continually a∣sisteng oure afayres, and beating downe the plottes of the enemyes, as if it had beene euen fauorable vnto vs, of∣fendet Amarue'ous fauor of god and ofensiue towardes them. Of whiche diuine prouidence, theare haue apeered so many, and so certai∣ne argumentes, in al this warre of Breda that albieth the endeauoures, and vigilance of the comanderes were verie greate, yet douptlesh thei had efected nothing with all there cares, withoute the extraordinary helpe of god, the∣re cheefe captaine. and thiese in amaner, are the thin∣ges, whiche haue diuulged abroade the fame of this warr, through oute the whole worlde. Breda albiet otherwise it be none of the greatest townes, yet in the compas of the The sreuid of Breda. walles, it douthe conteine no more then foure thousand pases, so that it can be walked rounde aboute almoste in an houres space. seauentine viladges aperteineth to the same with in his libertie. Firste in the yeare 1404. it fel vnto the house of Nasawe, by the dourie of Iane Polan, whow beinge heire of Breda, maried Engelberet counte of Nasawe. The same towne in the yeare 1567. Duke de Alua when william of Nasaw fleinge for his treason VVhen it ca∣me to the house of Na∣savve. comitted, gott into the kinge of Spaines possession. The yeare after, it came againe to the house of Nasawe in the yeare 1577. the count of Hollac compellenge it to be re∣stored. Then againe in the yeare 1581. being taken by The times the to vvne vvas loste and recouered the baron of hautepen by force and craft was subiect to the Kinge for nyne yeares, vntil suche time as aurager in the yeare 1690. by the fraude of sendinge in of aboate, (wherin lay hid secretly seauentie soilderes, as in times paste the greekes did be the troyan horse) gott in to his
possession bothe the castel, and the cittie, be the comaun∣de of Maurish of Nasavve Prince of orenge. The tovvne being almoste in the furt hermoste partes The situatïon of Brabant, reacheth to Holand by the riuer merka. it is inuironed vvit he neighboure tovvnes, and viladges not far distant: It lieth in amoste pleasantpart of the lāde, fuche a one as very many captaines and soilders saide they had not seene the like in all europe; so that not vvithoute cau∣se Graue Morish cauled Breda his paradyse. the fildes on euery syde plentifull of pasture, and corne, all the meddos compassed vvith yonge plantes, all alonge are deuided, vvith many riueres, as it vvere in there natural boundes; The roes of tries being set in order, as it vvere by line or by square with there grine bowes, doe on euery side sha∣dowe the pasadges of the wayes, and of the houseses. Not far of there were planted foure woudes, one of pine tries, and three of oakes. There passeth trough, it two riueres, Aa, and Merka, and withone of those two it is in∣closed. The riuer Aa being enriched with the riuers Aa filles his ditches. of the plaine contrie, douth rum about the walles of the towne, and is retained with asluce, least the ditches aboute the walles be left drie, when the wa∣ter of the riuer of merka (whervvith it is mingled vvithin the tovvne) are fallen a vvay vvithe the e∣binge of the sea, and vvithall it turnes a mill of cor∣ne vvithe aslovve course, into the tovvne. The place vvhere the riueres do mingel them selues togither; by the influence of the riuer Merka, into Aa, hathe retai∣ned The riuer merka pa∣seth trovve the tovvne. the corupt name of them boath, Merkendal as it vvere to say, Merka in Aa. Merka beinge shutt up from Aa. Betvvext tvvo trinches of brik vvalles in those ve∣rie diches of the vvalles, slideth troughe the tovvne, deuidethe be nature into many partes, and broader, be litle and litle, povvreth it self into the vvateres, and
sea of Holand not far of from Dortdreght. It is day∣lie stirred up be reason of two tydes. And by interpo∣sed sluses, it ouerfloweth the fildes of the suburbs, as often as it pleaseth those of the towne. From Aa, of oulde vnto the towne the name of Breda was giuen by the brabanders vnto whome Breede signified broade, as if thei woulde haue expressed the chanel of the riuer Aa, spreadinge it self obroad. In the midest of the tovvne, there is built an high tovvre of 362. foote, from vvhence is afree prospect The height of the tovvre. into the negboure townes, fitt to giue and receiue sin∣gnes from afar of. The houses are thught to be in number athousand two hondered. The towne in forme, is triangle if the The number of houses in the tovvne. castel built by the walles shoulde be comodiously ta∣kin. It beinge fortified with walles, bridges, magasens, The forme of the tovvne and with a double ditche of water, more doth contei∣ne in compasse, then a thousande passes. Furthermo∣re, it is so adorned with galeries, porches, pillers, wal∣kes, and with so pleasant gardines, that hard it is to Iud∣ge And of the vvalles. wether it be more stronge, or more beautiful. The walles of the towne beinge planted with a continuated row of oakes built not of brikes, buth of turff, withe three gates. made of brikes, do giue an extrance upon three corners of the towne, besides that by the whiche men goe oute of the castel. The curtines of the walles and of the castel, lieng betwext, doth altogither contei∣ne the number of fiftine bulwarkes wel prouided with artileries and some corne mills with winde sayles: There are tvvo plat formes vpon the vvalles for the ca∣non to shutt afar off. Vnder thies at the foote of the vval∣les next the ditches, there are tvvo shelters but som vvha∣te lovver, like to a third in anothher place aboue vvhich there is no mont adioyning.
Thies are as it vvere certaine places of refuge, vnto vvhich men goe be sorties vnder the ground and they doa∣peere aboue the vvatheres, foure feete in heght. Belovv aboute the foote of the vvalles, there is a hedge of thornes, hauinge the boughes cut and bovved in, and vvrethed a∣longe, vvhiche serues for defence to the shooteres and to the vvalles. The ditche lie open in an vnequal breadth, The bread of the disches. vvhen for the moste parte in a hondereth and fiftie pases, and at least in seauen tie paces, there is discouered in the circuite of the ditches, fourtine rauelinges cut in atrian∣gle forme, reachinge oute of the midest of the riuer, ru∣ning about them, vvherof three do Ioyne to the vvalles next the bridges of the gates, and with other two, the wa∣ter of the two riueres are deuided into the ditches. Ano∣ther The outvver de fortisica∣siones. runes be a litle bridge til it comes to the walles of the castel. Towardes the oute warde side is a parapet of fiue foote highe, that the smale shott may the better discouer on euerie side. Fiue fortificasiones apeereth in the front of the foure gates of the towne and castel. the cortines, and caualleros, are corespondant in discouerenge the ditche, and they assure the same in some thirtie foote broade. The foure haue 210. foote in lenght on bothesides, in breadth a hondereh and fiftie: The greatest that leyes to the castel, is in lenght two hondereth and fortie paces; and twoo hondered broade. The front beinge made crooked to∣wardes the Angles or corneres whiche the Spanard cau∣le tenacas and in Inglish horne woorkes. There apeere sharpned stakes oute of thies workes in clinenge dovvne∣vvardes The vvour∣kes of defen∣ces. to hender the a scent, if any atēpt to scale the vval∣les should offer. Ouer the ditches of the outvvarde fortes, there is a haulfe moone enclosed vvith a litle vvalle, and ditche turned crooked the lenght of a cubitt, to defende the shooteres; vvhiche they calle the halfe moone;
encompassed vvith another ditche. From this ditche; the distance of some pases; there is a conterscarf to vvhi∣che you are to goet trough a litle raisinge bridge suche a one as that of the other side of the tovvne. All thies in vvard, and outvvarde fortificasiones of the tovvne, Ex goode cor∣respondance. are so fitly disposed amongst them selues, and do dis∣couer, and ansvver one to another that some bienge higher then other, others being equall in hight, the one defende the other from the vvalles; and from the furthermoste to the neereste if neede be one may Forme of the teritorie or fortificasiones retire from the one to the other. lastly, the groun∣de belonging to the suburbs is of that nature and si∣tuation, that be continual ebinge and flovvinge of the sea, or vvithe pooles sodainly dispersed, no man can haue any accesse. Furthermore an I land belonginge to the suburbs, cutt oute against the ca∣stel, for the preparing of shipes, is inuironed vvith avvall of an in deferent height. After this forme Gra∣ue Morish, tvvo yeares sence comaunded vvalles, bulvvarkes, rauelinges, parapetes, and ditches, to be made. But when the situation and fitnes of the towne, did as it were alure be its owne nature, and proprietie, to stir up as it were a certaine scoole of mi∣litarie discipline, the states of the vnited prouinces. de∣sired that (whiche many foraineres iudged to be as it were the best wresteling place for soilders) for to exer∣cise in armes to be set before others for an example, and to be instructed. Hither therfore did bothe frence, Inglish, and the Germans come togither to learne mi∣litarie disipline; Hither Graue Morish was wont to send bake those that were skilfull in warr. (as often as consultation was to by made of exact fortifica∣siones, and perfect woorkes.) Hither he sent the
Numero 1. BREDA AS IT WAS FOR∣TIFIED BY THE PRINCE OF ORANGE BEFORE THE SEIGE LAYD BEFORE IT. A Bulwarkes B Rauelins C Cats D Halfe Moones in the walls E The Counterscarpe F Horne workes G Halfe Moones with their Parapet H An Iland on the other side of the ditch fortified with a parapet I The Ports of the Towne and Castle
son of Emanuel of Portugal nephew to him be his shi∣ster, made general ouer atroupe of foote togither with acompany of horse. Hither he sent bothe his sones being bastardes borne, wher of the one led at roup of foote. Number I. Iustinus Nasauw broother of Graue Morish, was Gouer∣nor of the towne a man exellinge be the vse of longe expe∣rience Iustinus de Nasavve vvas Gouer∣nor. howe coulde defend an a saulte be consel and asie∣ge be frugalitie. Iohn Artsenius drosart lord of vvormes was chife of the cittisens, a man no lesh constant then The drasats Iohn of Artsens. wise, for the moderateng of the dispensation of corne, and of tempering seditiones, and ministtinge counseils, in sudaine and desperate cases. For the defence of the towne, there was vsed to be apointed commonly, sixti∣ne companies of foote, and to the castel, but one, of The number of the ordi∣nari garisen. horsmen fiue, in the whole sixtine hondreth soilders. Butt hauing vnder stood of late the Rumor of the warr, there were added eight companies of foote, and of cit∣tisens that were able to beare armes, there were nom∣bred eightin hondered, who me Artsenius ruled be au∣ctoritie. The number of citisens ru∣led be Art∣senius. The corne prouided for the soilders in vvinter vvas eight thousand tvvo hondered measures of vvhea∣te, of oates, tvvo thousand eight hondered, of chese, three Measures of orne. thousand six hondered vveighte, and as many pound of dried stokfish. The cittisens vvere comanded, man be man; to mak prouition of corne for tvvelfmonthes, be∣fore vve couled come to besiedge the tovvne; soo that there might be no necessitie, to deminish the prouision made for the soilders. For the vvinnenge of this tovvne, vvhen many then∣ges Consideratiōs that mooued the Marques
to befidge this ovvne. did incorage the Marques Ambrosio Spinolas minde, many thinges also did vvithdravv itt. First the oportuni∣tie of the place did great lie enduce him, bothe for the hin∣dring of the frequent enuations of the enemies horsmen into Brabant, whiche from thence they moste como∣diously desingned to whate parte they pleased; As also for the hindereng of al nauegasion betwext the adioy∣ning townes of Breda, And the borderinge townes of the confines of Holand, and Zeland; VVhich is tought to haue beene don with no smale dificultie, by reason of some townes that were taken neere at hand, with en∣credible losh to the enemy. Further more many other comodities did allure him to attempt to take this tow∣ne, rather then any other; to witt the Zoile of the su∣burbs, fitt for making his trinches and fortificationes, eyther to make assault or to entrench. Hauing a riuer fit to pass ouer, and easili to be damned up, whiche being don, they who were besiged, might easilie be kept from prouition. They had woodes nere at hande, the fildes were fertile for feedinge. Lastly this was considered; that Breda being taken Bergen up Som, and other townes neere at hand might be taken the more easily. On the contrarie, the strenght of the towne that was Difficulties the Marques formd in vvineng the tovvne. so fortified both be endustrie and nature, did discorage him; But espesially the great dificultie of transportinge vituales a far of, when eyther the enemies was to be a voi∣ded with a greate convoy, for al oure citties were distant great days Iurneyes on foote, or that they might want vi∣tuales nor was there behinde them, any commoditie of riuer, whiche coulde be sayled with shipes to beare pro∣uision, vnlesh Breda, beinge neere at hand, as it were the theator of the enemies citties, could be bloked up. It was doupted whether that with a great number of VVagones, vvith longe and combersom vvayes be reason of the
winter, prouision and vitualles might be broght vnto us, which was manifest coulde nether be don without ado∣ble garde of soilders, nor withoute greate danger. This was the state of the lowe contries at this time, and State of the lovve con∣tries. of oure affaires. Filip the fourth King of Spaine, did forbid that any peace shoulde be made withe the confederated states, Iudgenge that truce, to be more hurtful then warr. The Archduces, Isabela Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spaine, wi∣fe of Albertus that excelent Prince deceased, thought it a disgraseful thinge that the army wherwith the Kinge florisheth in the lowe contries, should be Idel, and wit∣houte Implomient the repulce of Bergenop some was not reuenged, whiche being retained after the sidge, the e∣nemies gloried. Germanie being quiet from warres re∣sted. The strenght of the bastard Mansfelt yea and his ve∣rie name, was almost extent. There was intire pease bet∣wext the Kinges of France and Ingland, with the onely enemies of the confedrated prouences, there was Iuste cause of hatred. Herupon warr was intended against them, not for desire of rule, but for desire of reestablissin∣ge of religion, and recoueringe of there owne. Spinola in the 21. of the monthe of Iuly in the yeare a∣thousande six hondereth twentie foure goinge from Bru∣xeles, the time of the yeare beinge proper for warr, he cor∣ne being reepe, gathered an army. But he kept him self so reserued in this affaire, that although he fulli resolued to besiedge Breda, yet if he perceiued it hard to be effected; perhapes with a greater army a sit fel oute sent oute by the enemy. he, oute of euerie place wherin he lay, might be The resolu∣sion vvixt vvith the Marques vvent vnto the filds. able. As he iudged fit for the present good) to vndertake the same turninge his armye whiche way soeuer it shoulde please him.
The armie was deuided into thre pattes, making a she∣ow The armie vves de uided into three partes. to goe into diuers places, of set purpose to deceiue the enemie. Spinola goinge oute of his Iourney be montague, (whe∣re The Marques visited oure lod of montague. that sacred tēpel is of the moother Virgin, renoumed troughout the worlde with so many miracles) the mis∣teries of the cristian religion being dulie performed, and his deuosions beinge made at oure ladie is aulter for the ar∣my, led the foote men one way; and Lodouicus Velas∣cus, Count of Zalazarius General of the horse, led the horsmen an other way. Iohn brauius de laguna gouernor of the castel of Anwourpe with those that came frō mark∣land Ioyned with thies trupes not far from turnehoute, whiche Gonzalus de Cordoua master de campe general had gouerned. The army beinge hire mustered by Spinola, and being In his reko∣ning muche leshe people then he sought. founde lesh then it was supposed neuerthelesh he had grea∣te hope of there valor for beinge all chosen men. There we∣re in the whole fiftine regimentes, consisteng of ahonde∣reth foure score, and eightine companies; of horse, thirtie nine troopes, Breeflie, eightine thousand in the whole. Number II. Iustinus Nasaw ignorant of oure designe, but withal wa∣rie, Iustinus de Nasavv re∣forced the tovvne vveth ahon dereth com∣panies. as sowne as he hearde that Spinola, was come hither, sent for fiue companies of foote oute of the adioyninge borde∣res of sualuen, to Breda, and other fiftine beinge latelie arriued oute of Holand to Zwaluen (in whiche there we∣re two conductores of Graue Morish, and of Prince Hinri his broother, and manie Captaines with hautri∣ue afrence coronel, and morgan an Inglisman, and lo∣queren aholander; The next day after that he vnderstood
Num. 2. SPECIMEN OPERIS CORNVTI A. Frons operis cornuti. B. Fossa lata passus xxx. C. Receptaculum D. Murulus terreus E. Fossa altera F. Lorica decliuis G. Ʋrbis mocnia H. Fossa moenium I. Opus nouum, post aduentum nostrum in Gilsam, externis munitionibus circumductum a Bredanis, interna, allo passuum CXL. K. Lorica seu brachia tria fronti et cornibus munitionum praestructa. L. Fossa M. Seps sudium in decliui Lorica circum fossam.
that Spinola opproched neerer. There were sent three companies of horse to Gitrimberque of the Counte of Culingburge, Stire, and of Captaine Villebon Frence man. least there shoulde by two many horses, for the scarcitie of feeding, when tvvo companies of horse, vvith fortie fiue of foote, vvere inogh to defende the citti. To the offiseres vvho vvere lately come, to euery one vvas a∣apointed his standinge place, by the walles and outward portes. To hautriue, whow led the frenc men and the va∣lones, the watche was appointed at the gate of Genikin. To morgan coronel of the Inglish, the gate of balduke, To lo∣querin, to whome the lowe contrimen and scotsmen obe∣yd, was apointed the gate of an wourpe. thies presently wi∣the greate expedition fortified the front of ther outwarde wourkes eche of them in seueral plases of defence the dit∣ches on the outeward sides were armed vvith athick hed∣ge of stakes, Armed aboue like vnto athinge full of pikes, least anie stragling shoulde pass ouer. The distance from the outmoste bank of the horne vvourkes, euen vnto the three in vvard defences of there angles, vvas a hondred and fortie pases, vvherunto from the one, to the other, sorties vvere made in ther flankes to pass from the horned vvour∣kes vvithoute. And thies vvere the firste vvoorkes, added to Graue The Marques consulted vvith the matteres of the campe. Maurish force, vverby those of Breda began to doupt the siedge. Spinola came to Gilsh, a villadge distant from Breda tvvo houres iourney, vvith his army. Here he consulted vvith many masters de campe touchinge the beseeging of this tovvne; asked the opinion of euery one, vvhat they tou∣ght For many reasones they founde greate dificulties in the besidging of Breda. of the siedge of Breda eche one dissuadeth the assault: they afirmed the tovvne to be fortified vvith most strōge vvourkes: That the standing vvater, as often the tovvn es∣men listeth) ouerflovveth al the suburburbs: the tovvne
to be deuided into many partes by the riuer. The garison to be increased vvith tvventie eight companies of foote. oure armies for ther smale number vvas scarce corres∣pondent to so great an assault, vvherunto number vvas no lesh needfull, then valor. And if the enemy should co∣me behinde to assaulte the army, before vve had vvon so stronge atovvne, vve muste of necessitie, eyther goe a vvay vvith disgrace, or so smale an army be exposed to adoble perill, both before, and behinde. The Marques Spinola hauing heard the opinion of The Marques aduertised her Altesa of al. the masteres de campe, knovving that some stoode for the comanders and others for Inferior officeres, and that him selfe vvas freely to dispose vvhat vvas principalli to be don; and was to do al thinges according to direction, remained in the same place, and Informed Isabella the Archiduces whate the opinion of the masteres de campe were. She hauinge vnderstoode of so great augmenta∣sion of the garison of Breda, made answer, that she vvould not tempt fortune with the danger of so many valiāt men. that she should be much to blame if shee estimed not ther To conforme vvith the opinion of the masters de campes. liues more deere, whome she knoweth to be so willinge that they woulde refuse no danger at hir comaund. not∣withstandinge, leaste so excelent en army of soilders depri∣ued of glorie, shoulde returne home and do nothinge, that Spinola shoulde consider whate exploite was to be taken in hande, for there goode, and comoditie. Spinola hauinge consulted with Hinri Count of Ber∣ges schefe Gouernor of gilders (who was with an other He consulted vvithe Count Hin∣drique da Bergas. army at the rhene) sent the sardgent may or Franciscus lo∣sanus vvith letters vnto him, to aske of him vvhate he thought fitt to be don, as also Carlos of Burgondi Baron of VVaken Gran balue of gant captaine of horse shoul∣de treate vvithe Paulus bernardus fontanus, master de campe of aregiment of Valones, vvho gouerned the
prouince of Flandres, vvho might treate vvith him a∣boute Ademand touching the tntng of the Iland of casant. the busines of casant, an Iland not far of from slu∣se. They treated longe vvith him concerninge thies thin∣ges, and aftervvardes before the Infanta; and acordinge to eche ones opinion, so baron de VVaken, afirmed it to be easy, and Monseurde Fontaine to be ahard enter∣price: fontanus douted it: VVaken promised good suc∣cess, not vvith standing fontanus offered him self, to put the mater in execution, so that his command might be giuen him in vvrithing for his dischardge. The Infanta beinge willing in hope of the euent, comaunded it to Fresent'y the mater vvas reuoked. be don, and apointed a day for the dispatch therof: for thies affaires fontanus went to Bruges. Three dayes after waken, was sent priuilie, but al thinges being no we in a∣redines the Insanta, fearinge the voyadge shoulde not suc∣cede well comanded that they shoulde giue it ouer. In the meane while Spinola againe consulted with such The Mar∣ques turned againe to consuite tou∣chingh the besieging of Breda. as were fit, and with people of good Iudgement, and with some captaines calinge euery one aparte, he asked whate they thought of the besidginge of Breda, though latelie they had refused to attempt the assault. Here al againe (one onelie captaine excepted) begon to aledge the difi∣culties Al denied excpt one an a presented there reaso∣nes. of the sidge, and that the towne coulde not be in∣trenched in alonge time. The circuite of the trinches, muste of necessitie be, foure or fiue houres Iurney, for the many places of passadge of the cōtrie suburbs, which part∣ly are in accessible be reason of the marish groundes, par∣tely ouerflovv vvhen the tovvnes men do stop the riuer by asluce. Novv so great aspace is to be filled vvith so ma∣ny standinge places and vvatch vvardes, that al most they must needes meete togither, or the tovvne othervvise hardly to be blocked up: but there vvanted soilders to be deuided, into so many partes. Further it hath beene com∣manded to al the townes men in particular that a sufi∣cient
quantitie of corne shoulde be prouided for the en∣duringe of the vvinter, and sustenance of the soilders. la∣stely it vvoulde be a mater of greate tyme and labor, to weakē the towne by famine, also abounding with all thin∣ges. besides that if a great army shoulde be made for ray∣singe of the siedge, the enemy might come behinde, and euen without fight woulde take and hinder oure pasad∣ges, and wee shoulde be forced to retire, compelled the∣reto by greater honger and necessitie, for there condision and oures is so contrary, that they on euery side by the benefit of riuers, and citties, neere adioyning could ea∣silie a bound with all thinges, when al moste no winde can blowe, but might be prosperouse for any cariadge by rea∣son of the situation of diueres citties and portes. For Se∣uenberk, gentenberk, heusden, townes of suche as are confederates, and lye neere. Vnto Breda thre or foue hou∣res distance, besides some other encorparated viladges not far of, all which are fed with the sea, or riuers, but we shoulde stand in neede of corne sooner then they of Bre∣da, be reason of the longe, and hard transporting of cor∣ne in aiorney by lande, whiche way being but one, and very dangerous, shoulde betide oure army, in case the enemy did altogither blok it up. and beseedge it. An wourp, The Kinges tovvnes vvere far of. maklin, Lier (which are oure neerest townes to Breda) distant ten or twelf oures iorney from balduk, and herin∣tal, (vvhiche are the neerest tovvnes) and are nine houres iorney. one of the master de campes vvas of a contrary Only one vvas of con∣trary opinion to the rest touchinge the be caging of Breda. opinion, vvho not esteeming al thies reasones, did ther∣fore thinke. Breda vvas to be assaulted, for that no greater blovve coulde be giuen to Graue Morish seeinge he so deerly lo∣ued that tovvne, vvhiche bieng loste, he shoulde loose muche reputation. nor was it probable that the beseed∣ged had so ordered al there affaeyrs, that nothing shoul∣de
Num. 3. Numeri significant horas itinerum. * Signum locorum hostilium.
by quickly wanting in so great number, be want wherof, they shoulde not by enforsed to render it up. Hunger would opress the towne, wantinge externe hel∣pes; and the relife of vituales being hindered, woulde soo∣ne cause pouerty and discorde amongst the cttisens and the soilders. Number III. There were sent to discouer, Franciscus Medina, Ma∣theus The opinion of those that vvent first to bring re∣solution of the situation. otanus, and Don Iuan de Medises, who repor∣ted that the ground was fitt, for making trinches, and for∣tificasiones; the water of the riuer good, the woodes for fueil, and faxina, the fildes and barnes fit for foradging; but they did earnestli afirme, that al those thinges were to be feared, whiche were aledged by the masters de campe againste the siedge. meane while, Losanus returned from the Rhene with letters of Count Hendrick; who (ha∣uing vnderstoode whate al the masteres de cāpe thought of the dificulties of takinge Breda) Proposed vnto Spinola, Conde Hin∣drique pro∣poundes to beseigde reas and embrik. whate he iudged meete, to be don concerninge the beseed∣ging of Embrik and Rhes. That he was there present with his army, his compa∣nies somwhate increased, and preparinge abridge ouer the Rehn with barkes, with a fort Royal adioyned to the sa∣me; that for the better securitie of both it seemed vnto him that embrik might by taken, whiche beinge gotten, Or graue rauestene and Genep. Rheze woulde woluntarie yealde itself. But if it shoulde not like him, that abridge should by made (for want of boathes) that then was Graue and the castels of Rauesten, and Genep, whiche also might by wel beescheeged at once. and that his excelencie shoulde ordaine that whiche he tought moste fitt, hauninge firste consulted with Anto∣nius
Baron of Grobendunck Gouernor of the towne of Baldukaman expert in the knoledge of those places. Spinola hauinge sent backe Franciscus Medina master de campe of aspanishe regiment, with losanus, declared vnto him that hitherto he approoued of the count of bergas is adui∣ce, so far as it concerned Graue, Rauesten, and Genep, and de manding him whate helpe needeth for that enterpree∣ce. The people necessarie to beeleager graue. The count of bergus, required, that fiue thousand foote, and athousand horse shouled be sent te assiste him and with them and the reste of his owne army were suffi∣cient for that affaire. But he aduised Spinola to remaine securelie with his army in the villadg of Gilshe, an to houl∣de the enemy in suspēce lest they shoulde drawe fourth so∣me Cōpanies oute of Breda or other garisones to disturbe the seedge of Graue. Spinola, both glade of the consel, and releeinge vpon the Iudgment of so prudent acomander, related the busines to the Infanta, hauinge sent medina, The Marques aduertised hir Altesa. and hauing also called fourth Baron Antonius Groben∣dunk (as count bergus desired) he demanded, whate he thought of the proposed siedge of the castels of graue, ra∣uesten And sought for the opi∣nion of An∣tonius Baron of Groben∣donk. and Genep? Hee plainly affirmed, that so many In∣terprises were not so easie as it was supposed; but yet that it both might and ought to be hoped for, by the Count of Bergas relation, a man most skilfull in warr, and verie con∣uersant in those places. Many dayes beinge spent in this doubt, the army in the villadge of Gilse, began to loose courage, the riuer which is a water nere to the campe, was But litle store of vvater in Gilsen. two miles of, the welles, whiche were few, did eyther wax dry with heat or were exhausted by ouer muche Vse, or the water beinge drawen fourth was so foule, that it woulde not, but in alōge space of time be cleere and set∣led. And the thirst of the soilders vvas intolerable. Hince the empapatiēce of thirst in the extreame heate of the yeare, compelled many to drinck vnholsome wa∣ter, or to drawe it oute of ditches, or oute of the traces in
the ground cutt by the cart whiles, which caused dissea∣ses. Spinola informed of this discomoditie, leaste he shoulde slighly giue credit to this reporte, to the ende that al thinges might be the more certaine vnto him, enquireth of some of the masters de campe that were called, whether the soilders were in so great wante of water, as he was informed. They fearinge eyther to sheow the fault of the campe, (because they woulde The Marque informed of the trueth. please his eares) or measuringe other mens pouertie, by there plentie, afirmed that ther soilders had wa∣ter enoghe. The enformer herof beinge sent for by Marques Spinola, the Captaines being present, whi∣lst he proceedes to make goode whate he saied, Iohn Cont of Nasaw Coronel of two german regimentes, arriued in goode time, whow hauinge heard of the mi∣serie of his owne soilders, uphelde the informer in whate he sayde. Andone of those who had denyed it, pri∣uilie whispered in the informers eares, sayinge that he was behouldinge to him for that relation, which he him self was afrayed to make. Spinola hauinge founde oute the trueth of the mat∣ter, VVelles vvere digged for scarciti of vvater. comanded VVells to be digged euery wheare, and so aremedy was founde against this euell. fortie thousand loaues of bread, wer consumed by that bad ayer in the campe of Giles. VVithal there were at that tyme the tentes of two Other disgra∣ce hapned in the quar∣ter. Italian companies burnt, with a sudin fire: by meanes of al whiche discommodities, no wages being payed before that day, and the price of vituales beinge greate, many by flight for sooke the campe. VVhich example, Spinola fearinge leaste it shoul∣de Soilders run a vvay. be imitated of more, sought aremedy by seueritie,
and caused foure of the fugitiues that had fled; to dra∣we lottes which of thos foure shoulde suffer death. In the meane while, the free voyces of manie men we∣re heard in the army; The time of action, was spent in consultation; the spreading and publication wherof, lost The enemy murmured of the Mar∣ques. Iy and mo∣ked the Kin∣ef Spaine le bohae spanel. bothe the soilder and his reputation. Many thinges were don moste malepertlie by the ene∣my, against the Kinge of Spaine, and Marques Spi∣nola, with shame and ignominie amonghst the Ho∣landers, there were sportes sheowed, by certaine Ies∣ters, in maner of merie enterludes, which they cal∣led the spanish figth. There was in like maner aridicu∣lus picture of the Kinges spread abroad amonge the common people, sekinge Breda with alitle lanterne; Mar∣ques Spinola standing by, with both his handes scrat∣chinge his head, hauing vnderwriten a verie spitefull and tantinge vearse. Graue Maurish seeminge to be secure in all thinges, and lyenge Idely at Hage, as it were by comptempt; is reported to haue said merilie, that it had beene beter for Spinola to haue gon to Geel (where mad men are deliuered from there madnes) then to Gilsh. But thies thinges beinge slighted ouer, were forgotten, nether did they moue them to any signe of anger. Spinola, aprouing the counsel of the Infanta, tou∣chinge the besechinge of Graue, hauing sent Ion of Me∣dices with comaunde willeth Hinri the count of Bergus, to goe withe his army which he had at Rhene, vnto Graue, promishinge to send him the day apointed the Conde Iohn de Nasavv sent to socor Count de ber gas, brenging alonge vvith him Cowad de Aubermōt aman skilful in this quar∣ters. troupes whiche he required. where was sent present∣lie, Iohn Count of Nasaw. (who refused the gouern∣ment of an army, latelie offered vnto him by the co∣mon wealth of Venishe) with fiue thousand foote and
foure companies of horse: and three canons with eighti∣ne boates, and other warlike engines. He comandes Iohanes Conradus abermont Captaine of horse of Bal∣duke Don lie sento de  folovveth . Count  took in mondethrk  and the rvvne of Genep. to acompanie him, by reason of his skilfulnes of the places. The next day he sendes priuily hiacentus Velascus Marques of Belueder, with other ten com∣panies of horse, to the number of athousand, with chard∣ge, that he shoulde posess far and neere all the catel abou∣te graue, and so defend the places at his pleasure, wher∣in His soilders folovved vvith great modestie and obedience. after wardes the tentes were to be placed by the Count of Bergues. The Count of Bergues, goinge to Graue, hauinge soone asaulted the Castel of mondel∣berge, the towne and castel of cleaues, and the towne of Genep as he was in his Iorney, tooke it by force, and by there rinderinge placed garisones ouer itt▪ But the au∣ctoritie of Count Hindrik admonishinge the soilders, did so profit thos of the towne, and so terrifie the soilders from makinge piladge, that neyther was any mans na∣me brought in question, who might be found to haue taken away anie thinge by theft oute of the houses, though wel adorned, oute of whose windowes and hou∣ses, he comanded the castel to be beaten til they yealded. VVhiche thinge, when the Burgermaster of cleaues infor∣med Graue Morish de Nasaw. did admire, boath at so great ciuilitie of the soilders, and at so great vertue of the conductor, no lesh then at the integritie of another scau∣rus, as also the not touchinge the fruites of the trees whi∣che many was wondered at. He fortified on the other side of the Mosa the dorpe cauled mouck fit for prouision of vituales, and in the same place he pitched his tentes. From thence, he goes to discouer Batimburg, and Raueste∣ne, He pitched his quarter at mouk Marques of belueder took from the contrie of Graue greate store of cattel and to deceiue the enemies, he goes with fiftine trou∣pes of horse, and thre hondered shott. The Marques of Beluedere, hauinge goten agreate boo∣tie
of cattel, driueng away all whatesoeuer he founde from Graue to Rauestene, and sending them to Balduke, cau∣sed muche terror aborad. Hinrie of Bergues hauing dili∣gently viewed Batenbergue and Rauestene, sent for Iohn of Nasaw, and Conradus Aubermont to come vnto him. He sendes him Conradus with comaund, to declare vnto the Marques Spinola, that Rauesten coulde not be so Easilie won. as it was suposed, but if he woulde let Rauesten alone, Conde Hin∣drik sends againe to the Marques giuing his o∣pinion of the dificulties in vvining of rausten he woulde atempt to get graue. (if Spinola so comaunded him) and was in goode hope to attaine if. So he woulde sende vnto him some great forces. He comaundes Iohn of Nasaw, to pitche his tentes on the other side of the ma∣se, not far from Graue, and that he him self woulde abide at mouck, til Spinola had declared whate his pleasure was: Graue Iohn pitches his camp on the other side of the mase. and singnified Vnto him that he woulde in the meane ti∣me, make away ouer the mase with abridge, for passinge the armie, and ioyning it togither if need required. And count Bergues ar∣med abrige outr the ri∣uer. At that time, there fell so horible atempeste in one night, with raine, winde, lightninge and thunder, raging togither alonge time, as if the elementes were confoun∣ded, and the verie heauen it self woulde faule to the groun∣de. A vvonder ful tempest. Very obscure darknes, acontinual flash of lightning fire, acontinual noise of thunderes, rayne fauleng, not by dropes, but like vnto ariuer, and violent whirle windes. Lastly all thinges were full of terror, as if it had bene the la∣ste day. That night, Hinrie Fredrik of Nasaw, had desig∣ned VVho the e∣nemy is for∣ces vna aua ri tought to fall on the Excell, of Graueden∣drike. with his whole army to assaulte the tentes of Hinrie of Bergues not yet fortified, had not the tēpest aforesaid diuer∣ted it. Thre dayes after, the soilders of Graue being coman∣ded to goe fourth, they returned againe to ouerthrow the campe of count bergues with greater forces; but when nei∣ther the people of Graue were come in due time, and Cō∣de Hindrique was fortified and better prepared, al the con∣trouersie Graue Iohn de Nasavv pitched his camp in aco∣modions place. was ended with a litle squirmisch. Iohn of Nasaw,
as it was prescribed, pitched his tentes not far from Graue, haueng possesed so goode aplace, that they were enclosed with the riuer of the right side, before and on the left, with abrook flowing from the riuer. Not with standing he ma∣de atrence before, and on ether side, in that distance, a∣gainst the passage of the enemies. for the fore front of the tentes, the woodes were fit for ambuscados, next, the hills ariseng vpon the towne with agentel ascent, whiche bein∣ge posessed be day time by acompanie of horsmen, and be night retired for feare of suddaine opression of the ene∣my. Hence there was. dayly ocasion giuen of smale, Skir∣mishes of horsmen, when in the morning, by reason of the trinches that, were set vpon by the enemie in the night oure soilders fought to beate them backe; Staken∣brook Gouernor of the towne of Graue to terrifie oures, The stratages∣mes of the gouernor of graue vvas in vaine. hauing made anoice with his army approaching by night, as though he were readie to breack in to the campe, co∣maundad them to sound aretreate, next day after, being asked of Nasaw in discourse, wherfore he had disturbed his, and his soilders sleepe, withe, suche anoice of en signes? Count of Nasavv an∣svvered made answer, that he wondered more, why he came to take those citties by force of armes, the enheritance wherof he was one day by right to take posession of. To whome con∣trarie wise Nasaw answered, that he let pass that In heritan∣ce for the present (Because it was incertaine) but with all à spired after his owne gouerment of graue. VVhich the gouernor hearinge, saied. Ireturne home; And hauinge sayed this departed, and presently began to shut into the tentes of Nassaw, as to exact punishment for his ambi∣tion. After this, Aubermontius went from Hinrie of Ber∣gues The Marques tought strang of the dificul∣ties of Graue Hiudrik touching ra∣uesten. to Gils; whose answer beinge heard, Spinola won∣dered why bergus by his consel obiected so many difficul∣ties, (wherof he professed him self to by the chife man.)
But yet because he reuoked that which was proposed by him, touching rauestin, for feare of the euent, and desired to goe to Graue (if he shoulde be comanded (he shoulde do the same of his owne head and therupon goe on spidilie. VVith thies comaundès he sent back againe Franciscus Medina with Auber montius to Hinrie of Berguis. In the meane while he him felf doth fortifie Giles with twelf redu∣tes, The quarter of Gils vvas fortified vvith tvvelf reduties. built about on ouerie side, least the enemy by that way, shoulde sodainely break foorth vnto the campe. They of Breda perceiuinge this, supposing the purpose This of Breda being dece∣iued in there presumption turned to bring ther mouables. of beseedging the towne, was altered by us, comanded all the househould stuff. which they had transported into the townes adioyninge for feare of siedge, as being now oute of feare of warr, to by recaried by boates. Neither did they prouide for vituales for aine lōger time, but supposing they should haue had prouision enogh, of that which they had got for winter, permitted thos hondered oxen whiche were latelie caried into the towne, to be broght back a∣gaine, and also two shippes loaden with cheese refusing for to buy it. furthermor all the boores and ther wiues and children, who had before flyen into the towne, and whome as mise and deuoorers of corne, they comanded to goe fourth to get victuales (if any sidge had hapened) they receiued againe thos that were retired from the fil∣des They rece∣iued manie of no seruice vvhich vvas ocation to shorten there victuals. which oure soilders spoiled, with no litle loshe of vi∣ctuales, as men giuen wholy to there belli. Furthermore it hapened by that pitching of tentes by Marques Spinola, that neyther Graue morish coulde vn∣derstand whate we seriousely entended, nor yet whate we fayned: to wit, whether we were fullie resolued, to set v∣pon Graue, or Breda, or vpon both togither, or on any o∣ther cittie: and therefore was diuers waies so troubled aboute the matter (not daringe eyther to draw any gari∣son fourth of anie one cittie to socor another; neyter there
vvere sufficient forces to socor both.) He also feared not to be able to furnish them in due time of suche proui∣tions He vvent in∣to his broo∣th. camp. befitteng. At lenght departinge fourth of Hage, his garden of recreation, vnto Hinrie Fredrick broother of Nasaw, vnto the campes of nemegam, he comaunded He fortified wwinc. artillerie, and many engines and furniture of warr, to by carried into Bomble, and the places adioyninge to Baldu∣ke, Benefit found in the delay∣ing. to be fortified. And although the administrasion of warr seemed to many, that it woulde by in vaine to delay it, aine longer, notwithstandinge wee optained by that delay, that ther remained no tyme fit for the enemie; when the fall of the leaf aproched, the best time of remoouenge to whatsoeuer place, and ours byenge now ready for wha∣te ocasion soeuer The reporte of the preparation (wherwith we seemed to be willing to set vpon graue) being diuulged among Duk de Bul∣lon came out of breda to a∣side the de∣fence, gra∣ue. the people, Duck de bullon Frenceman, whow tought that the warr which he expected at Breda, was transpor∣ted to Graue, going thither to try his fortune, and at his returning againe to Breda, he founde all the circuites of the towne shut vp by oures. Hinrie of Bergues, knowen∣ge The laste in formasiones taken bunt Hindrik he found it far contrari to the first. the situation and condition of Graue, hauing also vn∣derstood the ópinion of the Inhabitance did contrarie wise perceiue all thinges, and releying vpon som mens iudgmentes, perswaded Spinola. He perceiued well that hardly in thre monthes space the matter coulde by exe∣cuted. And in the meane while by reason of the vallies whiche were aboute the towne, wherin the tentes were to be pitched, that he shoulde be, assuredly remooued by the winter wateres. The contrimen, and others that kneow the nature of the place afirmed, that the spring beinge pa∣ste, it was to be aslaulted, hopinge that at the end of sum∣mer it woulde be gotten: for after the faule of the leafe, al the places were ouerflowen, and became inaccessibile. He receuied the Marques to order.
Aboute that tyme there fitly ariued Don Francisco de Me∣dina, and monse de Aubermont, sent by Spinola, whow brought comand to count Bergues for the beseeging of Graue, as he had bene charged. Spinola much wondered at the dispaired hope of winenge Rauestē when he tought him self to be sure of tacking itt. Notwitstanding if that could not be broght to pass, he comanded him to go oute of hand to Graue. Counte Bergues being oute of hope of He affirmed to those that brught the order, that not hing coulde be executed touching graue. subduenge Graue, toulde both them that were sent vnto him, that he was out of hope at that tyme of getinge of it: but hoped that he should in a short space get the casted of Genep, if Spinola permitted, which beinge won, he might easily at an other tyme get Graue. They being amased, demaunded whate at laste woulde be the conclusion? They ans∣vvered count Hendrick. That he coulde not vnderstand, whow Graue so litle di∣stant shoule be now made so stronge that in his opinion it coulde not be taken, in wich there was neyther garison, nor prouision, nor coulde be a better season? he praied him in Spinola, is name not to loose courage, and hope of the victorie of owne towne, who with all had proposed the wineng of so many other. Herunto the count replyed ma∣ny wayes, that thre whole wikes were almoste nowe paste; in which the whole affaire ought to haue bene dispatched in the bigineng. In the meane while the enemy fortified his Army with frence and Inglish at nemegam, nor was he farr off. if Spinola would send parte of his army that he was pleased to aproach neerer, he woulde try his fortune. Touching this there were many discourses, wher fore Don Francisco Aubermont who was sent tought it bet∣ter, not to answer againe butt by letteres, they carrie let∣ters He gaue then letters to the Marque. from him to Spinola, wherof this was the contentes. That it was manifest with whate fidelitie and care he had vndergon the affaires that were committed vnto him, seeinge for that onelie respect he had brought vnder his
subiection the castel of mondelberge, the castel and tow∣ne of cleaues, as also Genep, by which meanes he coulde the better entertaine his army. It is true he con∣feseth to be the auctor of that interprice, but vnder Spi∣nola is corecsion, whome he perceiued to be diuersly trou∣bled, and to doubt of Breda. That he beleeued, those thin∣ges whiche he proposed coulde be effected, but by the faulse raporte of two men, to whome he had ouermuche trusted at the firste, more then him selfe had proued by experience it is not an vnusual matter, for thinges that were hearde to be related of the behoulders as thinges that were sene, often times greate and prudent captaines were often times so deceiued. He further afirmed that the same siedge aboute that ti∣me, coulde in no wise be set, for, that he perceiueth that many sodaine thinges, woulde happen otherwise, then he imagined, yet that he would acomplish whate was commanded, and refuse no danger, so that Spi∣nola would comand the same by his letters, and with the same, excuse him to the Kinge, if the affaire shoul∣de faull oute infortunatlie; as he him self had nowe pre∣saged. Spinola hauenge receiued thies letters, withoute all ho∣pe VVate he re∣solued tou∣chinge the beelegeringe of Breda. of geting Graue settinge his minde wholie uppon the siege of Breda, hauinge called backe Count Nasaw, and the Marques of Belueder, with ther armies, and with trou∣pes of other regimentes, wherof parte was at Breda. He co∣maunded Count Hin∣rik had chard ge to be vigi∣lant and loo kvvelto the borderes of gidrres. Hinrie of bergus not to tempt the castel of Ge∣nep, and to take heede of the enemy neere at hande (and to prouide for the adioyning townes of gilders, and not to remooue, vnlesh the enemy did remooue, and they remoo∣uinge to pursue them step by step. He sent from his campe Francis of Medina, vnto the Infanta, who shoulde againe propose vnto hir, the former purpose of beseginge Breda.
she mindfull of the former difficulties, whiche had before bene aleaged to hir, doutful whate she was to do, yet gi∣ues hir consent, confidinge in the valor and happines of Spinola. Bergues obeinge the orderes of Spinola, varilie with drewe him self from the enemy beinge nere att hand, that Maurish hauinge displaied his collors with an army of twē∣tie thousand; aduentured to assaulte his army whiche were foure thousand foote and athousand eighte hondered hor∣se Graue Iohn marched vvith his troopes vigi∣lant and vvel ordered. (Count Iohn of Nasawe least that his troupes shoulde be taken and ouerthrowen by his enemies army, which then did compass him rounde aboute, deuided his army into three squadrons as it were to giue battel. An whole month was now spent in doutinge, and de∣laienge, so many melsengeres beinge sent to and fro, to no purpose. Many publickly detractinge Spinola, did not stik to say Some vvith litle respect murmured of the Mar∣ques. that this warlike interprise, was veriel handled of him: and that the consultes were fitt to be treated in court, and the executiones in the filde. Some otheres amongste there cuppes did recount Spinolas, ignominious repulsh from Bergenopsome. (And inderision did paint fourth Spi∣nola, pullinge downe Maurish from the table. others did call in doubt the loyaltie of counde Hinrie of ber∣gues. Lastly some sayed, that they shoulde be forced to re∣tire, hauinge nowe omitted to manie goode oportuni∣ties, by there dayly lingering. Spinola begon no trence nor batteri nor comanded any proclamation to be made, which at the pitchinge of a campe are wonte to by. thin∣kinge he might say to him self as cecar did in passinge the riuer of rubicon, that yet wee may rerurne againe, and so confuted al the speches of his calomniators by his va∣liant actes, And least that the fidelitie of Count Hin∣rie
of bergues, or his renoome, shoulde any way be empaired, he tought to remit to hir Altesa the decla∣ration of the letters, of which he comanded acopie to be drawen in presence of two witnesses, and tought it expedient that acopie of them shuolde be publis∣hed iudgeing that by no truer testimony, then that of the Counte of bergas owne writinge. both of them coulde be purged he comanded muster to be paste of Muster vvas comanded to be pai of the army. the army, before any wages were payed, (which stile, he kept almoste duringe all the time of the sie∣ge) least it shoulde be anie gaine to others, and dis∣comodious to his maiestie, and a faulss number be presented, hauinge sent count of henin master de campe of Valones to the Infanta, he causeth neow Neovve lei∣ues vvere raist referred to the charge of cond hin∣n. troupes to by gathered to the number of six thou∣sand foure hondred Valons, wepones to be bought, and the reste of warlik furniture to be in areadines, and the ould soilders to be taken out of the garisons, appointing neowe soilders to be sent in there pla∣ces. After wardes al hope of returninge home beinge taken away, resoluing upon no other course, he concludes to goe to Breda. The 28. of August he sendes a fore Francisco de Medina, with ten companies of horse, and to the number of foure thousand footmen (apointing the Spanards in the vane∣gard, Den Fran∣cisco de Me∣dina occupied the dorpe of Gnip. and to march on til the dorpe of Genekin, the ne∣rest vilage to Breda, giumge him his instructions for that night. to whiche were adioyned the Irish regiment of Earle of tiron. Paulus Balionius master de camp of an Italian regiment at that time taketh vnto his possession derheid (a vilage lienge beyonde the towne against Genep) on the other Paulo Ballen pitcht his tentes in der yde. side furnished both with his owne, and a scots regiment
of the count of arguiel in the vane garde with fourtine companies, and of diuers nasiones were gathered agoode troup of horse acompanied with certaine pices of Artile∣rie. VVho the tovvne of Breda vvas beleagered of . Thus two sides of the towne verie neceslarie for the siedge were both taken in one night. the people of Breda, and the inhabitance saw us there, before they had any no∣tice of us. which when they vnderstood (oure iourney being finished be breake of day) they of Breda withe sea∣uen Squirmishes begon. canons, shott al day longe, and defended the houses belonginge to the suburbs, and next adioyninge Breda with supplies they sent oute; the contrimen fled a way, the soilders made smale skirmishes, with litle loss on ether side; vnlesh those of Breda ment to make them selues to be lau∣ghed at. who shot so right that they killed amiller of ther owne neer the towne, and compelled the captaine of the∣re owne korsmen there watchinge, to forsake, his stan∣dinge place, and to approache neerer the towne, for feare of danger. Number IV. Spinola early in the morninge, remoues from Gils with the rest of his armie, and beinge come to Genep a∣boute The Mar∣ques artueng from the tovvre of getnek choi∣sed the neces∣sarie places to pitch his campe. Fortificia nons bego in Genk. noone; ascending first up uppon the top of the churche, discouered from on high a fit place for the cam∣pe. Medina set upon alitle brooke (in which amill was turned, whiche ground barke.) Hauinge firste comanded to entrinch them selues, and after wardes gaue order to make aforte, and threredutes, withe other shelters for the shott. he keepes also abridge, whiche lyes upon Merka, Others begon in Dorhey∣dn. not far from the church of geink. He sendes Iohn of me∣dices to terheyden to choose aplace fitt to pitche the cam∣pe. He declares that all the sluces are to be taken, with
A. Turris alta 362. pedes. B. Arx Nassauiorum C. Hortus Arcis amaenissinus D. Merka flumen. E. da flaucius. F. Catarrhactae fluminis Merkae G. Ostia fluuij Aa et mola aquaria. H. Tres portoe Ʋrbis et vna Artis. I. Colles duo altiores in moembus. K. Tria receptacula in forsis moenium. L. Munimenta XV. Boluers. M. Seps spinea ad pedē moenus N. Moles XIV. Reuelins. O. Lorica circūfossas. Contrescerpe P. Maiora opera cornuta V. Q. Receptacula praestructa operibus cornutis. R. Brachia et loricae ante cornuta. S. Quatuor munitiones cornutoe minores. T. Sudes pinnis praesixae. V. Insula suburbana. X. Collis in quo Mola Caesarea.
Num. 4. BREDA NOVIS OPERIBVS POST SPINOLAE ADVENTVM MVNITA
which the water of the meddow ar eyther retained or slid into Merka; also agreat hill, whiche they call the conni∣buries, upon this firste day of the siege Paulus Ballonius tooke with cock boates, twelf shippes going to Breda, loa∣den Ballonius tooke ivv. If barks of the . with much prouision and houshould stuff, which ligh∣tinge on at vn wares he seased on them; as asure foretel∣linge of victorie, when the bootie of so many shipes, gaue signe of recoueringe that cittie, which in former time with aconterfet loadinge, was taken from the Kinge by fraude. The boatmen getting upon the bank on the other side, fled a way before oure men coulde take them: the bootie being left to the soilders and the sayleres. That day the people of Breda, defended by force and armes, the houses of the suburbes of the villadge of Genik but in the night time they were set on fire, to the number of thiertie, being all forsaken and quite spoiled. The next day Artsenius Captaine of the townes men garded with eight companies of burgers, cut downe the wood of Graue Morish: (called Bel kromboske) which was vnder the wal∣les, The vvood vvas cutt. least oures lying hid in the woold, shoulde watch opor∣tunitie at vnawares, to take the fortes nere the castel. That wood was set to open Sale: The dayes en suing, certaine litle skrimishes were made, the people of Breda breaking foorth on euery side, and Certaine houses vvere burnt. they endeuored to burne certaine barnes and villadges, belonging to the suburbs. All the houses of the townes∣men The corne vvas visited. were visited by publique auctoritie, and the quantitie of corne was registred, and related to Graue Morish, that he might vnderstand it. Amill whiche stoode in the way to hage, beinge puld apices, called cecars mill, he caused to Other forti∣ficattons vve re adioyned. be broght backe into the cittie, and the hill wheron the mill stoode, to be fortified, in like maner foure litle hor∣ned fortes, for the defence of the foure bulwarkes, whiche did uphould the walles of the towne. Breda fortified with
so many sondry woorkes, we haue thought good to repre∣sent in this stampe. After this, many houses of the people of hag, were The houses next adioy∣ning to the tōvvne vve∣re burned. burnt by those of Breda. two viladges Genik and haide lyinge in the way, were fortified by oure soilders. In feowe dayes after Spinola commandes Teterin and Hag (villadges one ouer againste another, on bothe sides of the towne) to be fortifed. Teterin fel into Baron de The Marques tooke posession of Teterns and Hage. One of the quarters vvas com¦mitted to the charge of Baron de Bal¦lanon x the other to count Isen∣berge. The forme and greatnes of the fortifi∣cations. Balonson master de campe of the Burgonnons- Hage fel vnto conde Isimburk cornel of the germans; euerie one had his owne companies committed to him, with trou∣pes of other nasions. and the horsmen necessarie for them. after this maner were the firste deuisions made of each quarter, exept Genik, were entrenched wi∣the awall of earth and aditch. The wall was eight foote high, a leauen foote broade, with abank of three foote for the commodietie of the smale shott. hauinge digged on the outside aditch of seauen foote deepe, the bot∣tom wherof was contracted into foure foote broade and the vpermoste parte into ten foote. The villadge of der heyde, that so it might extend the further, was diui∣ded with doble fortificationes, vnder the chardge of ballon; The hill called the conniburrowes; he him self kept for adefence. Not far from that hill he built abrid∣ge Abridg vvas made vpon the riuer of marka. vpon merka planted withe boates, and plankes to sup∣porte the pasadge. the boates were fastned with ancors, both before and behind least they shoulde be mooued by the waues. Fortes of turff were built on both sides of the brid∣ge, haulfe moones were made for defence. Beames were layed by line measured to the heyght of the The riuer∣hut vvith stoccados to hindr the passage, or nauigation riuer, driuen into the ground both beneath and ab∣oue the bridge, that no ship nor boath may pass. The boates of burthen lately taken, were tyed with
Num. 5. Prima Spinolae ad Bredam Castrametatio, binis primum partibus, deinde quaternis instituta. Prima Bredae circumuallatio circulo duplici leuioris operae facta.
anchors; least the enemy on anie side shoulde endeuour by force to pass the riuer. Charlos roma Sardgent mayor Hovv the dorp of der  vvas deuided re∣commending to Charolus Roma the vttermost part thereof. of Marques de campolatar master de camp of an Italian regiment, incloseth with certain fortes and defences to the utmost parte of the villadge of Derhaide (where there are greater sluces of water and chanels.) Number V. At last the besedging of the towne, began to be laied on foure sides, with a litle trench of earth, conducted alon∣ge from villadge to villadge, from one redute to another, withe other great fortes set betwen them, distant foure hondereth or six hondereth pases, neere and further, as the nature of the situation and way required, whiche locked up, all there irruptions were let and hindered, and all our peopel went freely withoute danger from one quarter to another. From Genik towardes hage, came Marques cam∣polatarius, towardes teteringen Iohn count of Nasaw ad∣uanced his workes. Spinolas quarter extended with atren∣ce of seauen thousand paces; but broken in the midle, be∣cause The disposi∣tion and di∣stance of catch quar∣tier. the chiefe standing place; of the horsmen were at there backs. next adioyning towardes the towne were fou∣re regimentes of spanardes, of Don Francisco de Medina of Don Iohn claro de Gusman, don Iuan ninno de touara and of diego luis de oliuero, and the Irish regiment of the Earle of tiron. Balloncō is quarter reached eight thousand fiue hondred paces. Balincons were encompassed, partly with atrence of three thousand two hondered paces and The circuit of the first fortifications. parte in the black dike (as they call it) was also two thou∣send foure hondered paces longe. Isimburques were in∣closed with a continuated trence, of nine thousand fiue
hondered paces. So that the outmoste circle of this firste trince, was thirtie thousand six hōdered paces. The inward trince next the towne was deuided almoste into two hon∣dered paces; which was the distance from one quarter to another, and conteined in compass almost fiue houres ior∣ney eyther trence was but fiue foote high, in the ditch sea∣uen The height. foote broade, Depe in the ditch fix foote, the parapet was foure foote high, and the inward banket deuided in∣to thre stepes for the shot to ascend, and decend, for there better comoditie to fight and in ech banket of the said three one foote and haulfe broad. to both trinches sea∣uentie redutes and fortes were built or errected, in which the soilders were set in siege like order, company. be com∣pany The reason vvhy so dis∣posed. and forte by forte. in ther due distance. Spinola by litle and litle, compassed the towne round aboute with foure campes on the other side. so that these lesser being altogither in compassed with greater; stood in steed of litle castels and forts. which thing he principal∣li ordained, that both he might perfect so greate a work withe the labor of a feow soilders, and that oure defences might be defenciue against great sallies and assaultes out of the towne; which had they bene deuided into many par∣tes; without dout being exposed to the iniurie and peril of the enemy; they had finished the workes nothing the soo∣ner. which maner of intrincheng; although. it gaue respit to the adioyning boores to bringe corne and cattel in to the towne wherwith being besieged, they might afterwar∣des in dure hunger so muche the longer, yet wer we of ne∣cessitie so to do, for the causes which we spoke of, the pru∣dent consel of the master de campe Don Iuan de medicis touching thies affaires was of no smale emportance to the Marques. The besieged perceiumg this, set on fire the rest of the buildinges belonging to the suburbs on euery side, lest they should be left fitt for us for the wourking of trea∣cheries;
or be a let vnto thē for there shooting it being ge∣neralli obserued, that there were burnt to the number of foure hondered and fortie houses. The 16. of Sept. 1624 Iustinus de Nasaw Gouernor of Bre∣da, Iustinus de Nasa Go∣vernor of Breda coma∣und d great salli to tempt the quarter of Isimbur∣que. The great sali made by the nemi out of Breda. with the aduise and consulte of certaine of his chefe lea∣ders, and other Captaines resolued to make a salli oute of the towne of Breda (whiche was the greatest he made du∣ring the siege consisting of all choice men, and of great ho∣pes and expectation, all which he appointed vnder the command and conduct of the Captaine of the garde of Graue Morish, a man of great valor and presumtion. This Captaine, at the very breake of day, issued fourth of Breda, with intent to hinder the begineng of the fortifi∣cacions Captaine Barri had chardge of the vvatch. of the quarter of the Earle of Isimburque, wherof Captaine Barri irishman one of the Earle of tirones regi∣ment. by his turne had chardge of the watche, close to the enemie in open fielde. The dutch Captaine, issuing oute so earlie in the mor∣ning, thought verely to defeate the Irish by setting on The enemy vvas discoue∣red by a sin∣tinel of Cap∣taine Barri. them as they were asleepe, at vnawares, and vnprouided: but it was the will of God, before he came to the place, of his pretended execution, the faitfull and vigilant Captai∣ne Barri, discouered ther coming by a sintinel, which he had prudentlie placed on a high three, to looke aboute on euery side, who espeing them coming, presently called to his Captaine, aduertising him that the filde was full of the enemie, and began to frame asquadron of there pikes. Ca∣ptaine Barri with great expedition, prepared him self, and Captaine Barri prepa∣red him self for the fight vvith great expedition. dreow on towardes the enemie, begining to order, and to deuide his shot into troupes to inconter them, giuing his officers and soilders the instructiones necessarie, for the fight, animating them, and presenting first of all his owne person, wherupon they al resolued with greate valor and The valor and resolu∣tion of the soilders. mangnanimitie, eyther there to die, or to get the victorie.
Then began that bloody skirmish on both sides, which The bloody skirmish be∣tvvixt the enemy and the Irish. lasted for the space of three houres, knowen and notorius to the whole armie, in which rare act and braue encounter, the Irish manifested the valor expected of them slaying the Captaine of the garde of Graue Morish, with an enginer, togither with many other braue gallantes and valiant soil∣ders, In the vvhi∣che the Cap∣tain of Gra∣ue Marish is gard vvith maine others vvere slayne cleauing a sunder and cutting off theire pikes, with his braue, experimēted and coragious shot; so that at lēght the furious enemy was constrained to retire, with great grife and no redress, other then rufully behoulding the field full of dutch, frenche, and German blood. And which is The enemy vvas forced to retire. particularly to be noted, and to be wholy asscribed to the prouidence and goodnes of almighty God, that wheras thos who, issued oute of the cittie were of so great number as The victorie vvon be the prouidence of the al∣mightie. asoresaied, and Captaine Barri with his companies, and the shott of Captaine dalahoid, and Captaine morri, his contrimen and appointed comarads, to ioyne and assiste with their forces in all occasiones against the enemy, being in all not aboue three hōdred, not as much as one man were killed, nor but two or three but slightly hurte: Although during those two or three houres space the bulletes flew a∣boute The skirmish dedan dcre for the space if three hours. their eares, as thick as hayle, and in open filde wit∣houte any shelter or defence. Captaine delahoid and Captaine morri seeing that Ca∣ptaine Barri began the skirmish a distance of, towardes the Captain de lahoid and Captaine morrisp di∣lie framed asquadrous of their pikes. enemy, whete his appointed place happned to be that day, on the watch with his companie, presently delahoid, and morri with greare speede, framed a squadron of the pi∣kes of the saied three companies, with a resolute, and ma∣gnanimous minde to receiue Captaine Barri and his shott, To receiue Captain Bar∣ri if need did require. The resolu∣tion of Cap∣taine de la hoid and morri togi∣ther vvith their soilders. vnder the shelter of their pikes, if neede did require, and fall togither with their full force on the enemy, being pre∣pared, and ready for that purpose, with final resolution to liue and dye en defence of that place, wherunto their soil∣ders cōdescēded with are solute minde and great courage.
The valerouse, and prudent Earle of Isimburque uppon Count Isim∣burque  In∣fanterie into ivvosqua∣dons vvith great expe∣dition VVith inten∣t to giue bbattell. the firste aduice of Captaine Barri, touching the quantitie and presumtion of the enemy, drew on vnto the field, and with great expedition brauelie ordered, and deuided his al∣main, and vallon Infanterie, into two squadrons, in forme of broad front with amostualerous determintion to inco∣unter and giue battel to the enemy if need did require. And prudent lie preuenting that if by chance the Irish shoulde happen to be dispearsed, to receiue them in the midest of his two squadrones, and order them aneow and fall with the full force of all on the presumed enemy. This noble prudent and mangnanimouse Prince of Isim∣burque with aforecast and csiderate resolution comaun∣ded Cattaine preston and  tovvards the enemy. Capt. preston and Capt. gerat whiche were of two Irish cōpanies to fall on towardes the enemy to defende a passad∣ge wher he spied soccor comming from the enemy, to thos that were recomended to the chardge of the Capt. of the garde of the Prince of Orenge and Capt. prestō spienge thē Cattaine preston sping the enemy vvith great corage and expedition did in con∣tr them. approchinge neer, with great expedition ordered his men, and fell on the enemy, and begō to skirmish, and like abra∣ue cōductor, deuided his shott giumg thē the necessarie in∣structiones to fight, animating them during the skirmish which did continue almost thre houres that at lenght by And . his braue conduction, valor and resolut determination of his soilders the enemy of force were constrained to retire, with the loss of many of theires, not able to preuent any kin∣de of redress. which to Iustinus de Nasaw then Gouernor of Breda was no smale greef so that this greatest sallie that ca∣me The enemy put to  vvhich  de Na∣savv vvas  out of Breda sence the first day till the last were defeated by onely the ualor and braue condution of the fiue Irish companies before spoken of, next under godes diuine assi∣stāce, which the whole leager admiring. woundered much of the victorie considering the great multitude of the ene∣my The extraor∣dinarie care and vigilece of the tvvo sargent  Isimburque and of dle de burnad. against so feow of oures. The prudēt care and great vigilance of the sargēt mayor Gōmar de furdī of the regimēt of coūde Isimburque, as also
the Sargent Maior of the Duke de Burnauill truly deser∣ued praise and renoome for ther continual and extraordi∣narie care and vigilance, day and night, which was of nota∣ble emportance for many respectes, which here is needles to relate, but onely to remember the obligationes his maie∣stie oweth them for their prudence, fidelitie, great extra∣ordinarie care, and vigilance, and prudent carriage, day and night with great punctualitie. Excellent, moste renoomed, and victorious Prince, ma∣ny The constant zle valor and fidelitie of the Irish to his Catho∣lick Maiestie. are the reasones which constrained me to relate and ma∣ke knowen in generall the incorrupted and constant Zele, approoued valor, and vndeniable fidelitie of the Irish na∣tion to his Catholicke Maiestie. VVherof their many fore∣passed rare actes made notorious their loue, and approued loyaltie in all occasiones; which to his maiestie, togither VVhich to the Marques and others his Maiesties minicters is manifestly knovven. with youre excellencie and others his faithfull ministers, is dayly remembred. For which I do not dout, but ther fide∣litie and faithfull seruice is, and shall euer be correspondent to the expectations of your excellencie, wherof there haue been many trialls, and speciallie now of late in the leager And specially at Breda. of Breda; that wheras many of all nationes there assisting, did dayly run away, ey, and many to the enemy, but none of this nation, which to many is well knowen. And be dayly experience we found that as many of them as did serue on our cōtrary side, daylie came to our campe, which An euident proof of the affection and fidelitie of the Irish to his Catholic¦ke Maiestie. not onely in this, but in all other semblable occasiones they made notorious their inclined affection to his Catho∣lick Maiestie, in testimonie wherof your excellencie can beare witnes. Also in another skirmis which the saied Captaine Barri Another skirmish be∣tvvext Cap∣taine Barri and the ene∣my. had with the enemy, the first of Ianuarij 1625. Issuing out of the citti of Breda, to discouer the intrie of his quarter, he fell uppon them, and with so resolut and vndanted coura∣ge, that first he broke them, and next forced them to retire
following them euen to the verie ditches of the towne till The enemy constrayned to retire and some of them taken priso∣ners. they caste them selues into the water to saue their liues where they were rescued by the artillerie of Breda; Barri not withstanding bringing back with hem certene priso∣ners, as a true testimony of his victorie. After this by certayne order sent by the Marques Spino∣la Captain Barri sent vvith the in∣gener kocke to break the dam. to Count Isenbourge, the first of February 1625. this Cap. Barri, with a hundred of the choisest souldiours vn∣der his charge, was commanded to goe with the expert engenier Cooke, to breake vp a certaine dam of the eni∣mie, wherewith they pretended to succour the citty of Breda, and to drowne all that quarter of the armie, but gods diuine grace assisting ours, the dam by the force of the high tide, and blustering wind, breakes of its owne ac∣cord, iust as Barri came with his companie, to the place to execute his purpose, so that with much adoe, they es∣caped the danger of that furious flood, by their swift ru∣ning Cooke the ingenier being in greate danger of drow∣ning, whose life was saued by the assistance of the pikes; that dam seruing the enimie to noe purpose, but to put them to innumerable and extraordinary charges. And whereas during the whole siege, there were an in∣credible number of forts; bulwarks and redouts, errected by the most prudent Marques for the defence of the armie, against the enimi, and yet amongest them all, but one fort royall alone, placed within a canons shot of the citti, this fort of soe greate importance with all the artillerie, and a munision belonging there to, was committed onely to the faithfull keeping and care of Cap. Barri, who vntill that time had for foure monnethes togither, serued before Breda in the openfield, euen vntill the month of march without any kind of defence of forte, euident arguments both of his valouer and fidelitie, as also of the honnor don him and greate confidence reposed in him.
All which, both the Marques him self, and the Count of Isenbourg, haue testified, and confirmed vnder their pu∣blick hands and seals, to his eternall praise. And were not that the great sallie, whiche issued oute of Breda the 16. of September into count Isinburques quarter were not beaten back by the Irish, it woulde be hard for oure wourkes to goe forward if such sallies should beset us on euerie syde, and so continue. whiche iruptio∣nes if they had made continually. oute of sundry partes oures being weakned in the biginning, for ther feones, and burthen of ther labor, and not being beaten back as they were, it had bene apainefull thing, at the self sa¦me time both to fortifie and defend them selues. But trough that respite whiche they gaue us trough the great losh they receiued, truly if thies sallies should continue anie time, it were hard for ours to fortifie them selues. So that after this at leasure, we made up both the trinches of all the siege, and wer by litle and litle finished. Re∣dutes and fortes were built in the forme wherof we repre∣sent in the precedent page. Number VI. The redutes were fiftie foote long, with a parapet ditche and palissada of wood. Thies redutes were made of gree∣ne turffe, with foure angles on the outside, or in square maner, and thirtie fiue foote broad, ther flank ahonde∣red The forme of the relouts. foote, and within eightie. The outewarde height of thies is thirtine foote, was equall to ether of the other And the fi∣gure of the forts. fortes, alike in thicknes fiftin foote, the ditch was made equal to both of them, with walles not straight, but leyeng inwards eight foote high, and twelffoote broade
Num. 6. Murus prioris circumuallationis terreus Turres seu Redouttes è cespite Castella terrea, seu Fortz. Jurrium et Castellorum primorum aqualis altitudo et crassitudo.
to ech of thies at ther intrie was made a haulf moone, and for ther better securitie they entred into thies fortes vppon aplank whiche at ther wil may be taken, and set at any ti∣me, the which was layed on the ditch of the intrie of thes fortes. within were upright walls of eight foote high, up∣pon the which was abanket of fiue foote broad fiue foote high, to diuert the enemies balles, and to defend our shouters. Besides thes so many fortes, atrince was cast up two thousand fiue hondred foote longe, from the vil∣lage of hage, euen vnto the bridge, by which Hage was And of the dike. ioyned to derheid, fiue and twentie foote broad below, twentie foote aboue, and six foote high; The ground whe∣rof being at the first verie soft, because it could not sup∣port the waight of wagones and horses, being paued with plankes, serued also to beare the canons. The engineres and such as were skilfull of the places, af∣firmed The cause vvhere fore the dike vvas made. that this dike was to be planted in this place, becau∣se the grounde in the winter being low and soft did so ouer∣flow with the fieldes that were wet of there owne nature, and with the ouerflowing wateres of the riuer merka, that the enemy might sayle this way, and woulde haue their prouision brought with boates into the cittie. but be me∣anes of this dike the passage was shutt and all soccor kept from them. VVhileste all thes thinges were thus ordered, Spinola went fourth euery day, comanding the Coroneles and Captaines, to call the ouerseers of the wourkmen: and The di'igence and care in∣finishinge the vvourck. as nothing is to much hastned to alonginge minde, so he comanded, that the vnwearied should succede and suc∣cor the wearied, so that they ceased not to labor in the night. By which diligence it was brought to passe, that two trinches of so great height, so many redutes so many fortes were almost finished within seauintine dayes, nor yet but with feow soilders. But the great assemblie of the fleower of nobilitie, being incited on euery side to learn
militarie disipline, and the example of many princes, were agreat prouocation to expedition, who among the co∣mon sorte being mooued with the greatnes of this warr, put them selues to task and cut thurfes of earth, and car∣ried fagotes with ther owne handes. further more the ex∣traordinarie profit of this labor, turned principallie to ea∣se the necessitie of the soilders, with whiche the army was kept least it shoulde deboard for when as wages were sel∣dom paied, and thos also but haulf payes, and the dearth of corne being great, the price of the labor was daylie paied to the soilders (who sets his labor to sale) by sole example. And as afterwardes neow workes that were to be ma∣de; A remedy for the neces∣sities of the souldiours. were disposed of, in the continual time of the siege, so the soilders labor turned alwayes to his owne profit; some had rather liue by beginge, then help ther necessitie, with the gaine of that kind of labor, which example seemed to many that the necessitie foght with honor, and toght mo∣re fit to die then spot ther honor. many be folishnes and to feow wisdome, had rather begg and be ahongred with on distained honor, then to susdaine his life with honest labor. Although two thinges at that tyme did grealie facilitat their labor and, necessitie first, the better condition of the cāpes, then that of Gilse for here the riuer and brookes did serue for drinck, the corne was ripe, and the barnes were full of food: secondly aperpetual temperature of the ayre conspiring as long as the soilders was in a maner exercised in cutting downe wood, making fagotes of shrub, carieng of bughes cutting of turffes, to build trinches and fortes. By which meanes it came to pass, that our soilders were subiect to no diseases, when on the contrary, agreat pesti∣lence, A remedie ours had for not to full in anie disease as those of the tovvne▪ and great agues, at the fall of the leaf, did afflight many of the enemies. The enemies in the meane season by prouiding and ta∣king
care, did endeuor to defēd them selues, and about that tyme, they decreed two thinges wourthie of memorie first that artsenius Captaine of the cittisens as often as consel of warr was holden, for giūeng there opiniones in that consell, should haue authoritie as other Captaines, wher by the for∣ces Arthns vvas permit¦td to  in councell of vvarr. of the soilder and the cittisen, should the more firmely be kint togither. The other, that euery one being put to his oath should declare to the senat, how much mony they had, and lend it Eachone de∣clared by his oath havv much mane he had. to the treasures, created by the authoritie of the vnited lor∣des, for the defraying of the expences of the workes, and the soilders wages, when the treasure house should be in want. And least any should deceiue them, or refuse, the Go∣uernor, The princi∣pall persons first tooke, their oath. Captaines, offisers drosart, Burgermasters, Coro∣neles, took their oath before hande. Then the comon people won by auctoritie, followed on not vnwillingly, there was gathered into the cōmon pursh, ahondered and fiftie thousand crownes, with which somm of money wages were wikly paied vnto the soilder, and the expenses of the workes were defraied moreouer some sortes of abolished mony, stamped with a publike marke, the oulde price was approued, and some also was augmen∣ted that the some of mony being forged anew might in∣crease The soom of many vvhih vvas ioyned. or augment in value. VVithall, leaue was giuen to sell cheese, and dried stockfish oute of a comon barne, when Victualls vve are  cut of the publi∣que munition house. butter and flesh fell short; but the cittisens forbore from selling, leaste the soilder should stand in need. Spinola vnderstanding that his companies were but few, to mak and defend so many workes at once, in so great adistance and circuit, by transporting of vi∣tualls afarr of, that it was most needfull, at one time, both to make prouision of wood, and also of corne, and so many fortes should bemade and kept, but espe∣cially,
because acertaine rumor ran, that the bastard Mans∣felt would break againe into the borders, to exercice the The Marques vnderstan∣ding of the co¦ming of the hastard Mansfelt caused nevv  to be made. robberies that he had latelie failed in, and to call the King of Spaines army from the siege, he ordaineth that fiue and twentie particular german companies shoulde be raised, ech consisting of thre hondered heades, withal hee sends from the camp Godfrido of Bergus, Baron of Grimbergue, The Daron of Grimber∣ge vvas sent to the Duke of Bauaria and Count illy. (afterwards Count) to the Infanta (in which he led acom∣panie of horse) that from thence he might take his iour∣ney to that most excellent Count, Iohn Tillie, afterwards to the most renowmed Duke of Bauaria, for one Regiment of those that were discharged by oath, and were to be sworne to the Kinge of Spaine; This he effected with no lesh successe, then speed, so that in steed of one Regiment, two were offe∣red. VVith all he sends into the prouinces patents to make up, ten companies of foote men, and some companies of horse all vppon his owne charge. Graue Mauris recouered the citie of Genip, now forsa∣ken Graue Mau∣r tooke po∣session of Mord  Ber∣gues Genip and Cleues. by our men of their owne accord, as also mōdelbergue, and Cleues. He being distracted with these buissines; and in throwing downe parte of the walls of those of Cleue, left vn∣to us a good oportunitie to fortifie and finish the woorkes. Hearing afterwards of his coming to Breda, our men ope∣ning al the flood gates of the riuers or sluces did all ouet drowne, the fields of the village of derheyden; on that side on which it was tought he might more easilie breake thro∣ugh. The Marques haueing sent Losano to Count Hēdrick, Count Hen∣drick follo∣vve a him. to make hast, as he was commanded, fallowed after by verie∣short iourneys, albeit with verie smale troupes, through the dangerous places of campine. Count Brionius. Frenchman, being encouraged by this Brion the French man resolued to state in Bre∣da to see the occasions. reporte, who had obtained leaue of us to departe into Fran∣ce (from Breda) where he serued for a soldiar with a new
hope of beholding the fight of Breda, obtained leaue of Spinola to teturne. About that time the enemie horse ca∣me out Bergen opson, and haueing taken a prey of horses, and cariages, which were coming with prouision to our campe, greater troupes of our armie being sent out, met them and put them to flight, and the bootie recouered. They sought for prouision of . Souldiars were sent from our campe to Seuenbergue, with a greate number of wagons to fetch prouision. But because that towne was free and held of neyther side, least it should receiue any detriment by the libertie of rhe souldiours, or The Audtor  vvas  the . anie souldiour do anie wrong to the inhabitants, Spinola sending for Theodorus Scot, who did determine of all priuate and publique controuersies belonging to the camp, or if there were anie crime committed, or anie contro∣uersie arose of anie spoiles taken in war, he determined the same by the authoritie of the auditour generall, com∣manded The vinted stats did forbed that no vitualls or munition shoulde be sent. to value the prices of all marchandise; promi∣sing that he woulde make paiement, but by reason of the number of wagons, plentie of prouision did much abunde, and Spinola comaunding those of Se∣uenbark the carriadge therof vnto the campe; the fea∣reful Magistrates, presently aduertifed the States of Ho∣land, yet the cittisens offered agood summ of money The Marques vvould not receiue the mny offered. for to buy corne, but Spinola refused it, affirming that he wanted the corne that was carried into their camp, not buyng anie from els where for their money. Two priestes of the societie of IESVS, of those who imployed ther indeuors in the camp. For the sou∣les health of the soilder, went into that towne, togither whith that companie, to assuage the pilladge of the soil∣ders, The assistan∣ce of the ∣theres of the societe of Iesus vvas to the Inha∣btance. And in par∣ticular to a minister of the . and preuent iniuries, were verie behoufull to the townes men of Seauenberk and the bouldnes of some men being irritated, they saued apreacher of the wourd; togither with his wife and familie, prayinge them that
no hurte might be don vnto them. which they admiring, who euer both diuulged abroad and expected more seueri∣tie The Prince of Poland arri∣ued to the campe. of thos sorte of priestes, demanded how thos black prie∣stes were changed? In those dayes VValdislaus Sigismundo Prince of Po∣land and Suethe, came to Bruxel to visite Isabella the In∣fāta, of whome he was moste princely and most royally in∣tertained. He no lesh skillfull then louing warr, renoo∣med for many notorius victories, being desirouse to see the siege (hauing sent to Antwerp Conde Selasarius gene∣ral of the horse) was broght the last of September into the campes of Breda. Spinola sendinge afore some costly sad∣led The Marques vvent to re∣ceiue him. horses, acompanied almost with all the nobilitie, rode from the campe two houres iourney, and receiued him coming with many congratulations, and with great she∣ow of loue. There was atent prepared in ahouse wherin though nothing belonging to kinglie glorie and maiestie was, yet was ther more militarie ornamentes then clean∣lines and cittilik ciuilitie. Hither when the Prince came a∣bout And vvithe great mang∣nificencie he receiued him. night, hauing discharged all the canons, once, twice, and the third time, and the drumes and trumpetes soun∣ding, the moone was depriued of the sight of the sun by a∣sudaine interpositiō of the earth. Betokeninge (if it may be The eclipse. lawfull to foretel) that that Prince most expert in armes shoulde one day become the tamer of the turkish moone; The artillerie begon to shut of. Breda hitherto had not bene touched with our cannon, nor was the more hurt with so many shott of togither, for that our soilders were commanded to shut more for mirth then for destruction, and muche shott went ouer the cittie without doing any hurt; yea the besieged also, had more profitt then hurt by that shooting, who from that tyme wer exempted from the paiment of all tributes; according to the former custome: the next day, the prince led about with sundry gardes of Spinola, where the enemy saw the
people stand togither shott as thick as haile to salute them. The day after he rode alone with Spinola, to take auiew of the other side of the camp the reste being commanded Ours tooke eight frentz gentle men. to stay behinde for feare of danger. At that verie time eight yong frencemen of noble hou∣ses, intending secretly to slip by us from Breda to Graue The Marques inuited them. Mauris is cāpe, were apprehended vppon the fenues, and were liberallie intertained, not as enemyes but as frindly guestes Spinola inuited the more noble of them to his table (amōgst whome was Marques Gringnol vicōt, serius with his broother, and Barron blianuill, youthes of an excellent to wardnes) and after (denieng them whate they deman∣ded) tould them that it was not his custome, to suffer any to pass through his army, to the enemies; gaue them chois of returning to france or to Breda, from whence they ca∣me. The Marques gaue them thar cho ei∣ther to go to Ereda cr to France. of which last offer when they made election, least they shoulde seeme to haue beene more readie to undertaek the labors of the siege, then to indure them, being carried to Spinolaes tent in acoache, led with atrumpet they were sent back to Breda. VValdislaus Prince of Poland, hauing viewed the wor∣kes, The Prince departing the camp v∣vved all the fortifications. which vntil that day were not fully finished, is repor∣ted to haue saied that the dice were cast betwext two great Captaines Spinola, ad maurish, and that one of them must nedes loose his credit, Spinola accompanying him going out of the camp, and hauing finished the compliments of curteous salutations recommended hym to count salasa∣rius to be conducted to Antwerp.
Number VII. The next day after, the Baron of beauoix coronel of Beron the Bavoix vvēt to take poses∣sion of a cer∣tayne poct. vvhich Gra∣ue Morsh mighaue taken. the burgondian regiment was sent with aleauen honderd foote, and fiue hondered horse to fortifie osterhaut; which the enemy might haue taken to the great in commoditie of oure men. The next day when he heard from thence the enemyes drom beath, sending out some that might. vn∣derstand it, he admonished Spinola of thier coming the Of vvhose comnig head∣uertised The Marques scoutes related that maurish disembarked his army at Gintenberge. of which his neow iourney, nothing could for along tyme, be found oute by enquirie; many thought that he would take oudenbosk, and rosendal. it was thought fitt that those places shoulde be taken afore hand; least we shoulde haue any enemy behind us; fea∣ring otherwise that vitualles coulde not fitly be transpor∣ted vnto us, and also we be kept from free fothering if the enemy should first posessit. Spinola supposed that this thing was needles to be preuented. Knowing wel that neyther the Marques Ansvvered vvel to the purposet. thos places could be fit for them for anambushe nor so dā∣gerous for our prouision when it should be fetcht the far∣ther of. whiche being so far from theire campe woulde be dangerous vnto them, in so graeat adistance, we being to auoide apassage not vnsecure to us. Not much after, it was vnderstood that Maursh his ar∣my was planted at mede, which village is distant two hou∣res iourney from Breda: to witt he seemed fitly to tak that Graue Mau∣rice pitcht his camp in mde. time for this coming when almoste all oure horse were ab∣sent, to accompany the prince of poland which semed ve∣rie strange to many, that maurish attempted nothing at that tyme, against our so feeble forces. Spinola, iudging that ther were soilders enogh, hauing left agarde with artillery about the cittie; ordayned Franciscus Medina Coman∣ded
Num. 7.
A. Breda. B. Custra Mauritij in pago Medoe. C. Castra noua Spinoloe. D. Niger agger. E. Noua Castella Spinoloe. F. Stagna ingentia arte facta. G. Statio Balionij et Caroli Romoe. H. Statio Baronis Balanconij.
to stand in place of deputie) ouer the neow quarter of Genik, he sending before measurers, who were to choose aplace to pitche the neow campe. beinge garded with sea∣uen thousand foote, and thirtie troopes of horse, not far of from osterhaut, within thre thousand paces, pitched his The Mar∣ques . campe against the enemy: for in one spurt of runing, and posessing of this so cummodius aplace, the substance of the whole siege, had beene turned up side douwe, For doutles if eyther Spinola had lost one day by de∣laying, or maurish had so much preuented him by ma∣king The . haste, Breda might haue been, saued by the commo∣ditie of so smale atyme for betwext derhaid and hage their lay open verie large spaces of land, and of wateres, wher by with litle labor, victualls might haue beene carried into the cittie, be wagons vnto the riuer, and with litle boates ouer the riuer, if those places had first been taken by mau∣rish: which might haue bene Don VVithout any difficul∣tie, when at that tyme there were no fortes of emportan∣ce, betwext his army and the cittie (except foure litle re∣dutes; And haueing vven the other in the morning. which were built on the black dike: But Spinola now with many soilders tooke the wayes and all the passa∣ges, betwext thies fortes, and the campe of maurish, and preuered him all hope of passing forward. So much doth the celitie and the wisdom of the generalls preuaile in war  which wee haue had this victorie. Here was agreat plaine filde of shrubbs, in which he might haue extended his army at lardge, if any fight had . hapened: This he caused to be taken and posessed with cer∣tain troupes of horse. the rest of the horse bying placed further of; in the fore front of the army. Behinde them there was atrinch formed as it were by nature; betwext Breda and the shrubbs upon this he plan∣ted seauen canons and placed the Infanterie behind it comaunding to cut down the fright of the meadow, and
of the riuers, and with great expedition fild the ditches. V∣pon the right side he left agreater fort to be defended of the burgondianes, which Baron of Beauoix had now almost The forme of the greate forte. finished. That fort of afoure square forme, and of that greatnes that the canons might be planted upon: The wal∣les were stronge against the shott of the artillerie, six score foote longe, in the flank twentie eight foote broad, and fi∣ftine foote high. There were longe stakes on euerie side streaching out of the woorck to hinder the ascending, wi∣thin there was abanket and aparapet and one step vnder the banket for the comoditie of the shotthe parapet was fiue foote heigh, ten foote thick compassed about on the outside with a ditch, of two and twentie foote broade, so that from the bottome of the ditch, to the top of the walle, it was twentie fiue foote highe. The campe disposed as afore said, the fore front being two dayes in ordering itt, Spinola expected Maurice, that The Marques stayed for Graue Mau¦rice tvvo da∣ys. if he would fight, he might be ready and prepared for him. Someone perhaps hearing that it was propounded in the conference of Spinola whether it were better, or not in le∣uauing the fortificationes before or bring the soilders to encounter Maurice, though his opiniō werenot asked, yet he gaue his sentence, that Maurice was not only to be ex∣pected, but that bringing the companies from the cittie, the whole multitude was to be employed against him, and that he was to go thither with all his armie he commended for he like fact, the Prince of Parma, anoble man re∣nowmed heretofore for so many victories. Spainla hauing spoken very honorably of the prince of Parma, shewed that man would haue bene the author of vndiscreet coun∣cell: that he seemed not to be far wide of the fact recomi∣ted in (esops fables, by commending the vncertaine euent of a battaile, for a seige that was most crrtaine, lastly, that that should be like a dog who letting goe a morsel that he
Num. 8. VARIAE MAIORVM CASTEI
LLORVM FIGVRAE. Dimensiones maiorum Castellorum.
had in his mouth, snatching at the shadow in the water, and so lost both. That he would not so hasard his owne fortune and his whole armies; that it was the enimies part to make warre, if he listed, and his to defend it, being offered. Not long after, a certaine master of the artillerie, asked Spinola, why he went not of him selfe to prouoke Maurices He ansvve∣red prudenly. army, not strenghtned with any great fortes, shooting of six or seauen canons? To whom Spinola answered, that it stood not with his honor, more lightly to insult ouer the Graue Mau∣rice kept his armie toge∣ther close seeing that the Marques preuented him in time. enimie, then to carrie him selfe ciuillie: that he was not ac∣customed to make a bragging, but a prudent war: that it is a Commanders part, to combat no lesse with councell, then with sword and forces. Number VIII. Maurice hauing pitched his tents at mede, kept him sel∣fe in them, nether gaue him selfe leaue, nor any of his, to de∣part farther of. VVhich Spinola noting, commanded fiue He comanded fiue forts to bemade. fortes in a maner all of the same bignes, to be made on the left side, euen to der Heyde, for Barron Beauuoix, Iohn To hinder his passage. Count of Nasau, Phlilip Count of Fuggere, to cut of all passage to Graue Maurice. which space being mightie and great, filled with continuated trinches. betwixt the fortes was afterwards adioyned to that first sodainely cast vp trence. To all these fortes, the forme, for their diuers situa∣tion, was also diuers in ther forme but their strenght and Graue Mo∣rish did not lettour vvorkes. height was equall with that other of Beauuoyes. Maurice did assault our men, who were busie about these workes, with no irruptions nether by day nor by night during which dayes, he lost by flight, many raw Inglish soldiars, whom he had called for to helpe him. A certaine French Trumpetter, by occasion of a thinge
that was lost, being set sent into our armie vnto Iohn Co∣unt of Nasaw, in the name of the french Nobilitie, inuited The French nobilitie desi∣red to try ther valor him to approache neerer vnto Maurices armie to trye their fortune with them. The Count promised that he would co∣me upon a certaine houre the next day after with three o∣ther And Graue Iohn de Na∣savv vvas no less desi∣rous to  nuter them. VVith three seconds. ther of his companions prouided with there swordes and two pistoles a pice, and vnarmed of other weapens. The next day after as it was agreed, at the houre appointed, together with Coronel Steenhuse, and two Lieutenants of two companies of horsemen, Grobbendonck the younger, and Botberge, he stood before the enimies campe. There came out of the enimies campe, foure horsmen, with o∣thers following a far off, to the number of fixtine, with three hundred of the enimies looking forth from the fore fronte of the armie, amongst which Maurice him selfe is said to haue bene the chiefe. There was amongst these four a young man called Briant, his sonne who once the father of young Grobendonck had ouercome and slaine in a single combat, hauing lost Lackerbec his Lieutenant. He desiring to reuenge his fathers death, sending a Trum∣peter vnto Spinola craued leaue to be granted him; to trie the combat with him that flew his father, as if otherwise he should haue liued to longe which Spinola refusing him (holding Grobbendonck sone least he should escape) Briaut, ayoung man of afierie spirit, sought occasion of his owne accord. Count Nassau, hauing receiued a bullet of his aduersarie on the fore part of his sadle, had his neck burnt with the fire of his pistol. Briant, hardy both of hand and voice said. At me, at me, shoote at me, who so euer thou art lo Briant, this day, this day will reuenge the wrong of his fathers slaughter. which hauing said, set∣ting spurres to his horse, in vaine prouoking the Lieutant of Grobbendonck the younger with a pistol, he being pierced thorough with a bullet of his, taking hould by the
pomele of his sadle, his hand being halfe dead, felt present∣ly He procured . to the ground so the vndaunted valor of the two Grob∣bendoncs, the father and the sone, vanquisted the two Briauts, the father and the sonne. Ther one captain Steen∣huse hauing wounded another of the enimies, there ran to helpe them, those sixteene which came out of the enimies campe. Oures by litle and letle retyring themselues, whilst riding closer one to another, one of them riding close to Nasau, puls the bridle out of his hande, entangled with the The Court  the danger. pomel of his sword, so looseth his sword, held by the brid∣le, and pluckt forth of the scabbard: so by two vne expected chances he exposed him selfe to the sodaine danger of two casualties. But Nassauius horse, other wise ardent and vn∣quiet, stood as amased, and gaue time to his master to take vp his bridle. The other, hauing left his sword, exposed him selfe to danger. Our Cornet, who came to behould, forbed∣den (by the coming in of the enimie) to kill Briaut, smites him on the head, yet brething, and taking horse, followes the rest. A few dayes after whē our troupes of horsmē, stood in sight before the enemies tents, Bouteuille Frēchman, with a conuoie of fiue companies of horse, came to remoue them from their standing place. Baron Beauuoix, garded with a Skirmish  Baron of  and baron of Boutevill companie of Counts, being by chance a walkinge, came betwixt them, and releeuing the gard, drowe the enimie back into a wood neere adioyning. Hēce Bouteuille going forward a litle, boasting of his owne prouesse, relyenig upon the promise of his frendes, and on acoate of male, which he wore vnder his cloake, prouokes ours to a single com∣bat. The condition being accepted of ours, besought to come further out from the wood, not remouing from his place. shot in the ranyes by one of ours, leting fall for And he re∣turd vvounded. griefe of the wound, the pistol which he had in his hand sled away. In the meane space, whilst they seemed to be idle in Graue
Maurices campe, nor none endeuoring to fire our forts, nor to hinder our workes nor none attempted to prouoke vs with their assaulrs, he of purpose concealing his designe, because craft required deliberation, nether was it safe to at∣chieue great exploits vppon the sodaine he resolued priuilie in the night, to set vpon the Castle of Antwerp: which ac∣cordingly And Graue Maurice de∣termined is sett vpon the Castle of Antvverpe. he put in practise. It is thought, that he knew, that a few soldiars were left for sauegard to defēd the Cast∣le, besides those, who ether for their age, or for their sicknes, were dispenced with all. The Castle seming worthie to him of his labor, and the gaine greater, then the losse of Breda. In vvhich vvere but feovve people Therfore he kept all his men in his campes at Bergenupsone and Rosendall, with so great diligence vnder watch and ward within the walles, that not so much as by any least sig∣ne, was any attempt perceiued, ether against Antwerp, or a∣gainst or armie. The chardge of this expedition, was com∣mitted Giueing charg to Bro∣nchene. to Bronchena Captaine of Bergenupson of a cōpa∣nie of horse hauing called him to meda. He drawes out a thousand foote, and two hundred horse, (as it was reported) with all kind of instruments laid vpon wagons, to the places that were appointed. He makes the soldiar belieue, depar∣ting from the campe and from Rosendal, that they should goe to Bergenupsone: and those that went from Bergenup∣sone, that they were to goe to the armie. when he was come somwhat far of from the cittie and from the towne, he com∣manded all the blue and yeallow coulered beltes (which the States soldiars were wont to weare) to be taken away, and red ones (such as the Kinges soldiars weare) to be put on, least they shoulde be knowen by the color of their belt for enimies, they should be betrayed by the Boores stra∣tagemes. Being asked of those that met them, who they were; they were taught to Answer, that they went to Ant∣werp The furie of the cuimie. for prouision whither it was reported that our men were to goe about that time. The coueringes of the
wagōs, being marked with the Borgundiā Crosses after our fassiō, holpe the deceite. All the contry people thus decei∣ued couered with the darknes of a cloudy night, they co∣me vnto the Castle it selfe. Then out of a hedge which they broake, they puld vp three or four stakes, and some of Their presum¦ption and successe. them got vp on the bridge. The winde setting on the con∣trary side, hindred all rushing, neying of horses, and noise The tempest fauoured their cause. of wagons, to be heard within the Castle. They so much the more boldly, let downe their boates into the ditches, set lathers vnto the walles, set a worke their sheeres, ham∣mars, barres and other instruments cunningly made, to breake the locks of the watch houses, and to breake vp the gates from the hinges. whilst these thinges were acting ne∣re the walles, Andreas Cea, that old beaten soldiar, to whom it befell to watch that night, harkned the more at∣tentiuely; Afterwards hearing a noise, suspected their trea∣cherie, A contrie discouered their arri∣ueing. and gaue warning by discharging his piece. Ioan∣nes Brauius, Gouernor of the Castle, and other of the watch ran out of their standing place vnto the walles, and stood vpon their defence. The enimies were so hindred The Gouer∣nor and the rest of his cause to asist. with a greater noise of that winde (which at first being more temperat, they approached more safely) that they could nether hould their boates. stable, nor fasten their la∣thers to the walles, nor do any thinge. Leauing therfore their instruments for feare, their boates, and some of their ladders, perceiuing them selues to be discouered, departed with speed, being doutles preuented by the interposition of diuine power and so the treacherie which was greuous∣ly attempted against our affaires, found a very easie issue. Andreas Cea, for his care of keeping the Castle, was more Andreas Ca vvas  his vigilance. liberallie rewarded then were in times past the keepers of the Capitol, by Isabella the Archdutches, with a pension of fifteene crownes a month and by the state house of Ant∣werp, with a rich sute of a apparell, and a rich belt. Graue
Maurice, being deceiued of his hope (which he concei∣ued in his minde as a thinge most certaine) being grieued at the hart, remayned for a certaine time in the campe, doing nothing and very pensiue, many of his cottages Grifes of Graue Mau∣rice. being ouer throwen by the tempest of that winde. But the horsemen of freese, being also sent for by his command, arriuing at Gittenberge, fell into great danger: for in Panger of his horse. that tempest, both the forts, and the bridge being bro∣ken, ouer which the horsmen were to passe, hindred them from all succour of their fellowes, so that it was said, that they were easily to be rent in peeces and ouerthrouwen by vs. wherof Spinola being admonished, douting whe∣ther he should assault them with a greater armie he cho∣se rather to omit some what in hurtinge, then with any losse of his owne men, to hurt the enemie: for following smale commodities, with great danger (with Augustus) The prudence of the Mar∣ques. he likened to those who fisht with a golden hooke, which being lost, could be recompenced with no catchinge. At lenght, Graue Maurice, hauing heard of not∣hing done at Breda, after two and twentie, dayes that he remayned at mede, striking vp his drummes, and fyering his tents, departed sorrowfull, as neuer to re∣turne The retire of the Prince of Orenge. againe. he is said to haue bene scarce afterwards se∣ne of his frendes, so as he admitted no comfort against his griefe, Spinola seeing the continuale smoke of the fires, going with a great company of horse to the eni∣mies campe, findes it to be emptie. to the last compa∣nie then retyring. Heare eache one desiring to shew Ours fallo∣vved them. him selfe valiant and couragius in ther Captaines presence, they droue the enimie from his place, stand∣ing for the defence of the company, whilst con∣strainned by the retyring of many, they handsom∣ly They tooke greate bootie out of the quarters. did saue them selues. The sutelers marchandise, and many instruments of the armie familie, being
left and, became a prey vnto the soldiar. But this retaeict being prudently made by Graue Maurice, got him so much honor as the enterprise being vnhappely attemp∣ted, brought him griefe. he might rightly say with Antigo∣nus departing. That he did not fly, but followed the profit that was behind him for departing, he so prouided for his owne, and his soldiars safety that he did both hinder the ir∣ruption of Spinola by workes that were made, and preuen∣ted be the present meanes of following after him to the And to effect the ame vvith grea∣ter securitie quarters of Swalim, being the vttermost campe, which is the way to Seuenberge: hereon he placed a fort for a forefront, insteed of a refuge. On the side of the fort, he cut a ditch of a good height, with a flanke built long wi∣se, to defend those that departed, hither they safely retyred them selues. if any greater force of ours runing vpon them, and oppressed the rest, they defended them hence they ran forth, to driue them back, trusting to the neere∣nes of the trenche: for that worke was so strong and so He fortified him self. high, that it could not be assaulted on the sides, but by lad∣ders, nor before, but by a most narrow entrance. behind therwas asort vpon the dike which did enclose the para∣pet, on which side the dike of the village of heyde, was cut, in the midest, left by this way ours should hinder the passa∣ge, He marched vvith his arm to o∣ndal. Mauritius deuided his armie into two partes. He him selfe went to Rosendale, with Ernestus Casimirus of Nassau, and fortified the place with atrench and with o∣ther He  of Nasavv to oranga. workes. Hyenery Frederique of Nassau, was sent to take spranga, with the other part of his armie, which he also fortified with the workes that were made, Spinola ha∣uing The Marques returned to his first quar¦ter. spent a feowe dayes after Graue Maurices departure, thinknig he had done sufficiently both for his praise, and Graue Mau∣rice fell side in Rosendal. And he vvent sick to haya. VVith . his profit, he retyred to his former companies nere to Bre∣da. Graue Maurice abiding a few dayes at Rosendale, be∣gining to be sick determined not to tarry with his armie.
That care therfore; being committed to Ernestus Cassi∣mirus in Maurices steed, the Count of hage being sick, is brought back to Holland, as one wearie of all: where considering all thinges, that nothing prospered, nor could finde no end, by litle and litle he pined away, his sicknes turning (as is said) into a consumption. which thinge peraduenture might come to passe, because he hoped, if the warres should haue bene prolonged vntil winter (as now but a litle summer was left) that ether we should for∣sake the seege by the crueltie of the time, or that we should be preuented of prouision, by reason of the difficulties of the wayes as also by reason of his tents being so nere, He sent for the bastard Mansfeild. Notwithstanding, lest he should be deceiued through our constācie and good success, he sent for the bastard Mās∣feld into holland, to muster or make vp new companies. he hauing talked with him at hage, being after sent to Rosendal to Ernestus Cassimirus of Nassau, after he had treated of those thinges he stood in neede of, departing for France and England, he went to fetch ayde hauing vnder∣taken He vvent for succour to England and Fraunce. this sea voyage in the winter time, and that at first the sea was calme, a while after, a smoking shower of ray∣ne poured forth from the black cloudes, together with tur∣bulent stormes of dangerous vaues, which made him that he knew not where he was. Hence all the heauens, and the whole sea, were conuerted into stormes, which carried A great ster∣me. the ships violently vpon the rockes, or rune them a ground. They could not lye at ancre, nor could they pompe forth the waters that beate in vpon them: their loading, and their armour were cast ouer boord, to ligh∣ten their barkes swimming by the shore side, the waues en∣forcing rhem. Atlast, the cruelty of the heauens, and of the seas being augmented made shiproack, drowning many of his soldiars, he scarcely saued by the helpe of a lit∣le boate, so that he was thought for a long time to be as
dead. The Kinge of England promised fourteene thousand foote. There were some companies appointed for Mansfeld The king of England pro∣mised assistā∣ce. And the vni∣ted prouin∣ces promied to augment his army. out of Liege, and else where supplies were gathered thorough Germanie, to the number of two thousand foot: but the v∣nited Lords resolued to augment their old companies, with great troupes of horse and foote, called out of England, France, and Germanie. Spinola perceiuing the enimies drift, admonisheth the Ar∣chdutches, that she should request of the Emperour against The Marques aduersited the Infanta. Mansfeld, like companies both of horse and foote. And that shee should request of the Duke of Bauaria, helpe of the con∣federat Princes of Germanie, against Mansfelds designes: Moreouer, that she should commande the Prouinces to defend their quarters whith fifteene thousand foote, which Andi that other troupes may be rai∣syms. they call curlinges, or selected men, and with three thou∣sand horse, which they call companies of the Ordinance, which troupes, partly the Prouinces, partly the collectors of the Kinges mony, might pay their wages: to these foote men, only during the time of war: to the horsmen, alwayes after, that it might belong to their charge, as often as any war should happen, presently to be readie, and being offered, e∣ther to defend, or offend. The Archdutches Isabella waing The Infanta gouerned all the troups. all thinges with a maruellous princely prouidēce, with con∣tinuall labor and consulting both by night and day, as she did order the whole busines, and did vndergoe so great a waight. which two thinges she did most easily bring to passe, which no other could attaine vnto, by the auctoritie of her name, and by the fauor she had amongstst the people. By her authoritie, with strangers: by her fauor, and grace, amongst her owne. The succours therfore which Spinola requested, she obtained of the Emperour by letters. She sent the Count Octauius Sforzan to the Duke of Ba∣uaria. The Emperour promised three thousand foote, and two thosand and fiue hundred horse. The Duke of Bauaria, Count Octa∣uus vvas sent to duke of Bauaria. a thousand horse, and three thousand foote. The rest
of the foote and horse, were sent by the Prouinces at the ti∣me The emperor and the du∣ke promised succour. appointed, according to the nūber that was ordayned. Then Spinola (on whom dependeth the waight of this affai∣re) wholie attēded to this one thinge, that to so great acom∣panie, according to the continuation of the war which he forsaw, prouision should be brought, both in great plentie and safetie. And to this end, vnderstanding two thinges to be most necessaire, first wagons by which he might supply The Marques prudenly di posed the conuoys. victuals, next by some perpetuall guide, which might serue the campe in hard times, and difficult wayes, he made Hen∣rie of Bergues, chefe of that transportation, retayning in the campe Orchoa Gomeretio, Comissarie generall, as they call They vvere comended to Count Hendrick. him, whom hitherto he had vsed in transporting of victuals, but nowe most of all had neede of him, with the rest of the horsemē, to make excursiōs about Breda, and about the cā∣pe. He sent the Count of Henning, to the States of Brabant, Count he∣ning vvas sent to the State of ra∣bant to pro∣cure vva∣gons. to procure wagons, that hauing perswaded them first, the o∣ther prouinces should also follow their example, the Count of henninge proposing the matter to those who were to gi∣ue their suffrage, he easily obtayned of thē, that they should all afterwards agree vnto it in the State house, when they The other prouinces vvere moued by this exam∣ple. both knew the present necessitie, and were glad of the re∣medy for the publique good. Those therefore of Brabant condescending, those of Flanders, Henault, Artois and the rest, did not vn willingly condescend, that so many wagons should be appointed. At lyre there was a publique barne of corne ordayned, hi∣ther first was the prouision brought, and from thence to the Amunition house vvas at Lyre or∣deyned. leager. The greatest part of the horsmen were committed to the charge of the Count of Bergues, which were to take care of the prouision; for the companies of Breda, need al∣most The care and dingens of Count Hen∣dricken con∣ducting the conuoys. no other defence, then the fortification already made. This leaders name although it was fearfull to the enimie, yet he chose rather with his owne act, then with his fame, to
deter them from all irruptiō. wherfore this way he acquitted himselfe of his office. It was his custome, early in the mor∣ning before day, to discouer the disorder of the confused troupes then sending before some troope of light horsmē, to goe after. To the first cōpanies and last, he ioyned artilleric, The order of his marchi∣ge. to giue notice of the enimies coming, whose signe by so gre∣at asound, might be carried a far off that by that signe which was giuen, the soldiars might be gathered together, and ha∣sten to that place which stood most in neede. Both sides of the way against Rosendal and Langestrate (where the ene∣mies army lay) to be set with troupes of horse on both sides, And his pre∣uention a∣gainst the treachrie of the enemie. and to set betwixt the horsmen light footemen, and with the rest of the horse to enclose with the reste of the foote; so to goe forward in their iorney, and yet in fight. That they sho∣uld seeke as much as was possible, the safest passages, to preuēt treacheries, disposing the wayes that the passages might be the more easie. If there were any dāger, that he should be wa∣ry, not to bid battell vpon the enimies ground, and for that cause, ether to expect in a fitter place, or kepe him self from disaduantage, and to set the wagons insteed of a trench, if they were to fight, bringing the shooters with in side. As oftē as they were to march, that the Captaines shoulde goe befo∣re, till the last had passed, both to veew and hasten their com∣panies, and then fallow after all, and then in the marche to before most; and finally, to come in time. To prouide pla∣ces of lodging for the soldiar before night, then the gardes to be apointed before night. To call the boores, to en∣quiri of the enimie, of the wayes, and to setwatch, as the custome was. Ether to sease vpon the bridges, or to breake them downe, to take away passage from the enimie. To set the soldiars ready in their standing places, with their horses bridled, if neede were. That they should send others out on euery side, to take some, by whom they might know the enemies designe. Furthermore, to haue certaine spies
who should discouer vnto them, all their councels and at∣tempts, whom he should reward liberally. In the night, he Their spies. should beset all passages with watchmen. and lest con∣tinuance should be diminished by custome (which vses to happen by lenght of time) he should often visit the standing The vigilanci he obserued in his iourni by night. places at vnawares, not so much for distrust of those that walke the round, as that being equall with the soldiars they should be the more willing to vndergoe the labor with the leader. Now he tooke care, as well for the affaires of the boores, as for prouision. He as ouer-seer of the fires, admo∣nished the soldiars to put out the fire, which they had kind∣led Punishisment for disorders in the barnes. He caused those that were more carelesse, by whose negligence the slame ill enkendled arose and too∣ke hould of the houses, to watch afterwards abroad in the o∣pen aire, punisht them in their purse, and condemned them to repaire the damage. He admonished thē, after the maner of Aurelianus, that they should liue vpō the spoile of the ene∣mie, and not vpon the teares of those of their owne side. To doe iustice for the contrie people, against the libertie of the soldiar, to heare their complaints, and to punish the guiltie. The fruit vvhich of all resulted. By which discipline he brought to passe that the inhabitāts (of whom there was great care, had in the villages) that they out of the Churches and steeples, wherin they put their wi∣ues, children, corne, and houshold stuffe, should giue those thinges to be sould, which for feare sake they kept close and shut up, and that the labourers of the ground should be exer∣cised without any impediment. VVith so great quietnes, brought he hisarmie thorough the villages of Brabant, with a speciall care which he had of the corne, fieldes, hou∣ses, and men. The enemie by the fame of so exact a discipli∣ne, neuer durst so much as once to carpe at our troupes, that plainly with what honor the prouinces fulfilled, Alexā∣der Seuerus for his modestie, whilst he led his amongst the Parthians had great renoome for his braue conduction and
gouernment that name chey talled Bergues of Croac, the The craces called him God of the boores. God of the contrymen. By this so great care of the Count of Bergues, al though all the corne was carefully preserued, yet because by reason of the number of horses the store of grasse was by litle and litle diminished in the cāpe, and those horses for the conti∣nuance The Marques had greate care of the horse and fo∣rage. of their labor, were spoiled with leanenesse, when many did feede on chopt straw, and on chaffe (wherunto necessitie compelled them to augment their forage) Spinola prouided for both these discommodities, after this maner. Lest the rest of the forrage, should faile for the horse in the campe, he sent a companie of horsmen, to guard those that went too and fro, into the wintring places, vnto the citties and townes adioyning neerer, where they might re∣fresh them selfes for a time, whilst victuales and waggōs we∣re made ready for lire. And as at that time the forrage for the cāpe could not be spent, in which the horses had carried thither prouision, he forbid them to goe vnto the campe; hauing likewise dismissed (as soone as they were vnloaded) the wagons and beastes of burthen. hence the horses, when else where they were better fed, by a litle repose, were refres∣hed from their wearines and their leanesse. This that Spi∣nola might effectuat the more safely he built a great fort in the village of Barlen three houres iorney from the campe Fortifieng the vvayes in diuers places. and placed a garrison, adding therto one companie of hors∣men. To this place afterwards, did Count Bergues bring prouision, with his horsmen: here he staid, whilst the wa∣gons vnloading, went out of the campes: hitherto did the companies of horsemen, and other of footemen, meete them and receiue them. Furthermore, that in all euents, the iorneyes might be the more secure, a fort being made by Count Isenbergue, in the village of Leurence against Rosendale, almost in that place, in which the riuer runing betwixt, might be passed For the secu∣ritie of the convvay.
by bridges or ouer shallow places. Furthermore, other three were made by Henrie of Bergues, betwixt Lire, He∣rentale, and Turnhoult: four also at Outturn hout, in which the soldiar which were too and fro, tooke his rest in the night which iorney, al though it was far greater then the o∣ther, by which men goe directly thorough hooghstrat yet because it was far distant from the enemies campes it was. thought to be more safe and certaine; especialy when but meane grrrisons were left for these two castles Hooghstrat, and Turnhoult. By this circumspection, the wayes were so safe, that the contrymen, chiefly of Turnhoult accompa∣nied almost with no conway, did securely transport vi∣ctualls to the campe by wagon. which libertie of going too and fro, when the enemies knew, hauing once set v∣pon them to rob them, they spoiled some wagons, driuing away their horse and carriars, not far from the village of Barlen. Graue Maurice, meditating in his disease of new ex∣ploits, Graue mo∣rish once again turned to tempt the castel of Antvvorp. hauing not yet laid aside the hope of surprising the Castle of Antwerp, once againe vndertakenig anightly en∣terprise, purposed to set vpon it the second time. It pleased him to commit this busines, to Stakenbrouck gouernor of Graue, but his attempt fell out no more happely then the former for there felle continually so great a rayne, that their peeces serued to no purpose, by reason of the moystnes of their poudre; and when the enimie saue fire in the night v∣pon the walles of the cittie, supposing to be betrayed, he sodainly retyred back with so great perturbation, that lea∣uing parte of his cariage, in places not passable,, he spec∣dely betooke him to flight. It is thought that there was a conspiracie of some treacherous cittisens made within A conspira∣cis f trea∣cherie vvas  in the itie. the towne, who for desire of a new gouerment had inui∣ted the enimie. Thirtie were commanded to be banis∣hed, whom petulancy of wordes made to be suspected,
but by and by they were forgiuen, and some were permit∣ted Some  and prer∣ly forgiven. to tarrie still. Graue Maurice therfore when he sawe he could do not∣hing more against our conuoyes, although his armie was diuided into two parts to lye in wayte, turned all his care to vex those which were said to helpe to bring the victuals. They were taken who were found guiltie of that fact, and were soundly punished in their purse, nether did they spare those which were tributaries to the confederated estates the rest being deterred with the greuousnes of the punishment. Moreouer, all the milles round about, were broken downe, their irons being taken away. The bakers and bruars, had The enimie . their bruing vessels and their ouens spoiled. we also vnder∣stood that it was treated amongst them, whether it was the custome, that those places of the fielde which were kept with litle or few companies of soldiars (where our proui∣sion lay) should be depopulated and destroyed. Some thought it fit, that all the places round about should be set on fire, to which ours might haue accesse for prouision, least they should be commodius for vs, to bring aboundan∣ce of victualls. Others fearing, least also we should set fire on their villages and free townes without gard or defence dissallowed of that councell. wherfore he opinions benig diuers (as it is wont to be in desperat cases) they carried pri∣soners The enimie apprehendd tho it that brought to the Marques prouiion. from Tourenhoult, hooghstrat, and the adioyning villages, some which had relieued our tents with prouis∣sion and victuals. Spinola requiting them, as many as he vn∣derstood to haue carried to the enemie food and victuales, he likewese commanded to be taken, and to be punished in The compla∣ints vvere ansvvered. eueri place Diuers of these complanied vnto him by mes∣sengers, as if they were inocent. He made them answer, that this was the estate of the present war, that seing the enemie did by all meanes hinder the bringing of prouision, that he also forbid the like; and if they would haue him not to hinder
them, they also should desist from hindring ours: but if they went forward in hindring ours, he also would goe for∣ward in hindring theirs. By these examples and penalties, the contrymen and merchants being deterred, not daring scarcely to bring any All thinges became deer. thing into our army but by stealth, there ensued for a few dayes a great dearth of bread, wine, bere, and other mar∣chandise, which Spinola feared to relieue by imposing on them a lesser price, fearing by how much he profited the soldiar, so much the more he should hurt by the scarcetie of sellers and of corne (which ar allured by aduantage gayne.) for these causes, during those dayes, some certaine soldiars (which preferred hungar before honestie) they cut in pee∣ces for reliefe (a most miserable food) the carcasses of dead Som vvere of necessitie constrained to eate horse flashe. horses: and by this necessitie of ours, both the lesser famine of the besieged, and the greater aboundance of Maurices armie (which was relieued by the neerenes of the citties and riuers) we were to ouerthrowe them. For then there was plentie of prouision in the cittie, at a reasonable rate, which the state had caused to be set vpon all marchandise, nor we∣re esteemed at a higher rate then before the siege least the cittisens and the soldiars, should thinke them selues opprest. Araser of wheate sould for sixteene shillinges: ar easer of Prudence of the senat of Breda. Rie, for ten:: of panick, for eight: of Barley for seauen; and oates for as much. A sack of salt was sold for eight shillinges. Dried stockfishe, and a pound of cheese, for The price of vituales in the tovvne of Breda. three halfe pence A pound of greene cheese, for a peny. A pottle of oyle; for two shillinges and a peny. A pottle of rape oyle, for four pence. A pound of beefe for three half pence. And by this cheapnes of victualls, it was a won∣der how long the patience of the beseeged did endure. In the enimies campe, corne, wine, food, was brought from all parts, at the lowest rate, VVhether it was not lawfull for ours to haue accesse. Spinola that he might succour the
necessitie of his soldiars, besides the Kinges daylie allowance, he comanded to be daylie distributed to the soldiars man by man, beere measured out of the magazin or amunision hous which thinge did greatly winne their affection, and The Marques preuented a good re∣medi for the necessitie of his soders. was also healthfull for them. The Infanta Isabella, against the rayne and winters winde, she caused to be giuen to the senteries (which were to watch without any shelter) six hun∣dred gownes, to the rest hose and shooes almost to the num∣ber And also the Infanta. of eight thousand. They of Breda, who gladly receiued of others that which they would willingly should befall to our affaires (hauing vnderstood of others that our necessities were greater then they were, beleeued that for the space of fortie dayes, no prouision had come into our armie: that the Reportes a∣monst our coarartes that cure ar∣my dayly de∣cad. greatest part of our armie, was runne away: and that the lesser part by far, remayned: that none now were of force to sub∣sist, and endure the brunt of labor: and that the rest, ether for famine, or for sicknes, would forsake the siege. These and other thinges did the holanderes diuulge abroade. There were some also that did more amply and with greater boasting, publish the same abroad in print. The besieged therfore, vpbrayding vs with our necessities, brought forth their prouision, as bo∣asting of it, somtimes with oxen into the suburbs. VVhen The enemy bsted of the  of thr prouition yet at home, casting their accounts, they had but ameane quantitie of corne. The state (least they should quickly con∣sume, that which they tought to feede longer upon, decreed that no man should brue beere, which should cost aboue a crowne. They tooke also away the tin and copper furnices, Preuension of the enemy that thre prouisi might long indure. from the makers of Aqua vitae, lest corne should be consu∣med by that meanes: and that they held out so much the longer. But their boasting was rewarded with a iust punish∣ment.
Number IX. Spinola seing them more freely, to wander about the wal∣les, where certaine gardens were, to gater hearbes and roo∣tes which were left, least they should scape scot free, and that passage be open for messengers, on that side on which the watch did seeme to be lesse vigilant (by reason of the great∣nes of the circuit) he caused to be made nere to the cittie in three places, some lesser, and greatet fortes, and three batte∣ries to place canons and artillery upō. Those sedes of the for∣tes, Great and Litle fortes and batteries vvere built. which looked towards the cittie, to repell the balles of the peeces, had their wall fiue and twentie foote thick. The bul warkes were of this forme. The greater standing in rhe village of Genip, which the Marques of Campolatar defen∣ded, The forme of the forti∣fications. was a hundred and sixtie foote longe. A hundred twen∣tie fiue foote broad. The walles behind and on the sides, were fifteene foote thick. But the thicker side was made fit both for a walking and standing place. The angles stan∣ding out, did perfect the fore front. There were in the buil∣ding, nine prospectes or windowes, to place so many ca∣nons in. Eache of eleuen foote and a halfe in bread made not streight, but with their brimmes slope wise. inwardli with a banket, made of turfes and boughes, eight foote high, with his papapett. thirtie fiue foote broade, and boorded ouer, to remoue the canons speedely. After this building, there was a leuel of a hundred and thirtie foote longe, and fiftie foote bread. VVithout vnder the prospectes, were sharp stakes: for a refuge for the masters of the artillery, vaul∣ted and hedged about, to defend the flankes and bulwark. Then a ditch of fortie eight foote broad, and seauen foote deepe; from the higher brimmes, to the very bottome, it
Num. 9. Agger Tribuni Wyngardij. Agger Baronis Balanconij. Agger Comitis Isenburgici.
was thirtie eight foote upon the outward bank, was set aranck of sharpned stakes, to hinder the irru∣ptions. The other two bulwarkes of Tettering and Hage, this Other forti∣ficaiones. was the midle most, and that the least of the three, but the strongest by its nere adioyning to the fortes, being built al most after the same maner, differing only in lenght, breadth and corners, were kept by Baron Balinconius and Count Isenbergue. VVhile those thinges were thus ordered, after∣wards the besieged, made irruptions out at diuersgates, and shot the balles of their canons very thick against our wor∣kes, and against our campes, but to litle purpose. Our wor∣kes being finished, when they saw their affaires to stand in hard tearmes, some of the soldiars, tradesmen, and husband∣men, for feare of hunger, began to yeeld them selfes. For Some of the  them selues. being wearied with the present incommodities afflicted with a great plague, with long inclosing, and change of diet, they both had scarcetie of corne, and they withall vnderstood, that there remayned litle fleshe, fishe, and cheese. Oyle pressed out of rape-seede, and dipped in their bread, they commonly vsed for their meate. There we∣re very sumptuous banquets made to the soldiars by him  made be the knoker of dgges. that knockt the dogges on the head, to wit for three half pence ameale. For he for acertaine stipend of twentie shil∣linges a month, being commanded to kill all the dogges to auoide the plague, furnished a table with those dishes, nether had he daylie a few soldiars to be his guesse, to dine so well for so litle mony. But when this life seemed to many men very hard and grieuous, it was made far more insup∣portable for feare of continuance, wherfore they endeuou∣red The enemie began to run avvoy. And the Marques co∣maad that the  thou . to better this their bad estate by flight. But Spinola sen∣ding a Trumpetter to the Gouernor of the cittie with com∣mand, hewarned him, that none after that time, etherin re∣gard of rendring him selfe, or of flight, should hope for pard∣don,
of him, but should be driuen back into the cittie, or be hanged, as many as should come from thence, VVithall, he commanded all places, to be kept with watches, by which they could passe priuilie. promising fiue and twentie crow∣nes Decompence for . for a recompence, to those that cayght them coming out of the towne. All for the present being astonished, and therfor (as it oftē hapneth) made the boulder hereby, cōmit∣ted them selues to the mercie of Spinola, who weeping, with all possible prayers, entreated them without the fortes, that receiuing them, they would asist them with meate, or else kil them, rather then to send them back into the cittie. Spinola receiued the wife of a certaine trades-man of Antwerp, to∣gether with her litle childe, now lately of her owne heade departed out of the cittie; commanding the rest that came with her, to returne back, but afterwards he dispenced mo∣re liberally. with his owne law, sending back none of the fu∣gitiues in to the towne. when but few, and very seldome, a∣ny Spinola co∣maundd to  boores to be hanged  of the cittie. of them issued out. He hanged up two boores, in the sight of the cittie, which in the dead of the night endeuoured to carry thither victualls. This fact, proued prositable, and better then mercie, others afterwards being made afraide by The saied proued fact  Novv  of graue Mau∣rice to  the cittie. this exemple. Graue Maurice, thinking with a greater number, to send victualls to the besieged, bringing great quantitie of corne and other prouision to the hauens of the cittie nere at hand he prepares eighteene great boates with flat bottomes which in a calme, might goe vnto them, which freed from the Novv in . surging of the seas, feared the sandes nothing at all, and lye safely at ancre in shallow places. To these he makes sides and fore-deckes, raised up on ether side and high of thick oake to resist all kind of force and batterie. Eue∣ry In vvhich vvas sent  and a . one made after this maner, he armeth with four or six brasen and iron peeces, furnisheth with many balles of wilde-fire, afterwards he loades them with corne barre∣led
vp, with great quantitie of cheese, bacon. and por∣ke. All were set with most expert shooters. He aduertiseth those of Breda at the same time, that with some of their best The bsiged . soldiars, they vpon the day appointed, should breake out of the towne, and should plant them vpon our bridge. Those of Breda obeynig this commandment, make ready four∣teene ferrieboates, six wherof they furnish with so many canons, and withe balles of wilde fire, and appoint three hundred soldiars to stand vpon the shipps, they prouide six hundred, which might sallie out from the lande, neere the riuer. VVhich thinge Spinola vnderstanding, doth fortifie The Marques . a bulwarke which he made in the village of heyden with greater garrison (by which way the enimie was to passe) planteing agreat hedge made of trees. furthermore he de∣termined to plant another roe or hedge, with greater stakes bound together, two thousand foure hondred paces longe betwixt was fair litle forts, which he built ouer the blackdik, as they call it, lest by that water which during all the winter, did flowe into the cittie, the enemies might passe their pro∣uision. for such was the nature of those meadowes that as often as the swelling of thesea raged (which alwayes happe∣ned euery twelue houres) ouer flowing also with land wa∣ters, they might easily enter into the cittie with flat botto∣me boates; and also made a passage for footemen, after the sea was gone out. But behoulde, the windes which at the first were very prosperous for Graue Maurice, to our vn∣speakable happines, turned contrary. the raging also of the sea, contrary to its custome, did scarce so much as mo∣ue . the waters: and so once againe the diuine power, did ouerthrow the enimies designe. In the meane while, whilst the ships loaden with victuals and soldiars, were stopt with the weather, the number of cheese and bacon was so dimi∣nished VVich proui∣sion vva for the . by the pilfering of the soldiars, that litle store of this his prouision could haue come vnto the besieged, although
it had hapened that the ships had passed by vs. But a few dayes after, the corne which was barreld vp, wet with the moysture of the rayne and of the ship, began to growe thorough the chinkes of the barrells, after it was taken out of the ships: and thus the enimies alwayes endured one losse vpon another. Afterwards, when our men were sent out of the cam∣pe to fetch wood and forraige, (that nere at hand being spent) the enimies supposed, that our soldiars being disper∣sed to gather forraige and wood, might easily be distroyed by their horsemen: and for this cause, noted the more dilli∣gently our gathering of wood and forraige. They laboured Great dange∣res in ∣chnge of vvood and frradge to to our campe by all meanes possibile about this matter, that our men might be depriued of both: this seemed easie vnto them be∣cause their strenght of horse was greater: when as our horse were almost all employed, partly in defending the campe, partly in bringing prouision: and that it was all one, ether to put them to the sword, or hinder them of their cariage: which being lost, the siege could not be mayantained. hen∣ce it hapned by oure daylie foraginges (which was need∣full) when foraige was fetcht from vnuseall and dispersed houses, that few forraigers could goe about in to those di∣spersed and dangerous places; which though it did not doe great hurt vnto vs, yet it did great hurt to the sol∣diars, to the beastes, and to the carriars. Spinola, least he should leaue any long time so litle a spirt of ioye to the enimie, afterwards as often as he was to fetche forrai∣ge, he expected the returne of the companies, whom for Sauegard sake, the Count of Bergues brought back within three leages of the campe; by whose Saueguard, The Marques prouented  enemies . he sent the forraigers from the campe, on euery side, vnto the fildes neere adioyning. Furthermore he so di∣sposed of his conuoyes, that when the wagons at Ly∣re were loaded with corne, diuiding the number of
horse and foote, the wagons being loaden with oates, they should speedely transport forriage into the campe, which being afterwards vnloaden, the soldiars as soone as might be, returned back to Lyre, to gard the other conuoyes. In the meane while, the other horses, which were in a maner become vn profitable to doe any worke, by reason of their labor and leannes, were sent into more fertile places in win∣ter to fetch forrage whilst others returned, to whom their owne quarters, were assigned for their repose. So the ior∣neys being dubled with freshe horses, and well fed; he pro∣uided The sollicitied and di a∣ching of pro∣uisiones vvas refered to the harge of Acander Hse. forraige and prouision in a short time, ouer which of∣ficie, Alexander Hesius; leftenamt of the Artillerie was ap∣pointed, who vsed continuall diligence and expedition, in loading and transporting therof. But after the prouinces (on whom of their owne willes, the cariage of corne and forraige was imposed) perceiued the siege shoulde longe indure, and alwayes new requestes to be added to the former, being wearied with the charge of so many wagons continually sent, and seemed after to re∣fuse, a new meanes of getting prouision was inuented. Ther Other vvas gons vvere taken up for The condu∣cting of vi∣tuales. were hired in all those villages, wagons with two wheeles, which for their greater compasse, one horse commonly, but two at the most do draw with greater speede then three do draw those which goe vpon four wheeles, although they be lesser. The price agreed vpon for euery one, which at the first was much greater by reason of the difficultie of the wayes, afterwards in better times was halfe diminished. So corne was prouided with far lesse charges of horse and wa∣gons, with lesse forraige, with like expedition, equall num∣ber, and easier price. This new industrie conseued Graue Maurice, who tru∣sting Graue Mo∣rish deceiued in his conce to the season of the time, beleeued, that by reason of so deare and so long cariages, we should neuer ouercome so great difficulties of corne, especially because winter now
was so nere at hande, and all the villages being emptied, the corne was carried in to the citties, and the cattell, by reason of the war, to be driuen away far off. He is reported, braging, to haue said to his frendes, that which once Pom∣peo said to Dirachius of Cesar. That he vvould not refuse, but to be esteemed an Emperor vvorthe nothinge, if Spinolaes armie departed vvithout shame; and therfore he would wil∣lingly grante that glorie to him (after Spinola had held out the siege the whole winter) that he might know more then him selfe, and also more then the diuells them selues. And God prospe∣red our affai∣res. indeed, vnles diuine succour had continually more asisted our affaires then humaine did, and the winter season (which vsually was sharp) had beene most milde, we could neuer haue ouercome so great difficulties, with such constancie. verelie the aboundance of waters, which the townes-men sent vpon our campes during Nouēbre, when they shut the flood-gates or sluces of the riuers, to poure abroad Aa and Merkam, began to cast downe our dikes put vs enough both vnto feare and care. Nether did Spinola thinke, ether that that war could haue lasted so long or that, there should neede so great a number of wagons, or that the expences of cariage would proue so great: which burthen, if the pro∣uinces from the first beginning, had seene the whole toge∣ther before their eies, per haps they would neuer haue in∣braced that with so good a will and consent, as they faith∣fully sustayned euen to the end of the siege, defreying the The fideliti of the provinces vvas admirable. charges of four hondred wagons, as also paynig the wages of the prouinces footemen: by which fact, they shewed themselues most faith full to their Kinge, and haue acquired euerlasting praise. Moreouer, who could fore-see, so many troubles tho∣rough all Europe, should be stirred vp, only for Bredaes sake? It was commonly beleeued, that there was not suffi∣cient prouision of corne and victuals, for so many thou∣sand
heades, as were kept in siege before the cittie. The cittisens accustomed to plentie, and vnaccusto∣med to war and hungar, would not endure or suffer pe∣nurie. The French, Scotch, English, VVallons, Dutch, (of whome many were placed in garison would neuer expect, till corne began to faile some by nature, others by custo∣me, being greedie of their owne pleasures, made us liue in hope of a speedy rendring; so easie a thing it is to begin war at ones pleasure, but to end it at an others. But be∣sides the corne, which the cittisens had were man by man commanded to prouide, and which were laid up for the soldiars in the common store-house, the contry people (all the time that we lay at Gilse, it not being as then resol∣ued to shut up all the passages at once) carried a great quantitie into the cittie, for feare of war. Furthermore, all the Captaines and commanders, for the excessiue gaine, which they made by asking and receiuing the payes of those that died, resolued constantlie in them sel∣ues, to vndergoe all asperities; and so much the longer. by how much more soldiars dyed by sicknes and other miseries: because, by that losse, their gaine daylie en∣creased, and not vnwillingly sustained their owne hun∣gar, by the wages of the dead, getting death by pouer∣tie, and gayne by death: so much more is gold preferred before fidelitie. The number of those that died during the siege, was so great, that aboue fiue thousand dead bodies, were brought in account to Libitine, which was the third part of all the heades (which were in Breda) being num∣bered at the first to fifteene thousand and so the sparingnes of the dead serued for victuals to the liuing. which thing lest we, nor the cittisens them selues should perceiue, it was
prouided from the begining by the Magistrats of the towne, that none afterwards, thohugh rich or noble, should haue the A in vn∣ to  the . bells runge at there buriall. These thinges, did not only deceiue ours, but for the most part also, euē the opiniō of the besieged them selues (the Cap∣taines otherwise, who were mightie in factiō, had after a ma∣ner, set their faith to sale) and many of those that fled from the cittie affirmed, that vnlesse the sige were the sooner raised, that they could hould out no longer: which selfe same thinge, was written out of Holland to the Count of Bergues. Also a Ger∣man soldiar, who had serued the Hollanders nine monthes, being taken by ours, and knowen by the Count of Isenbur∣ge to be one of his cittie, his life being pardoned, upon this condition was sent back to Breda, that when as thinges were The zele of the Count of senburge. in the greatest extremitie, he should returne vnto our armie, assured both of his life, and of reward, after he had bene two monthes at Breda, conuersant amongst the soldiars without suspicion being returned, he related, that the soldiars, com∣pelled by necessitie, now began to sustaine their liues with horse flesh, nor had not corne for two monthes. He coun∣celled them, that Spinola should more often batter the cittie with his canons, at least in shew, that they might with the more apparent pretext, rendre them selues. They ioyfull and encouraged with the relation of these thinges know for certaine. what they will, and what they wishe? esteening the Hopes of good succes. Count of Bergues nether to be deceiued nor the German soldiar to haue lyed in so great a matter, nor al the fugitiues to haue bene false, they request Spinola, to let them batter the cittie with their artillerie. He although he knew well e∣nough, scarcely any thing was to be got with those engines amongst soldiars inurded to warr, the cittisens also, euen with custome, to cast away feare, yet condiscended to their request, that on three sides on which so many bulwarkes were close to the cittie) the walles of the cittie, and the hou∣ses,
should be battered. Fhillip Count of Mansfeld, oportunely returned at that Count Man¦felt . time in to our armie, lately Captaine of a companie to Gustam Adolphus Kinge of Suede, renowmed for his fa∣mous facts, who had led his troupes with great authoritie. He hauing added industrie, vnto art (as vse is the master of al thinges) found out, that it might serue for great good purpose vnto warr, a new kinde of engine, which might be fitter for to transport, and carrie the balles farther, and that with lesse quantitie of poudre; To giue order to this busines, departing from the campe to Bruxells, he caused fortie brasse peeces to be cast, also twentie thre murde∣deringe peeces, to send forth balles of wild-fire. Thirtie of those lesser peeces, of no more weight then a hundred and fourscore pound, did euery one carry balles of six pound weight: the then greater, each one of seauen hundred fiftie pound, carried balles of fiue and twentie pound. The vse of these, although they cost but halfe so much, was yet greater, and more frequent: for the litle ones, were easilie drowen with two horse, and the greater, with no more then four; wherasalthe old ones, must haue seauen, ten, or eighteene. They carried iron balles, only with the third part of poudre, further then the ould one did. That This inuen∣ted art of Manifelt vvas found profitable. abridgment, Māsfilds art inuented; for he knew so well, how to boyle with fire the melted mettall, that hauing lesse thic∣knes of brasse, yet was of like hardnes, and was also bettet then the greater peeces; and their lightnes so much the lesse. The balles also, although they were shot with lesse pou∣dre, yet for the same reasō flew the further (for the fire being giuen in the center giues fire to all the pouder at once, but otherwise beinge giuen in the furmust part of the bottō driue the ball with greater vehimencie) of the peece. An other inuention also of this Count, was admired. Iron Another in∣uension of count Mani∣felt to dr afire ball far longer then an Yrn lact balles made with salt peeter, of aboue a hundred pound weight, he made to carrie, seuentie paces further then any
other brasse murdering peece. These he shot from a far off, into the very hart, or middest, of the cittie, wheras otherwi∣se, al the force of murdering peeces, by reason of the long distance, vtterlie died before they came there, because our bulwarkes, were at lest six hundred paces from the cittie we vnderstood by the run awayes, do lesse damage then terror to haue surprised the besieged by the shooting of those bal∣les; we also saw (hauing got the cittie) the great ruines of hou∣ses that were ouerthrowen. One of the ammunition hou∣ses The besieged put to great terror. (wherin the poudre was keept) hauing the top tumbled downe, not taking fire, fell without doing any hurt likely o∣therwise to haue brought great slaughter upon the cittie, But And in par∣ticular be the artillerte of cont Isen∣burque. other balles of the canons, where with on a three fould side (and on that especially which Count Isenbergue wonne) we battered the cittie, made such feare, that both many houses were left emptie, and the assemble was called weekly to church, without the ringing of any belle, and at an vnusuall houre, and at last the soldiars were commanded to goe to their standing places, without the ringing of the belles. The wife of Captaine Aertsenius, that shee might encourage the fearfull mindes of the cittisens, when the bullets flew very thick, being carried in her coache upon the walles shewing a manlike courage in a womans bodie, taught that courage was to stand in steede of a wall. The enimies affaires standing in these termes, it was com∣monly saied amongst the people, that the confederated Sta∣tes, and Graue Maurice were one angrie with another for The states complaining of Grane Maurich. the ill managing of these matters. The States al eaging that because he had left so much time to Spinola, to fortifie his tents, busying him selfe to beate downe the walles of clea∣ues; that noting being done, (after two and twentie dayes spent to no purpose) he departed from the campe at meade. Contrarywise, Graue Maurice blamed the States, and here after spoke ill af their gouuernment among whom general∣ly
in the opinion of all men, they altogether made their pro∣fit of him. That he left it to themselues to iudge; whether His ansvver to thr com∣plainth they had don him more honor, then they had receiued be∣nefit from him. The states displeased with that speeche, and fearing least he would reiect the gouerment, cried out together, that he was their soueraigne Captaine, nor did at all dout of his wisdome and fidelitie, but that they had only proposed tho∣se thinges, which seemed to them to be expedient: that he should goe forward to defend the common-welth with the sword, to dispose of the war after his owne pleasure: that they would make it appeare vnto him, how deare Breda was, vnto them: that he should spare for no impositions, were it for no other respect, then that it was the patrimonie of the house of Nassau. He appeased with this promise and excuse, lest he should suffer his diligence to be craued of the Neovve le∣ues of horse. common wealth, caused a thousand horse to be enrolled and armed at his owne expences. Mereouer, the States them selues, another thousand to encrease the companies which were expected from france. further they consult a∣bout making a damme, wherewith they might shut vp the A costly Dammad: be the in my to eyther o∣cer Breda or drovvne oure campes. passage of the riuer of Merka, not far from Seuenberge. This, forsooth, seeming, to be the only meanes left vnto them to deliuer Breda, if as often as the raging of the sea swelled highe, accustomed to ouer-flow into the adioyning fieldes, and the winter waters (which flow into the riuer by the brookes) being retayned, they should ouer-flow all the groundes and that, that standing water was fit, ether to send victualls by shipes into the cittie, or for distroying of our armie: they set therfore vpon this matter, of so great They Ioyned aninumera∣ble quantitie of barkes and other materiales. importance, and of so incredible expences; they send to Seuenbergue in great number of boates barkes, and cock boates (wherof they haue great aboundance) to that place, wher there is a certaine mouth of the riuer, which they call
Lamsgate, and the side-bankes to the clifts, ar full of hol∣low places, All thies boates, were needfull to carry the piles. Then many ditchers and wourkmen being set a worke they ordaine wood to be cut downe, turffe to be cut round a∣bout stones, trees, plankes to be carried, boates to be loaded, and lastly the piles, to be set opposite to ether side of the ban∣ke: when behould, at by an vnexpected frost, of three dayes, they ar compelled to desist. In the very night of our Lords Natiuitie (vpon which day they first did vndertake that worke) Staken brouck, The vigilan∣ce of the count dsinburque preuented the presum∣tion of Sta∣kenburke. with great troupes of his, went to Rosendale, and comes behinde the backes of Isenburges companies, to see what he could espie. he vnderstood by his spies, that but a litle dit∣che being filled, it was easie to passe, which to fill, there needed but some six or seauen spads. Glad of this newes, ta∣kes with him eighteene companies of horse, with no more then seauen spades. Being come to the place he perceiues that the thinge could not be done with the helpe of a hun∣dred spades, yet sending some before, he commandes them to attempt the passage. Our hors-man that had his appoin∣ted standing, which watched not far off, discharging his peece, giues the signe, and cryes out arme. Stakenbrouck thinking to be bewrayed by the signe, commanded to sound al the trumpetes, contented only to haue disqueted oure campes, ran away. All passages being otherwise so stop∣ped by Count Isenbergue, with so many ditches, with so many boughes of trees, and piles fastned in the earth, that they scarcly seemed passable to a single man. The frost being past, the workmen (although great diffi∣cultie was proposed of dispatching the damme by reason of the swiftnis of the riuer) returne to their ommitted worke they sinke three very longe boates of burthen to the bottom, loaden with turffe, and with stones, and ca∣sting sagotts vpon the earthe, together with the damme be∣gume
on both the brinkes of the riuer, laying the turf∣fes in order, driuing great stakes betwixt to bind the ground, they aduance halfe way into the riuer. Moreouer in the towne it selfe of Seuēbergue, by letting in and letting out the floodes they make sluces on the other side of the ri∣uer, that after the floodes had fild the fieldes, they kept them vnder water by the height of that poole, by which it was needfull to passe ouer the ferrie-boates. full of proui∣sion. hauing therfore gayned the ebbing and flowing of the sea, they againe prepare those thinges which ar needfull to furnish the ships. Spinola pondered that worke with much care, and ther∣fore The Marques continually carefull in preuenting  the . he studeed before all thinges, that by the information of spies, he might vnderstand in all times, by day and night, what soeuer was done in that place. And as often as the Moone was ether new, or at the full (which dayes, ar wont to cause the greatest raging of the seas) he planted more for∣ces nere to the campes of heyden and of hage, on which si∣de the irruption was most feared. Next, he caused the sluces of all the riuers (by which the land-waters were brought about heydam, into the riuer of Breda) to be opened, whilst the waues of the sea, ouer-drowned all the fildes, and, being retyred, commanded, them to be shut: and then when they came to worke about their pretended damme (lower now by the waters departed) he sodainly drawing Oure slouses hinderd much the dam. vp the sluces, by letting goe the rest of the force of the wa∣ter which he retayned, sent it vpon their worke, and hin∣dred all the administration of their endeuours. Furthermo∣re, setting mariners, by night cut asunder the bankes of the riuer of Merkain sundry places, the length of fiue thousand foote: for which there was a two-fould reason. First, that such waters as they retayned by the damme, to make the channel of the riuerswell, and let out towards heydam he, cutting the bankes of the riuer might diuert into the bor∣dering
valleys of the fieldes. Next, that by how much the more water the surging of the sea should bring ouer the bankes, into the large spaces of the meadowes it should be returned back with the greater violence, by its departu∣re, vpon the damme: which for certaine so fell out, so that by how much the neerer, both the sides of the damme approached together, so much the higher the sand raised it Rare preuen∣siones and prudent care of the Mar∣ques. selfe from the bottome. finally asking the aduises of all car∣penters and other Inginieres, who denyed that so great a damme could be preserued from higher waters, yet before all councelles Spinola iudged it expedient to prouide, that no place should be left the enemie to pierce thorough. Number X. To that dike therfore, which he had brought from the dock of the bridge towards hage (digged thorough lest it might be passed with cock-boates) he commandes another thicker hedge or roe of trees to be cast before, and to be bound a boue with trees laid a crosse after the maner of the other. Then he caused a litle shelter or parapet alongste to be set vpō the dike on that side of the stoccados of fiue foote high, to couer the shooters. Furthermore, here and there he His vigilance and care preuailed placeth aforte, wheron he might plant the Canons. Lastly, he blocked vp the riuer. with three or four roes or Rankes of great and stronge stokadoes of wood wherbe he might hin∣der the passinge of the enemy as well on the outward as on the in ward sides if they should come to atempt our workes or to soccor the town that be meanes of thies stokadose Roes of scc∣kados vver in distance set to hinder the pasing of the enemy. there boates might be hindered in not passing the riuer or in takinge posession of oure bridge and fortificationes. Betwixt these two outmost stoccadoes of trees, there lay at incre the enimies ships which were lately taken, with their
Num 10 AGGER A SPINOLA IACTVS PALVSTRI LOCO Lorica, vallis ligeis munitionibus, aggeribus{que} tormentarijs firmatus.
A. Agger tabulis constratus. B. Pons Naualis inter Heydam et Hagam. C. Brachia ponti praestructa. D. Seps. duplex palustri loco fixa. E. Vallus quadruplex seu palisade in flumine Merka. F. Munimenta idonea imponendis maioribus tormentis. G. Loricula nostrorū trans Merkam.
mastes placed backwards upon the fore-decks, to receiue and rent the sayles of such ships as they should meete. Vpō them abridge was built, and a parapett placed fast by the bridge, and boordes and plankes necessarie for the same. some had their keeles boared thorough with hoales, but yet Other inuen∣siones vvere preuented to let the enemy in not pa∣sing the ri∣uer. so stopped, that taking the sparres out of the hoales, they might sodainly by sonken in to the bottom of the riuer and which being stopped might altogither hinder the say∣ling and passing of the enemy. To the outward stocca∣does of threes, two mastes were, tied together by the two pointes crossinge ouer the riuer. Before these there lay a bark full of pitch, rosin, and tow, and with other thinges prepared for fire, which, had the enimie come, being dis∣persed into the enimies nauie, would out of dout haue cau∣sed great slaughter. These thinges accomplished, the enemies not slowlie, mended vp againe in the nerer places, the detriment of the trenche cut by vs, by a double fortification made on ther side, at the mouth of the riuer, lest we should hin∣der by our irruptions, the disposition of the worke. Also those of Breda, ether that they might come into some part of the worke, and hauing broken the force of their riuers, the damme at Seuenbergue might be mo∣re easily perfited, or that they might recompence the worke attempted in September all in vaine, by destroying the trenches with which the riuers ar diuided, to let forth water upon our campes, they began to make those bulwar∣kes thicker, and to raise them higher. This being knowen, Spinola (seeing he could not diuert the riuer of Merka, from his wonted cur∣rent) he maketh a ditch of two thousand two hun∣dred The Marques preuented re∣medi to hin∣der the execu¦tions of their sluces and vvaters. feete longe, before the walles of the cittie (whe∣re a higher ground retayned the waters) by, which he turneth all standing water, by a brooke brought about the
side of the cittie, into Merka, lest the waters should be let up higher into his campes. VVhich ditch, before it was fi∣nished being augmented and strengthened in the riuer by those of Breda, being cast downe by the diluge of those wa∣ters that were gathered together, ouerth rew some of the slu∣ces, and fortifications of the walles, to the great affrightmēt of the cittie. Also nere vnto Seuenbergue, the great force of the water returneing back, drowned three ships in the bot∣thome of the riuer (which being loaden, they had sunke in∣to it) and ouer-boare al the piles laid upon them. Vnto which thinge that of the diuine protection did succeed, be∣cause as longe as that ditche was wrought by so many han∣deslabouring together, although they shot continually a∣gainst our men forth of the cittie, yet the shoulder of one only soldiar was shot with a litle bullet. Those of Seuenbergue would not yet desist from their designe, which they had in vaine attempted the third or fourth time although they vnderstood it was most hard to be effected. They who saw the miserablenes of their estate, iudged that they went about with a vaine dissimulation, to relieue the hope of the besieged. They notwithstāding, bar∣gaine to repaire the vndertaken damme from both sides of the bankes of the riuer. To strenghten it, they fastē straight trees by a line in the riuer, filling it up with turffes giuen frō hand to hand. They fil up the spaces betwixt the trees, with great stones, turffes, and boughes of trees. Least their labor should be intermitted, the turffes digged out of lowe places (whence the swelling of the sea, drawe back the water) they lay up in piles, like to stacks; that such as by the swelling of the waters appeared aboue, they might bring to withe their cock boates. Lastly, so they striue against both sea and riuer as if they woulde ouercome euen nature it selfe. Iusti∣nus Nassau, begā againe to repaire the bulwarkes at Breda, and gaue order to amend the floud-gates, and fortresses that were fallen: furthermore, to raise up the trenches and the
walles before our cannons, lest the houses should by endo∣maged by our shooting. Spinola although he beleeued now in some sort the affir∣mation of the Architects or engineres that his kāpes could not be remoued, nether by the ouerflowinges of the cha∣nielles by the waues of the sea, nor by the refluxes of the ditches of the towne, by which by the cuting of a new ditch, he diuerted the water of the fenues into Merka, frō the fiel∣des; yet because he knew the Hollanders to be skilfull in sea The Marques preuented the plts of the enemy. matters, both by speculatiō and by practise, and saw thē not desist from their endeuours, sent continually spies to Seuen∣bergue, not contēt with the report of what they found vn∣less thē selues had also seene, that to be true which they af∣firmed. And when word was brought that the damme, for the most part perfected did goe forward, and many ships to lye at ancre, prepared to carry victualls, turned that way, whether the win de of Breda carried them; once againe by Gods prouidēce, the winde, which had blowen prosperous∣ly vntill that day, turned contrary, and so great a tempest arose on the sodaine, that the posts driuē in to the riuer with The enuen∣tions of the enimie pre∣uailed no∣thing against the tempest sledges or rāmers, the turffes, the fagots, and the stones, were ouer-borne by the deluge, and the litle boates wherwith they brought the turffes and other materialls, beaten one a∣gainst another, and cast on the shore, and all nauigation vt∣terly hindered But afterwards by those tēpests they gayned this, by the change of the weather, and continuation of the windes, that the work of the ondertaken dāme, they suppo∣sed necessarily to be deferred vntill the next march. These thinges vnderstood, the Senat, lest ether The preui∣dence of the senat of Bre∣da. by the continuance of the siege, they should want victualls, or for want of mony should be vnable to pay the soldiars wages, resolued by two wayes to prouide a remedie. First to lenghten out their prouision by measu∣ring out and distributing of it sparingly: for after that they They visited the houses and barnes. had once in the month of September, taken acount from
house to house of the corne, they againe in October, calcu∣late all the graine in the whole cittie; and againe in the sa∣me October, in two dayes space, all that was noted was a∣gaine measured, setting watchmen from street to street, writinge downe the number of people in each familie. And when the cittisens were found to haue twelue thousand measures of wheate, in the publicque store-house, fiue thousand; ad fiue hundred head of cattell, it was decreed, that there should be measured, for so many weekes, to the soldiar, out of the common store-house, a hundred and fif∣tie measures; to the cittisens, out of their owne heape, a-thousand measures; eighteene head of cattell to be slaine, wherof the pound should be sold for three penns. Nether yet contented with that distribution, visiting a∣gaine the garners of the cittisens, they calculate once mo∣re all the corne, and forbade, none to be sould, or carried away, without publicque authoritie, upon the penaltie of All the corn vvas brought into a store house. fortie crownes. By which penaltie also they ordained, that no cittisen should from thence-forth, brue beere in his house, lest bruing of the stronger beere secretly, they should consume the more corne. Lastly, more was done in Decem∣ber, when they commanded to be brought forth in pub∣lick out of priuat houses, what corne soeuer they kept se∣cretly else where. And least any should deceiue them, in the mōth of Ianuarie, calling euery one in to the court, they vrged them to take their oathe, that they should declare as they tought, how many measures of wheate, meale, barley, oates, ether of their owne, or of others, they had in secret: u∣pon condition and obligation, that he who being sworne, would not confesse the number, in the meane while, should euery day, pay twentie shillinges: but who so should wit∣tingly for-sweare him selfe, should be both punished for Lvve or∣dained for the bakers mrs. his periurie, and should moreouer be condemned in three score pound. with these penalties were the bakers and the
Num. 11.
millars also bound, to whom it was forbidden by a penall law to bake no bread wayghing lesse then six pound and a quarter, or to sell to any one, more then two pound, ether of wheate, or of meale. These lawes being made, the next day after the calendes of Ianuarie, the Magistrates and the Captaines, going thorough out all the houses and gra∣neries, tooke the corne from euery one, making them to sweare, that they kept no more corne from them secretly. Then they began after this maner, to cure the discease of the want of mony. The Gouernor of the cittie, the Coro∣nells, and Captaines, and all the Officers, swearing how They haue coyned nevv money. much mony euery one had, affirmed, that what euery one was able to lend, should be coyned a new. Number XI. Then were four sorts of monie, of brasse and siluer ma∣de, of a four square forme: the thre that were of siluer were of two, foure, and six shilinges, those of brasse, of a penny, halfpeny, and a farthing. Then was it published by a Cryar, that that sort of money, should passe currant for so much, and be of such a valew, as they were declared by their pri∣ces. In the meane while, vnwelcome newes were brought vnto vs of Brocheme, a towne of Cleeue. Lambertus Char∣lesius Lambertut Charles be∣seeged Gogh vvhose vvol¦les vveare broken. of Newmehe, Gouernor of the confederated States, vnderstanding of the smale number of the garison, and of the fall of the walles, gathering men, forth of the adioyning confederated places, he endeuoreth to breake into Gogh, on what side he may, and doth attempt it. Of nine hun∣dred of ours, who were left in garison, only fiue hundred were esteemed fit to beare armes, the rest being worne out with sicknes or with wearines. The fortresses being weak∣ned
with the moisture, where the ditches of the walles were full of foordes gaue passage to the troopes, nor were on that side, planted with stakes, or with piles. Iacobus Tourlandus Gouernor of Grocheme, aduerti∣sed of the issu of the soldiars of Newmege, aduiseth the neighbouring Gouernors of the Kinges townes, that they should looke to them selues, being him selfe as he thought secure. Euer now and then, he made the round about the walles, and the day before they besieged the towne, he dou∣bleth the number of the watche. He commanded four-sco∣re The vvatch vvas dubled to gard that place, where the walles were broken, where it seemed by reason of the ruines, a more easie passage did lye open. Also, what he had vnderstood of the enemies issue whate he had a duised his neighbours, what him selfe had done, of al these thinges he giues account by writing vnto Spinola; which letters of Ioānes Gonsales Gōuernor of VVe∣sel, of the vncertaine state of thinges, togheter with the let∣ter of Tourland, being receiued he checkes Tourland, that ether forgetfull, or careles of him selfe he vndertooke the care of others when he could not, by reason of so great di∣stance of place, send succour from the campe in due time. The enimie going forth in the dead of the night early in the morning, stood vnder the fallen walle of the towne. There were four thousand foote, and four hundred horse. These, whilest they laboured to get to the top by the rui∣nes, our fourscore watch-men, assricted on a sodaine at the presence and number of the enimie, forsaking their lea∣der, with shamefull feare betaking them to slight gaue way to the enimie to entre in, by that place which they had vn∣dertooke to defend. They posessing the walles, with their weapons a while The enemie  vnvvares. after, sease upon two gates, and upon the market. The most part of Tour-lands owne forsaking him, hardly able to withstand the assault, the enimie being now come to the
gates, gathering together some soldiars of those that fled, endeauoreth to defend the Castle, and the other Gate of the cittie. He sendes to VVesel, to Ioannes Gonsales, to craue Turland de∣fended the castle and one gate of that place. helpe, promising both he and his, in the meane time to keepe the place. Gonsales writ back vnto him, that he should still retayne his former courage, and auoweth that he should soone receiue succour from him: only that he should stand faithfull. with much a doe was that day sustai∣ned. By night, when ours couragiously opposed the forces of the enimie, at lenght there were beaten out of the gates: only the Castle did remaine. The next day after, percei∣uing the succour of a thousand foote, who contrary to that which Tourland had aduertised to be done, entring by the posterne gate of the Castle by hastning, to breake the bridge, leauing three hundred on the other-side of the ri∣uer; all which were ether slaine by the enimie, or came ali∣ue in to their subiection. Tourland, hauing mended with lathers and boordes, that bridge, which led out of the cast∣le into the towne, and which him selfe had broken, about to make a sallie forth into the cittie, being shot in the bel∣lie, was greuously wounded: and so at last, in the sight of all the Captaines, upon honorable conditions, rendred it up. Lambertus Charlesius, author of that expedition, got Tourland vvas sore hurt. the victorie, but enioyed not the benefit therof very long. For after certaine houses sacked, Churches robbed, Altars Gogh vvas lest. subuerted, Images burned, all thinges diuine and humaine quite disordered, lastly nether weighing nor moderating nothing, but to doe iniurie, at last had this victorie, dying The imputie of Lambrt Charlis. of the palsie, he receiued worthie punishment for his wic∣kednes. It appeared, even by the iudgment of the enimie, that we lost no great matter by loosing Grocheme nether And his reserued pai∣ne. it was so much intercepted for desire of retayning it but thinking to diuert Spinola from Breda. For Breda being now rendred they aggreed with us (without any condition
asked on the other side) that that towne should be reputed for neutral and free. Those of Breda notwistanding, hea∣ring That the tovvne should be re∣putd for neutrall Those of Bre∣daflouteth at oures. of that victorie talking with our watche from the wal∣les, with a wittie soldiar like wipe bid them be packing to Grocheme. About that time, it was reported, that the troupes, which Mansfield had gathered, ran vp and downe in the borders The rumor and fame that paseth of Mansfelt. of henault and Artois (the bordering prouinces next vnto France.) The Infanta Isabella, albeit she could not suspect, that any Prince would entangle her florishing affaires, The prudent preuentions of the Infan∣ta. with those forlorne affaires of Māsfield; yet because she was not ignorant, that the willes of Kinges, as they ar violent, so to be mouable and vncertaine, she, according to the greatnes of the perill, prepared for war howsoeuer, and re∣solued to resiste strōgly, if it were offered: she therfore ap∣pointed garisons, about henault and Artois, for the defēce of the confines. To those of henault, she sent the Count of Emden for their comander, Artois she commended to the Count of hoogstrat (who was chiefe gouernor therof, to be defended. She sent the Count of sforza, to hasten the Captaines and the Duke of Bauarias companies, against the coming of Mansfeld. She commanded the corne and cattel to be driuen into the remoter citties: she forbid hor∣se to be transported out of the low contries, into France, as the french had then forbid corne to be carried into the low contries. Spinola likewise suspecting, that Mansfeld secon∣ded with the french, English, and German aydes, would deflect towards the lower Palatinat, commandes VVilliam Verdugius. Gouernor of those places, to gather in gari∣son a hundred and eleuen free companies of Germans,  Marques commanded the lovver  to by reforced with two companies of horse, besides the companie of Captaine Gratfreus, admitted into pay with fiue hundred horse. In the meane space, the soldiars in the wallon pro∣uinces, armed them selues, with three thousand horse,
and with almost fifteene thousand foote; the companies ga∣thered a new, towards the end of sommer, were also ready. Scceris of the emperor and of the prouinces. The companies of the Count of Anholt, of three thousand foote, came, with a winge of a thousand horse (Baron of Ain∣si hastining them) the Marques Spinella armed on the bor∣deres withe the emperores socorres who resolued with a willing minde and great desire to encounter Mansfeld, with four thousand two hūdred horse, and three thousand foote. All the Prouinces companies, ar committed to the com∣mād Don Carles clooma co∣manded this of the contrie of Don Carolus Coloma, late Embassador for the Kin∣ge. The Prouinces horse, were cōmitted to Albertus Aren∣bergue, Prince of Barbancone Master de campe, who was for that purpose lately called from the commandrie of the horse. These were first wiled to stay at Namure, to the end to stop Mansfelds passage, if, as of late, he should come to inuade the borders: but vnderstanding a while after, that he went about to ioyne him selfe, with Graue Maurices com∣panies, both of them, with the Prouinces companies, plan∣ted them selfes not far from Antwerp. Spinola reioycing to haue so great an armie, as the wal∣lons The number of the vvhole army. scarce remember euer to haue seene the like (for they were censured, besides the garisons of the bordering citties, to be thirtie thousand foote, eight thousand horse, yet om∣mitted no time without solicitude of the siege, but that he endeuored by letters intercepted, to vnderstand the coun∣cells of Maurice, and of the besieged. For this respect, he was not wearied, nether with watchinges, nor with labor. He setteth many in standing, and watching places, promising thē great rewardes, if they could intercept any such letters. Three were seene to enter into the cittie, our watch being ether careles, or deceiued by their celeritie. Almost in that place, whence thiese were seene to slip by, by tho∣se Letters of graue Mau∣rish vvere found. that sought. a few dayes after, a litle purse was found, wherin two letters, smeared round about with wax a∣gainst the damage of the water, if they were to be ca∣ried
in by meanes of water. Both were Maurices; one writ∣ten to Iustinus Naslauius, the other to teState of Breda, writ∣ten with characters, abbreuiations, al most inexplicable. In these, when many had trauelled to interpret them, only the good fortune of Michaele Rōtartius, Secretarij to the Kin∣ge Michel ro∣tard expli∣cated her meaning. and to the Marques preuayled. He, by continuall studie both day and night, pickt out their meaning. This was the substance of one of them, written to, Iustinus, with a shor∣ter discourse. That he had vnderstood to his great content, so great quantitie of corne, to haue bene of late found amongst the cittisens: that they must especially be carefull, that by a spa∣ring distribution, it might be likewise lenghtned, wherby he might haue the more time to bringe supplies for which cause, he laboured with all possible endeauour, in France, England, and in the confederated prouinces. That for the same respect, Mansfeld was come, that adioyning his com∣panies, he might recall Spinola from the siege. That they we∣re now coming, and had bene there, had not the contrary windes hindred them. That there were two thousand horse (besides some companies gathered in the Seigniorie of Lie∣ge, and else where) fourteene thousand English foote. at Douer; ready to take ship. The rest of the foot in Germanie, and the confederated prouinces, chosen by him, to the nū∣ber of eleuen thousand, already shipped, with certaine other cōpanies, expected the weather. That they had already on∣ce, set sayle, but by a contrarie winde were driuen back. That as touching the confederated States, that they would spare no cost nor labor, to aduance Mansfelds endeauours, and to deliuer Breda, hauing by a new decree ordained to gather four thousand horse, (aboue the number of the ac∣customed armie) in England and France; and there, more then six thousand foote. That as it was firmelie hoped, the springe approaching, that there should be armed, fortie
thousand soote, and six thousand horse, to deliuer Breda by one meanes or other. That as to the great good of the ar∣mie and of the cittie, he wished, that the victualls (which Iu∣stinus him selfe had written) might last frō the present tēth day of lanuarie, for a hundred and eight dayes next ensuing▪ euen vntill the Calends of May. And albeit he hoped vere∣ly, that his whole armie should be ready much sooner, yet he prayed them, that the victualls should be prolonged by sparing them, as much as might be, to the end that more ti∣me might be gayned, both for his owne and another armie, which was as yet abiding in the borders of Frāce. Now, that he desired to vnderstand, what he tought of distributing a certaine portion of bread, to the soldiars, to the cittisens, to their wiues and children: that it seemed to him a thinge worthie of consideration, that commonly then more was wont to be eaten, ther when bread was giuen out by measu∣re: otherwise not to buy more then was vsuall and necessa∣rie, especially when it was sould at a high price. Besides that that thinge was wont to giue occasiō to tumults, how great caution soeuer was vsed for the conseruation of Iustice. wherfore that he left all that to the iudgment of the senat it selfe, and councell of war, what soeuer they should determi∣ne to be for the good and profit of sparing of victualls. what the soldiars horses were to doe (corne and fodder being spēt) that he dealt with the States therabouts. Tat they pro∣mised, to pay the wages which the horsmen were to receiue for these that were aliue, more then for those that were slai∣ne, so that an indifferēt valuatiō were made therof. wherfo∣re that they should, refufe nothing to endure extreme hūgar, it being published abroad, that they should be slaine. That they should keepe their milche-cowes (because milke was very nourishing) for reliefe in their, last extremitie, as long as any forredge lasted. And although it was not to be dou∣ted, that he had of late with special diligence, visited al the
granaries and store-houses of the cittie yet that he prayed him, continually to looke about by all meanes, to aug∣ment the common store house, if parhaps any thinge were hid by any one by deceit. Furthermore, that it was related to him by the Senat, of the carefull desire of the people of Breda, for the mittigating of all the distresses of the siege, with their owne purse and corne; but that there were also complaints brought by them, against the insolencie of tho∣se that were to defend them, who although they could not iustly complaine, nether of lodging, nor of fire, nor of their pay, nor of any excessiue price of meates, yet by li∣bertie and force, both by day and night, were careles ether to breake downe the houses, or dig up gardens, or to pluck up their hedges, of their orchardes, or to spoile their stables, their shops and standing places, and that only for lack of discipline, when some lately put in prison for these faultes, yet escaped without punishment. VVhich example dout∣les might coole the feruour and promptitude of the citti∣sens in watching, who now began to plead for them selues, that their owne houses were to be kept against their dome∣sticall enimie, before the walles them selues: wherfore he desired, that if the same were hereafter found, they should be more seuerly looked vnto who so should offend, to the intent that the feare of punishment might deter others: for that it was the part of soldiars, to forbid iniuries to the citti∣sens. And that it was his pleasure, that these his letters should be deliuered to the Captaines, and assistants of the coun∣cell of war, wherby they may vnderstand, that necessarilie such in commodities of the cittisens, were to be prouided for, who were sufficiently oppressed in other thinges. That of the new trench of the enimie, placed toward Seuenber∣gue there was agreat palizado made of posts, Further∣more, the States cease not to damme vp the riuer of Breda neere Seuenbergue, and that it should be shortly finished:
Num. 12. Specimen posterioris circumuallationis circulo passuum LII. millium.
although many douted; that channell being stopped vp, what would after come to passe. By some it was thought the fieldes would largely ouer-flow: of others, that it was douted. That the thinge would iudge it selfe, after the e∣uent. That he knew for certaine, that bosome to be so am∣ple, that it could not be filled but with infinit waters, al∣though the riuer were retayned: nether was there need of any great helpe to breake the dike, now so fortified by the enimie: that that worke would bring annoyance to the eni∣mie, when he should come to succour them. wherfore, that it should not be from the purpose, if against that ti∣me, ships were sent by them vnto him, for to helpe him. This was the substance of the letters. In the end, at the foo∣te of the letter, was added. That Mansfelds companies, were once againe set to sea, by a contrary winde, were agai∣ne brought back into the harbour. That Lambert Charle∣sius, Gouernor of Newmege, had taken Grocheme by force. Number XII. These letters being receiued, and Maurices designes made knowen vnto vs, calling and requiring so great forces of forraine soldiars, Spinola vnderstanding that al that war was intended against him, and that he was yet to retaine in the field full three monthes space, when Maurice had vn∣dertaken with so great obstinacie, to deliuer Breda, as though he esteemed the whole good of the common wel∣the, to be placed in the losse of that one cittie) breaking downe first those forts, which lately being built at mede, Maurice had forsaken, he resolued to encompasse his armie with incredibile labor, with a trenche of wonderfull greatnes, in the most wicked time of winter, least so great
an armie of the enimie, should break in behinde him at vnawares, as they had appointed at the beginning of the springe. That trenche when it was finished, in the whole compasse, contayned fiftie two thousand paces, so much greater was this then that former made on the sodaine contayning no more then thirtie thousand six hundred pa∣ces. Posteritij will wonder, nether, would Pompey him sel∣fe, or Cesar beleeue it, if they were aliue, of whom, the one, cut a trench, at the most of fifteene thousand paces; the other, one of eighteen thousand to goe to Dy∣racchius, And lest any man should thinke that the count should be mistaken, it is thought good, that the number of the paces thorough euery campe being found out by his owne care and fidelitie, should be committed to writing. The quarter of Spinola in the village of Genik, with that which Salazarius generall of the horse, defen∣ded at his back, were inclosed with a trenche of two and twentie thousand six hundred thirtee three paces. That of Balancon, with eight thousand six hundred. That of Isenburgue, with a leuen thousand fiue hundred fif∣tie four. That of Ballion, with nine thousand, eight hun∣dred thirtiene. Now Spinola had begun to compasse within, with an Another trince vvas comaunded to be made. other trenche, but of a lesser space, against the irruptions of the besieged. That because the cittie was first ren∣dred, was neuerfully finished, yet contayned with his im∣perfect circle, sixteene thousand paces. But doth of the∣se were ten foote highe, the walles arising, not vpright, but step by step. Below, fifteene foote thick, with aban∣ket and parapet with in for the vse of the shooters, below ten foote thicke, raised vp fiue foote highe, with a ditch depressed without side seauen foote Depe, in breadth fifteene from side to side, the bottome lyeng open no more then eight foote. These two trenches had so
much more strenght then the former, which in height ex∣ceeded not fiue foote, in thicknes seauen foote, with a ditch nothing broader. Vnto both of these greater trenches, we∣re built new redutes, and batteries, to plant canons vpon; furthermore were at euery entrie a haulf moone. Diuers Other forti∣ficasiones of the quarteres redutes were also adioyned, by reason of the perill and dan∣gerous cituation of the place. They were so fortified with new receptacles, and with many other workes, that none but he who saw them, could hardly conceiue the frame of so great workes; so that I. May with out iniurie, truly tear∣me them, a very Labyrinth of fortifications. The num∣ber of all the workes in the campes (besides those fortifica∣tions, which were built in diuers villages, ether to defend Incredibile greatnes of the fortifica∣tiones. the conuoyes, or to defend the irruptions) were a hundred seauentie eight: refuges, fourscore and sixtine: redutes, thir∣tie seauen: fortes fortie fiue with batteries reforsed: so far did this siege surpasse the renowmed endeauours of Cesar, a∣gainst Alesia and Dyrachium, where there were no more but four and twentie fortes without any more fortificatio∣nes but atrence. VVhilst these thinges began to be set in order, Mans∣feld Presumtion of Mansfeld. hauing gathered together certaine helpes beyond the sea, and else where supposing him selfe in despite, now to be feared, fayning to goe to the Palatinat, humbly besee∣cheth the Archdutches Isabella by letters, that she would please to grant him a safe passage thorough her contrie, and to asist him with a secret conuoy. he had conceited in The letter he vvrote to his aluza. his head, that without any suspicion, he should be suffered to passe thorough the Kinges prouinces (which way he was of necessitie to goe) to gratifie his Master the Kinge of En∣gland. That he would not attempt the same without ad∣uertiseng hir altesa which she, without discurtesie, could not seeme to deny: but if she should, then that he would make his way by force, which the equitie of his cause re∣quired.
Isabella, hauing often tried the honestie of that so well knowen man, thought it best to signifi by silence, how litle credit he had with her, and how litle she feared his so∣daine gathered and vnexpert armie, fitter for the plough, then for the war, nor composed scarcely of any other, then of soldiars compelled by force, she being fortified with so many and so expert soldiars. In the meane space, those of Breda, whilst they see them selucs entrenched with so great workes, both expect with longe hope, for Mansfieldes helpe, and he (tossed too and fro with the sea) to tarrie longer then they expected, began to groane and to wax wearie. For now cheese, and stock fishe Extreame necessititie and victualls vvounder full deere. fayled, now they began most cruelly to enhance the price of meates. A pound of butter, was at halfe a crowne: a pot of oyle at six shillinges: an egge at three pence halfpeny: a Greate disea∣ses. measure of pease, three pound. a pound of Bacon, eightee∣ne pence. which dearth of victualls, the soilderes impatient of want, draue them to the dismall eating of dead bodies Asistance of the cittisens. others for the most part by the vse of vnaccustomed mea∣tes, became (as the Phisitians call it) full of scurffe. for being wearied with all sorts of euills, afflicted with a gre∣uous plague, were nourished with ould and with stinking wheate, long before prouided against such an accident. The cittisens, as the labors of the soldiars, and assudietie of their watchinges did diminish, tooke vpon thē to keepe the walles of the cittie, leauing the outward forrifications to the soldiars: from which worke none, albeit ould and ex∣empted, would admit dispensation. Iustinus Nassau, least the extreame dearth and want of victualls, should cause so∣me vproare amongst the soldiars, to the end he might make them the more faithfull to him, he chose the more needy The gouernor disembled vvith his souldiars. artificers to be in the places of the dead soldiars, that they might haue wages, when now they had no gettinges, and might succeed vnto their labors. Furthermore, acquitting
them of euery second watch, commāding them to watche but euery third night, became more gentle and more mil∣de lackning the seueritie of the former discipline. Then the Captaines exhorted them, the preachers of the wourd out of their pulpits, besought them for Gods sake, that they would not grow faint harted, nor by the base tit∣le of rendring, to submit them selfes to the filthie seruitude of the Spaniard, that they should nothing dout of the assu∣rance of Mansfelds coming: because he seemed not to be The Captai∣nes procured to animate the soldiars present at the day appointed, that therfore they were decei∣ued: that he was nerer at hand, then they thought, but that the messages could not be brought, be reason that all passa∣ges were stopped. That Spinola was not for hopes sake, day∣lie Their hops vveare in vayne. exercised in making of so many fortifications: that he him selfe being witnes, he should not vse their owne affir∣mation: that the German, French, English, and Holland hel∣pes, were at hand, for fear of whom, Spinola was busied day and night; that it was an argument of vnworthie tendernes, not to suffer penurie, helpes being so neere at hand, and but so litle awhile before they would come: that all difficulties were now ouercome, and only libertie was expected: that the impatience of a few dayes, ought not to loose the prai∣se of so great constancie and pouertie endured. VVhich thinges being saied, the Captaines, least they should be con∣uinced of lying by the besieged, or that the miserable con∣dition of the cittie being seene and vnderstood, should be brought vnto us by the report of the conuoyes, decreed that no Trumpeters or drummers sent by us, should frō thence fourt be admitted within the walles, but should expect their answer without: and here by the councell of manlianus, they should be intertained honorably and liberally, to boast of the aboundance of their victualls. The Magistrates also, looking into euery thinge, forbid the confraternities of the cittiesen of all assemblies after the example of Augustus, least they should enter into factions,
vnder the title of a colledge, in the knot of some wicked fa∣ction. The soldiars also were watched of the Captaines, as often as many walked about, and by their presence, the coniurations of those that walked, were preuented. VVith these and the like remedies, was the cittie, in perill, preser∣ued, and the languishing mindes of the cittisens, and of the soldiards, sustained when they held up their necessities by only hope. Now at lenght, Mansfeld with his companies of foote, approached by sea vnto Gittrenbergue, when heauen was The mis∣chance of Manifeld in his naui∣gation. once againe seene to fight against him. For the windes did so beate the arriued nauie, one against the other that ma∣ny of the ships being broken, did serue for nothing: then, as if all the cold of the winter had bene reserued for that time all the riuers were shut up with a sudaine frost, that prouision could no longer be carried to them. It is the custome of those of Gittenbergue, to keepe at home litle prouision, upon the confidence of continuall naui∣gation, and of the neighbouring places. Hence by the ar∣riuall af so great a companie of soldiars, there was smale prouision of meate for all them, the frost forbiding to bring in new. Furthermore, what with plague, with agues, with the sea, and with vomiting, by reason of their long shutting up in the ships with the narrownes of the roome, and many fild Their nevv and ravv souldiars en∣dured gteate miseries. with the filthie sauor (being almost all raw soldiars, and vnaccustomed to tempests and stinckes, were cast into the waues, ether dead, or halfe aliue. There was counted by some, aboue the number of four thousand. Some cast in∣to the sea for dead by swiming got to the shore, and ar yet liuing in the towne. Many dead bodies floting by the shore side vnburied, and more euery where cast up by the sea upon the land, breathed forth a greuous plague upon the neighbouring townes of Holland. A very sorrowful
spectacle to the English soldiars, who by the outward soy∣le, whether they were sent for succour, were so, roughly entertayned. But that which befell much more misera∣bly, when Mansfeld durst not set a shore those whom a∣gainst their wills he constrained to take their oathe, by the same remedie chiefly they dyed, by which they we∣re kept, least that they should runn away; to wit, enkind∣led by that prohibition. Notwithstanding, many beta∣king them to vs by flight, vnarmed, ragged, presented vs a patterne of the rest, affirming them selues, to be in bet∣ter fashion then the rest, when almost all of them, were inuoluntarie, and vnexpert in war, that they were by and by taught how to handle their weapons, when they were to be led in to the field. It was saied to haue bene sene that some found amongst them, who fild in all the pou∣dre at once into their peeces mouthes euen to the top. which had bene measured to them for sundry shots, that there was scarce place to put in the bullet: so skil∣full were they in their pieces. It appeared by many let∣ters, that those companies were gathered compulsito∣rilie, of the most basest sort of the rascallitie; and that in a short time, what by sicknesses, what by runing away, they were so diminished, so that of fourteene thousand, scarcely four did remayne. VVhilst Mansfelds ships were with-houldē by the frost, that very season of the yeare, admonished us of diuers con∣siderations. The fort of Nordame nere to Seuenbergue, in∣accessible Seueral in∣terprises vvere pro∣pounded. in summer by reason of the waues, now to bego∣ne vnto on foote by reason of the cold: Prinsland also, Rosendale, and Seuenbergue it selfe, were thought might easilie be taken by reason of that weather. Dis∣patching therfore spies on euery side granadose, and balles of wild fire were also prepared, to cast in to the eni∣mies ships. But in vaine, when the frosen crust of the ri∣uers
(which otherwise seemed thick an firme) were so wea∣ke, for the snow in texmixed that scarcely would they carry the waight of two or three soldiars at once. The wayes also the snowe neuer lying in one equal height, but driuen hi∣ther and thiter by the winde into the ditches (so that dout∣full places could not be discerned from the solid) were ve∣ry dangerous, to lead the troupes that were to marche. The spies stood in snow somtimes up to the breast, somti∣mes up to the mouth, and somtimes fallen or couered in the snow were faine to be haled out. Nether their voice, nor their hollowing one to another; would any thing helpe. Three soldiars of fuggeran practised in all bould attempts, getting in to the tents of Rosendale, after Thre reso'ut soilderes of fugeresri gi∣mt. drinking and talking together, they had discried the eni∣mies ships, betrayed in their returne, scarcely escaped by flight, one being wounded and taken. But else where the fuggerans attempts fell out more happely, and a very few of them, frequently brought back with them many captiues. but the fortune and deceit of war, is very variable. There were some, who besought Spinola, that with the companies of Carolus Coloma, together with some of his companies adioyned, he would suffet Rosendale (litle for∣tified to be assaulted. That they knew by the bewraying of the inhabitances, that they were so affrighted with the feare of ours, that gathering vp their goods, would be mo∣re ready to rune away, then to stand to fight: that that might be done without ether damage or any danger, if in the meane time our horse might be planted in two parts, before Bergenupsome and prinsland. Spinola, to whom those things best pleased, which were done rather with prudent councell according to reason, then prosperous The Marques is vvont to giue credit to nothing vvithout good funda∣ment. thinges done at aduenture, treating all thinges with him selfe with more serious examination, supposing that thin∣ge, could not very much, helpe to the acquiring of that no∣table
victorie, chose rather to keepe his soldiars safe, for the occasion of a necessary combat, then ether to feare the whole armie with the opiniō of the enimies audaciousnes, or to encourage the enimies mindes by good successe, if the skirmish of a few of his soldiars, should perchance haue fell out vn fortunatly: for in war it hapned, often times by thinges of litle moment, great alterations of thinges to be made: nether was it the part of a prudent Captaine, to pour∣sue litle victories, with great perills. In the fourth of the Nones of March, the aniuersarie day of Breda, in times past taken by the vninted Peeres, by the fraud of a boate was changed. This day those of Breda, Solemnitie in Breda in me∣morie of the daie it vvas taken by the hollandes by fraude. being wont yearly to solemnise, now kept so much the mo∣re ren owmedly, by how much perhaps hereafter they dou∣ted to celebrate the same the more seldome, more truly af∣ter the maner of a solemne buriall, then a birth day. for dis∣charging thrice towards the euening, all their greater and lesser Canons, they consecrated the last night to the me∣morie therof. Now the time was come, in which the intermitted affai∣re of the dāme to be made in the riuer, was renewed. That interualle of time, wherin the mariners and the workmen desisted from their labors, had roused vp the studies of sun∣dry persons. A certaine person, vndertakes vpon the a∣greement of a great summe, that he would finish the wor∣ke, almost despaired. He, in the presence of those whom the States had set ouer the care of this damme, choosing a place not far from the former, where the riuer was fuller of hollow places, and more narrow, he drowned stones tied vnto litle netts (lest they should swimme away:) vpon the stones, he sprinckles a certaine kind of binding sand (brought as it was reported, out of England or France) to fill vp the chinkes, and to fortifie the damme. The affai∣re seemed to succed better then it did before, when by a
sudden alteration of the heauens, so great force afwater on∣ce againe by the ouer-flowing of the Moone of March (in which the sea then most of all doth swell) was stirred vpon high, and so great a deluge of rayne and vnthawed snow, flowed together on euery side, that the damme begun at Seuenbergue, and very many forts of Rosen dale, and some part of the suburbs of the cittie of Breda, were altogether ouer-turned. The wayes also to our campes, and some of our fortifications neere to the cittie, were so drowned, that The vvaters did ouerflovv the camps. they could, for three dayes be gone vnto not but by cock∣boates in which time one campe being shut from another they were in great necessititie of victualls, when they could No smale dammage don vnto our quarters. not go to one another with their wagons, nor was there meanes to haue so great a supply of boates: the riuer, the shore, and the fieldes being all alike. Neuer could it otherwise haue bene more clearly kno∣wen, by how great mercie of God, the armie was conser∣ued Greate fa∣uour of god. the whole winter: for if the same extremitie of winter time, and aboundance of snow (which fell in this short ti∣me of the winters departure) had hapned in the former monthes (as at other times it was wont to do) out of dout, we should haue bene forced to forsake the siege, for no other cause then only for the sharpnes of the weather: for in those few dayes, wherein it freesed so seuerely, the sinnewes of many were shrunke vp by the force of the cold, and some amongst the watches, were found dead, Some had their handes and feete so stiff, that they were faine to haue them sawed of. Many carriars also, and purweyors of corne (who the crueltie of the wayes thorough rayne snow, myre and windes had cast back in their voyages made by night) were Delaying of the proui∣sions. kild in the way by the frost. The conuoyes also were so hin∣dred, that for the space of three weekes, in which the snow and the frostes were dissolued with cōtinuall raynes) scarce any victualls were brought besides that which the wiues of
the German soldiars brought, daylie almost setting their companies in array) runing abroad into the incorporated townes, brought into the campe vpon their shoulders. Of which women (who continually performed other duties towards their husbands by fetching wood a far off, getting of forraige from all parts, dressing their meate, washing their linnen, carrying their houshould-stuffe when the The almayne vvomen vveare of greate seruice drummes were beaten) such respect seemed to be had of them in the campes, that they were not held for any hin∣derance, but with honor were reputed to be mens mules. The sraise they deserued The waters being diminished, the enimies endeuours attempted againe, with great solicitude of minde, to finish the pretented damme. Spinola caused the sluce of the riuer of Leure (which reached vnto the riuer of Merka) to be broken a sunder, and commāded certaine riuers to be stop∣ped, and diuerted, which poured them selues abroad into our campes. He caused a trenche likewise, which he had placed in the fennie groundes, from Merka to hage, to be raised higher by three foote, lest the standing poole (though ouer-flowing might be passed ouer with boates. to the end they might breake back the force and swiftnes of the riuer returning from Breda by certaine letts set against it to receiue it, from ether banke therof did make within, here and there vpon the sides, hilles, lyingout like, horned woorks, next before that place, where they intended to build that damme before. Then they lay before that ga∣ping or gulfe both which appeared in the medst betwixt the horned woorks of the riuer (by which the force of the waters, now more straitned, were caried) long beames af∣ter a triangle maner, fastened in the riuer with a litle space betwixt, which the riuer enclosed, but a litle broaken. Then they began behinde to make the damme, secure, as they supposed, of the successe. By their perpetuall labors The enimie begon nevv muented vvoorkes. both by day and night, they had now brought the mater to
that passe, that hauing brought trenches along on both si∣des. of the riuer, besides the litle straites of the mouth, it see∣med All vvhich vvas broken by the vva∣trs. almost nothing remayned to be stopped. But so great was the force of the immense waters, both augmented and inforced, that now it disgorged like a most raging torrent (which before alwayes passed thorough the loose riuer with such lenitie) that scarcly could it be iudged by the eye, on whether side it flowed. Moreouer, the bottom it selfe, And the tmpst af∣trvvards. the sandes boyling vp of their owne accord, thrust forth the beames rammed in, so that the rāmed stoccadoes who∣lie slid away. And so great a tempest fell at that time, that whatsoeuer boates, stones, turffes, fagots, and trees, were laied in the water to strengthen the damme, was all ouer∣borne, and the nauie in which the Duke of Brunswick car∣ried the french horse, was greuously torne in pieces, euen in Their ships vveare torne in peces. that passage, not a few quite ouer whelmed, many driuen hither and thither, which hardely could hould their cour∣se. Theyvvere novv out of p in going forvvd vvith the dam. So the enimie, seeing his so manifould preparations, to proue so ill, at last iudged it best to giue quite ouer, a thing attempted so oft in vaine. In those daies, with notable craft, letters were sent from Iustinus to Maurice, and likewise from Maurice and Mans∣feld, to Iustinus, in which many thinges, very necessarie to be knowen, were discouered to Spinola. A certaine person, out of the care he had of the common good hauing gotten a countrie fellow, skilfull of the places and of the passages, and ready to vndertake any thinge, agrees with him that loaden with Tobacco, Butter and Cheese, like to a runne away (as though he had craftely cosoned our watch) should get to the walles of Breda, and should present his seruice to Letteres of Maurih and Iustin. Iustinus, to carry letters to Maurice, if so he pleased. The man being of a fickle minde and greedy of gayne, (posest at home of nothing but of pouertie, sells his faith. Being thus instructed, as it was agreed, got to the walles of the
cittie: the marchandise, brought to those that were so hun∣grie, made the stranger to be very welcome. Iustinus greedy of newes, enquires many thinges, of the campe, of the pas∣sage  cogging oore. he had found out, and of the common opinion. He, as one of a perfidious minde, like to Sinonius, and concealing his owne, a cogger and dissembler of euery thinge, telling somethinges truly, and lying in others, somwhat neere to truth, gayned the opinion of an honestman: for those thin∣ges which like us, we easilie beleeue. Being asked, whether he hoped, by that way which he escaped, to finde outsome pas∣sage to carry back letters, answering at the first fearfully, at last he set their affections on fire with faire wordes, to vnder∣take the affaire, which one thinge he most earnestly desi∣red, vnder the pretence of a refusall. He therfore carieth let∣ters from Iustinus to Maurice, with a promised reward, if he brought back answer from him into the cittie. The dis∣sembler Faithfull to the Marques promises all diligence: but when he cāme into our campes he deliuers Iustinus letters vnto Spinola. VVherof the contents were as follow, That he reioyced much, to haue receiued letters thrice from Maurice, by which he vnderstood, both that Mans∣feld was safely arriued with German and English succours, and so great warlike preparations to be made, for the relee∣uing of Breda. That he should be carefull, as he had promi∣sed that there should be corne enough till the end of Aprill or begining of May, vnles it should by chance be burnt by fire, which the enimies often shot into the cittie. That he would shortly finde out new inuentions for corne, by sear∣ching the granaries of the cittisens. That the workes of the enimies, ar lately extended from the great trench, which lay before the water mille, to the campes of Balanconius, and placed against the litle tree of Guittenbergue. Those campes began to be fortified with workes by Spinola. The garison of the ciitie was daylie very much diminished
with the plague, bloody-flux and with the scuruie. That the sick could not be refreshed and cured. For want of medi∣cines and wholsome meates. That the rest who were in he∣alth, The garisen of Breda be∣gon to demi∣nishe. lost not their courage, but looked earnestly for an oc∣casion to performe the affaire both well and valiantly. That the rape-oyle, was alwayes first burnt, before it was applied to dresse meate with; but that there was but litle left. Spinola hauing read them, and sealing them sendes them by the same messenger, promising the fellow a liberall re∣ward, if he brought answer from Maurice, and from Mans∣feld vnto him. Maurice supposing that he might secure∣ly credit the messenger, by whome (with so great fidelity) he had receiued iustinus letters, giueth both answer, and a reward for the fellowes paines, and sendes him to Mans∣feld, to receiue also letters from him. The fraudulent and, cheating messenger, bringes both to The Marques came be the enimie is let∣ters. Spinola, and his reward being giuen him, getts him gone. In those letters Maurice purgeth him selfe of his stay, and imposeth the cause of the prolonging of supplies, upon the contrary tempests of the yeare; beseeching him that he would endeuour to prolong the victualls some weekes by sparingnes, but vnto the end of Aprill: that he had neede of so much time, to gather and to ioyne his po∣wers together, that otherwise so extraordinarie charges of the vnited Lords, shoulde be to no purpose, and their endeuours all in vaine. That these, indeed, were hard de∣mandes, but that fortune must be now holpen by indu∣strie, especially seeing all the French horse gathered by Mansfeld (two only companies desired, which weare daylie expected) was now come to Bullen, and to that end, the ships of the States ar gone to transport them by a prospe∣rous winde. That the French companies of footepart were brought by Captaine Candale, part were in the way, as the other companies were both of horse and foote, gathered
thorough Germaine for the States. Lastly, the Frenche, Englishe, and German supplies, were to come but a litle after that time, which he would haue prolonged by him till after Aprill. Mansfeld promised that he would shortly be Iustinus guest: that then he would merrely drink his and his valiant companions health; That he was come, prepared with a hundred companies of foote, and fortie of horse, nor dou∣ted nothing of supplies. Spinola confirmed once againe by these letters of the pe∣nurie The Marques vvas infor∣med of the necessitie of of their prouision, and aduertised of the slow coming of their helpes, the eleuenth of the Calends of Aprill which was the feast of easter, thought good to try Iustinus min∣de, by demanding of him to rendre it up. For this purpose he sendes the Trumpeter of Count Sa∣lazarius with his letters priuily. That he had treated no∣thing with him touching Breda vntill this day, about the quantitie of corne which he had in the cittie; but now knowing certainly upon what day he should receiue vi∣ctualls enough, and for that cause it was not meete, that he should any longer delay the deliuering up of the cit∣tie; that he would make him offer of reasonnable con∣ditions, if he would treath with him of a composition. And truly if he should require a litle time to expect ayde (which notwithstanding for the strenght of their workes, and the greatnes of the armie lying round about; he might easilie vnderstand, that he could in no wise suc∣cour the cittie, that it should be granted vnto him, so that he would now presently treate there of: else that here∣after there would be no cause, of affording him the like fauour. Iustinus hauing called together the coūcell of war, reades Ansvver of the gouernor of Breda. the letters receiued from Spinola, and become proud with the promised coming of supplies, and with the encrease
of victualls augmented by the death of so many men, thus made answer. That he was amased, hauing read Spinolaes letters, and al his so strange demandes: but so much the more, because he thought that he and so many valiant companions of his, could be made afraidwith wordes; to whom he affir∣med, that nothing could happen to be feared, except it were a base report. That in time it would appeare, that (by flattering him selfe) he was ill instructed of the state of the cittie, which he hoped to rendre into his handes, of whom he had receiued the same, to be kept and de∣fended. Spinola (least the minde of the wearied soldiar should wax faint, by the insolent braging of the besieged, which assumed to them so great courage) prudently supprest that answer in dead silence. VVhich was enough to per∣suade the shortnes of the remainder of the labor vnto the soldiar, it was commonly gathered by suspicions, that a Trumpeter was sent to lustine out of the campe, touching the rendring of the cittie, as many did coniecture wil∣lingly, albeit many fayned reports, and added some fea∣res of their owne, to that which they had heard from o∣thers, when they vnderstood those hopes of Spinola to be deceiued, or deferred any longer. The composition ther∣fore was left for that time, and the coming of forreine hel∣pes, was expected. In the meane space, when all the enimies companies, hauing called out garrisons on euery side, (and hiered citi∣sens for wages, set in order in their place) were come to Guittenbergue: and Sprang, and in the same place other soldiars looked for, who wintred at Rosendale, Spinola suspe∣cting the delay of that time supposing that they did coun¦terfetta coming, and that indeed he was but deluded, doth fortifie Bolduke, Reinbergue, VVesell with garisons which
he had brought (which places he thought might partly be assaulted, to with-draw him from Breda.) He places in Bol∣duke fiue hundred which Baron Grobendonc Gouernor Reforce the tovvne of Balaukt. of that cittie had added for a supply to the companie lately admitted, besides the ould garisons. He calleth seauen companies of soote, from the Palatinat, which might helpe the towne of Reinbergue, nere adioyning, but it was afterwards knowen by the letters of Maurice, which Iustinus Nassau had receiued, that all their compa∣nies sent to relieue and deliuer Breda were not far of from our campes. These places therfore being prouided for as afor-said, Graue Mau∣ric caused to fire our mu∣nition house. Maurice hauing sent his spies sets on fire the church of Ge∣nick, (wherein were laid six thousand sackes of ground corne) with the measurer of oates dwelling nere, the fire by the greatnes of the winde, tooke hould faster then it could be quenched. Two thousand sackes, (preserued by other sacks laid vpon them) were found the day following without any detriment. Spinola nothing greeued for that mischance; aboue that which was meete and conuenient The constance of the Mar∣ques. (sending purueyors about to buy corne) speedily repayred the losse. There were presented to Spinola by Vincentius Lasanius The care and asistance of the prouidor Lasanius. chiefe keeper of the Kinges corne (behoulding the fire) three thousand sackes of wheate, which he kept shut vp in the campe against all mischances. The Hollanders so inso∣lently wrote abroad of these losses, that what they repor∣ted to be consumed by the fire of one church can scarcly be contayned with in the walles of six great churches. They faine the numbers which perished in that fire, to be two and twentie thousand sackes of wheate, and twen∣tie thousand sacks of meale, six thousand of barly, four thousand of pease and beanes, four hundred shoulders of bacon, and two hundred vessels of oyle, two hundred bar∣rels
of butter, three hundred bundells of stockfish, two hundred barrell of heringes, two hundred barrells of sal∣ted biefe, two hundred sacks of salt, three and twentie thousand cheese, a great quantitie of flower, syrope, and honny. VVith these fables, related at the heighest, the hollanders went about to maintaine their owne hope, and to spread abroad our pouertie. Spinola admonished by letters of the danger of the store The Marques gaue straight order to looke vvel to the ponder. house, which the enimies went about to set afire, as late∣ly they had done the Church dubling the watch, and cut∣ting about another ditch, he caused it to be kept more cautiously hauing transported almost halfe the quantie of the poudre, into another new store-house, lest if any dan∣ger hapned, all should be burnt at once, and the armie stand in want. Tributs im∣posed by the Hollanders. To prosecute that which rested of the war when the vnited, States vnderstood, that the treasure house was especially to be prouided for, wherof they sought to fin∣de some pretext, iudging this to be enough to exact mo∣nie; besides the tribute that long agoe was set vpon the head of euery one, they exacted of all the citties and villages, the hundred part of all the prices and marchan∣dise. Furthermore the confederates and their companions, asked to be numbred by representation, six hundred thousand crownes, and six hundred for letters of ex∣chance, by the treasures which kept the counting hou∣houses, Asistance of he confede∣rats. to be sent to be counted to the States. That quantitie of mony being gathered, there was enough for the enimie against that time we on the contrary, be∣gan to fall short of mony in our treasure house; for when for the setting vpon Genua the very same time, in which the Kinge of Spaines armies were drawen forth, were before Breda, nor could be with-drawen from
thence without disgrace, the french armie passed the mon∣taines like as conquerors, the fidelitie of many negotiators, began to be incertaine among forreiners (whom the terror of beseeching Genua did afright) and so that which the ene∣mies long a goe had plotted, which were at that time op∣pressed with great penurie of mony. Diuers meanes therfo∣re were proposed for collecting monie; They commanded the mony of the yeare ensuing, to be Inuentions to collect money. borrowed of all the Kinges commons. The common im∣positions vpon the citties, to be lent afore hand. To bar∣gaine with the Captaines of the soldiars, that euery one for euery second month should pay their companies, their wages as from the Kinge. If that should be a heauie bur∣then, atleast the Captaines them selues, and their Coro∣nells (which did excell in their owne riches) contented for two monthes without pay, should susfer them to goe forth with their troupes; which last thinge many of the Captai∣nes seemed to promise, but was thought fit to be omitted for the present, least the noueltie should denote pouertee. At last it pleased to lay in gage the Kinges reuenues, vpon condition of a rent, and by this meanes the soldiar was asisted. About those dayes, the King of Spaine to compose the new combustions of Italie, created Gonsalus Cordua Ge∣nerall Den Gonza∣lo de Cordu vvas sent for Master de campe gene∣rall of Itallie. of his armie. Gonsalus had now bene from the first beginning of the expedition, in the campe of Breda, and with him, and with Count Salazarius, Spinola consulted all his councells, to others reserued, to these two vncoue∣red. He although most expert in warlike affaires, and fa∣mous for the victorie against Mansfeld, lately defeated and put to flight, yet he here shewed him selfe to be of such be∣hauiour, such as vellerius neuer painted for their mode∣stie, in act, like to those that did nothinge, attributing not∣hing, to him selfe, and by the same attayning all thinges;
euer esteeming him selfe inferior to others, quiete in coun∣tenance and in life, and minde alwayes watchfull. Newes being brought at this time of the death of the Kinge of England did not a litle hinder the Hollanders and The death of the King of England Mansfelds enterprises. The English, runing from their co∣lours, daylie in great nombers fled vnto vs. Mansfeld cat∣ching Henry of Nas¦savv ioyned all his forces. any of ours by his soldiars, sent them back without exacting any ransome: affirming that he had no enimitie with the Kinge of Spaine. VVhich thing Henrie of Nassau noting, calling his companies from Rosen dale, and gathe∣ring together his garisons from all the confines (as inten∣ding briefly to make an end of that busines) lest by doing nothing, they should dreame of a defection, ordayned the And the Marques commanded his force to approach neerer to the occasion, bizonnos or young soldiars to be euery day trayned vp in certaine warlike exercices. Spinola, that he might haue in due time, helpes and companies in a readines, commits to the charge of hoogstraet, Henrie of Bergues with his horse, and with some of the Emperours people, athousand hors of the duke of saxonie and 3000. foote of the Regiment of Collato. He knowes very well both the Castle and the in∣corporated. Towne, and causeth it to be fortified. From thence he buildes six greater fortes, hard by the riuer of Hoogststrate, with certaine spaces betwixt, them euen to the campes of Breda. In these interualles or spaces (which met almost together) he placed perpetuall companies of soldiars, to the end that in a short time, the whole armie might meet the enimie at Breda or at Hoogstrate, as neces∣sitie should require. He places the Count of Anholt with the German helpes, Carolus Coloma, and the Prince of Barbancone with the prouinciall companies, and with so∣me other extraordinarie, of 3000. foote, and 1500. horse in the neighbouring villages of Antwerp, Maclin and Lyre. By reason of the greatnes of that armie, and number of the horse, so great necessitie began to grow of fodder, that the
horses were faine to eate hors-dunge, or the dry leaues of the trees or of litle shrubbes. Oathes enough could not be bro∣ught, where with so many charrets, and beastes of burthen, besides the sadled horses of the soldiars, might be sustained. The sodaine arriuall of the soldiars accustomed to more freer libertie, and vnaccustomed to our discipline, not con∣tent Disorder of strangers. with that former freedome of militarie theft, of a peece of mony euery day butrobed the houses, spoiled the villa∣ges, and begā to dishoner our armie as if they were enemies; afterwards more insolent to call for their pay that was be∣hind, as if otherwise they would refuse to serue us. Our cō∣panies, then which none had euer behaued thē selues more innocently vntill that day, instructed rather to hate the eni∣mies, then to hurt their owne frendes, began also to play (as the witts of soldiars ar allwayes prompt to vice) the same pranckes which strangers, did in mischieuous facts, and to accommodate them selues to their libertie. Spinola admoni∣shing the Captaines, supposing it meeter in such a time, ra∣ther to pacifie, thē to exaggerate the force of those fellowes, ordained some few of their heades to be cut off, but adui∣sing secretly the Captaines that they should aske pardon of him, forgaue them the punishment, iudging that that was not a time to take notice therof. VVhilst ours remayne dis∣persed in these places, Maurice closed up the last day of his Graue mo∣rich ended his daies. life at Hage, happie in this respect, that he lamented not a liue, the rendring up of his Breda. These ar reported to be the last wordes he spake in this life after which he vttered not so much as one wourd. Is Breda rendred, or freed? that euery one might plainly vnderstand, that he was kild with the griefe ofloosing that cittie, the glorie of the recouering wherof in times past, had got him honor and renowme, and for the de∣fence wherof, at his owne and the States incredible cost, he had stird up allmost all Europe. Henrie Frederick of Nassau, brother to Maurice, a Prince
very exquisite in warlike arte, and in all vrbanitie, was cho∣sen by the consent of the States to administer war in the Hinrie Fe∣dertque of Nasavv his brooter vvas elected in his place. place of him that was deceased. In that interuall of time, on which holli dayes were made for Maurice, and in which a new Commander was appointed for the armie, many of our Prouinciall companies, wearie of the war, departed ho∣me from their standing places; also not a few of the ancient horsmen, disgusted with the hardnes of the war, for the te diousnes of expecting their wages, forsooke their co∣lours. So the French daylie in greater number, came vnto us in great troupes from Mansfelds armie, complayning Sedicion in the quarters of Mansfelt. that they were cosoned by him with hope of assaulting the Palatinat, nor in seauen monthes space, had receiued so much as one penny. Some of these mens voices were there plainly heard to say, that they would not goe against Mar∣quis Spinolaes armie if in case they should be led. A young Frenchman, by trade a Pothegarie, apprehended in Mansfelds campe, being to haue solicited some of his fel∣low citisens to runne away, tyed vnto swift horses, and tor∣ne in peeces, gaue up the ghost. Our soldiars at Breda, speaking with the besieged out of the watch, made a coueant, that no peece should be shot in the meane while, (so that of two armies, one seemed now to be made) afterwards flooted one another. That ours ga∣ue The centryes of Breda spo∣ke vvith oures. vnto them a litle Tobacco or cheese. They vnto ours, morcells of their owne bread. After a few dayes, the new Commander of the war, Hen∣rie of Nassau Prince of Orange being returned to the cam∣pe, The besieged tooke a greate comfort at the election of their nevv generall. the besieged reioycing at the nere approaching of the succours, shot balles more liberally in to our armie. One in Spinolaes tent, (he being then absent) getting in thorough The Marques escaped tvvo dangers. the roofe of the house, tooke away the Canopie of the bed, and broke in peeces two tables in the chamber, that as in times past, the hors-litter of Augustus (being admonished
by his frend to goe out of the tent) was by the meeting of the enimie, thrust thorough and torne in peeces, as though he had bene laid therin. Scarce four dayes after, when Spinola to discouer places, sitting upon a white horse, rode nere vnto the cittie, the balle of a great Canon, broke the bridle vnder his horses mouth, leauing the raynes in his hand: that it is to be beleeued, that ether the chiefe Com∣manders of war, ar in a morce secure protection of al∣mightie God, or by how the lesse any one spareth him selfe in battaile, seemeth to be so much more the safer. Spinola hauing ouer-passed these dangers, calling The Marques fortified vvith the next adioy∣ning troupe. together the troupes of the adioyning companies, pla∣ces them, with in and without, in diuers parts of the trenche. He places Count Anholt, in the outmost parts of the campe of Ballancon against the plaine of Oo∣sterhout, by which it was thought Mansfeld would breack thorough. He opposed Beauuoix against the late companies of Maurice, towards the villadge of Mede. He made Iohn of Nassau commander of the plaine of Champen The Baron of Ainse, he placed vnder the title of a Coro∣nel, made chiefe comander of the parttcular companies of the Germans, behinde the campes of Genike to defend the standing place of the horsmen; he distributed the reste in o∣ther places. Te commanded the troupes of horsmen, to co∣me to defend the quarters, hauing daylie doubled their numbers, and to repaire to their standing places, for the de∣fence of the campe, and he was often afterwards at the night watch, especially on that side, on whiych he douted The valour vvhere vvith he proceded. the enimie would break thorough, whiter he betooke him selfe euery night. vntill the enimie retvred back. Neuer at anie time did the virtu of this Noble man more shew it selfe. The in nightly watches, or his sleepe interru∣pted betwixt whiles, neuer made him the lesse affable.
Being awakened, he looked with such liuelie eyes, he list∣ned with so attentiue a minde, that he seemed not to haue ssept at all: and he as soone recouered his sleepe, as he was awaked, so securely slept he, all his carees being so well hus∣banded. In his apparell, he was negligent of all curiouse trimming, and carelesse of adorning him selfe, euen in the dignitie of a generall. Touching the crueltie of the season, and the weather; and whether it rayned, or snowed, or free∣sed, or blew, or wheter it were euening or midnight, he ca∣red not. He often times sustained hungar, two dayes toge∣ther. His bed, was often in his coache, or in the poore cotta∣ge of some soldiar. He made no account of his meate, of his rest, nor of his owne body. The burthen of his waighty af∣faires, was perpetuall, and his labor aboue al beliefe. His minde was a conqueror of al difficulties, as his countenan∣ce almost the same, in aduersitie and prosperitie, in whose peaceable mirth, the hope of the soldiar might rest, secure his councells he nether approued in his owne opinion, nor communicated them, but where it was necessarie. Not de∣iected upon a sodaine, but by such as were made strong, by long delay. He was of singular silence. His beleuing of new aduices, together with his distrusting of them, and as well his slow creduIitie, as his ready contempt of heauie rumors. To prouide for, to consult, write, heare, command, to goe a∣bout the campes, was like vnto a daylie pastime. Neuer did he pretend any excuse for his wearines; neuer forbid acces∣se vnto him. He was familiar with the soldiar, with clownes, with the scoutes or spies, still conserning the honor, of a ge∣nerall; nor this but when need required. He bestowed mo∣re honor, and gifts upon those that were displeased or auer∣ted, who might corrupt the state of the war by their power, then he did upon his frendes; hauing no feare of others ma∣lice. Three were taken in the village of Hage, who endeuo∣red  spis vvere taken.
to carrie into the cittie, a huge bundell of letters, also a good quantitie of Tobacco, and flagons of oyle (where∣with to cure the scuruie:) they, hid the letters of Hērie Prin∣ce of Aurange, written to Iustine, in the woods, whilst they were taken One being put to the question, who at other ti∣mes had often passed thorough our campes vnto the cittie, The letter of Hinry de Nasvv to ustino. thorough the carelesnes of our watch: he thorough the pai∣ne of the torment, tould of the place and of the letters. Henrie wrote thus vnto Iustine. Maurice his brother, to be dead. That in his place, he was created generall of the armie by the States; That that acci∣dent, should nothing the more hinder the supplies: that he would come with his armie (which could not be made rea∣die, nor march forward sooner) after three dayes, in the vil∣lage of Dungens, two leages from the cittie, whence from the top of the Tower, they might see them: that he would doe and attempt all thinges for the raising of the siege. That he only should itch out the victualls, by measuring and diminishing of them, and confirme their patience, setting before their eyes, the desire and good will of so great and so choice an armie, and the excessiue expences of the States. That he should also write vnto him, on what side, or by what meanes, he thought Spinolaes campes might mo∣re easily be broken thorough: for which purpose, he should conioyne all his studies and his forces, to his coming to him with his supplies. The besieged, who receiued letters brought priuilie to them, of the same tenor, with these newes, conceiued ioy, mingled with sorrow. The newes of the supplies, caused ioy; the dead of Maurice, that most prudent and vigilant Prin∣ce caused sorrow. They looked far and nere abroad in the fieldes, from the top of the Tower: the succours being per∣ceiued, In vaine they reioysed. they rune together: ioye was made amongst them, and the mindes of all were raised up to hope. VVith a hor∣ne,
they beginne to blow-forth our flight from the Tower; they called vnto vs from the walles, that we would ga∣ther vp our trinkets: forgetting them selues, and that their Breda was a prey for vs: we, not they, being the hunters of this wilde beast. After that the enimies armie was planted in the village of Dungense, Henrie of Nassau, going about to draw his ar∣mie Hinrie of Nasavve in vaine tentd the to vvre of strhaut. nerer to ours, came to assault the Tower of Ooster∣haut (which one and twentie Burgondions, kept for the vse of discoueric) sending before no smale troupe of foo∣te and horse, casting abroad some balles of wild fire. The burgundiones, refusing to yeld them selues vnto the eni∣mie, Not vvith standing the burgondianes being fovv in number they had the viciorte of the enemy. chose first to trie all fortune, then to make a base ren∣drie, vpon no conditions formerly made. The enimies breaking the gates with apattarr, casting fire into the To∣wer and into the Church, (when they could do nothing more) effecting nothing, did depart. Fiue of the Borgon∣dians were slaine, and seauen were consumed with fire. Of so great a number of the enimie, many were wounded, and many slaine, whom ours kild with the throwing of sto∣nes, when they (for feare of burning) wisely threw their poudre downe from the top of the Tower: and so with a smale companie, a great armie was withstood. The bur∣gondiones, with their burnt faces, anoynted with cerusa and with oyntment shewing their faire woundes, were ho∣nored by Spinola, with the representation of a pension, to They receiued apremi for ther valor and vertue. eche one and colours giuen to the Sardgent who was chie∣fe ouer them. The besieged, when now they could nether receiue let∣ters, nor any messengers could safely goe out of the cittie, A svvallovv vvas taken be oures. sent out a swollow, which might carrie on highe a litle scro∣ale tied to hir winges. Isenburges soldiars, espying the birde by the piece of paper, bounde by alitle thride and nowe fal∣ling downe, they catch it and cary it to the Count Isēbur∣gue,
Num. 13. A. Agger Gertrudibergensis. B. Agger Seuenberganus. C. Statio Caroli Roma. D. Castra Pauli Baglioni. E. Castra nupera Mauritij in pago Medensi. F. Agmen hostile. G. Stagna palustria. H. Flumen Merka. I. Sepes ligneae quatuor in ipso flumine.
Num. 13. A. Agger Gertrudibergensis. B. Agger Seuenberganus. C. Statio Caroli Roma. D. Castra Pauli Baglioni. E. Castra nupera Maurity in pago Medensi. F. Agmen hostile. G. Stagna palus tria. H. Flumen Merka. I. Sepes ligneae quatuor in ipso flumine.
who after sent it to the Marquis Spinola. These notes were written in the scroale—1—69—2—27. Now was there greate expectation stirred up in all the world, of some new euent of Breda; hereunto ar the eyes and eares bent, of al Kinges and Princes. The very Emperour him selfe of the Turkes, by reason of the vncertaine euent of this siege, see∣med to turne his sword into this or that part, or to make peace. So that now it seemed not so much to treate of Bre∣da, but of glorie, of existimation, by reason of so many succours sent from euery side. Number XIII. In the Ides of May, after midnight, Henrie of Nassau, to trie his fortune, although with some detriment receiued, Hinry of Nassavve attempted oure quar∣teres, yet the chiefe of his armie being safe, caused the vtmost campe of the village of Heyden (a place dificult to be pa∣ste throw be reason of the situation and woorkes and far vn fit) to be assaulted: be reason there was no way but to naro∣we dikes cominge from the bordering townes of Seuen∣bergue and Guittenbergue. He cutting their riuer sliding betwixt, and a litle trenche from without, being cut betwixt two dry ditches, was fortified with atrenche and with a fort the new generall of an ordinarie forme. But desirous of ob∣tayning fame, and inflamed with the emulation of his bro∣thers fortunatnes, had conceiued all hard thinges, to be ea∣sie. By this dike therfore, of Gittenbergue he sendes be∣fore the most expert English shott, and two hundred pike∣men The assaul¦ting of the Inglesh. of the rer-ward, all armed, with armes of proufes Coro∣nell vere Englishman being their leader, whom other En∣glish did a companie, the French, and Germans following after, that so they might preserue the English; al amounted almost to the number of six thousand. There artillerie and The order vvher vvith they mar∣ched.
bagadge came in the rergarde: the hors-men stood on the side. Henrie Nassau him selfe, standing in the midest of his armie, expected what would be the euent. Spinola discouering that designe, sent speedilie to admo∣nish Paulus Ballionus and Carolus Roma, whose troupes Of vvhich the Marques vvas aduer∣tised. lay in those quarters, that they should be by and by in ar∣mes. They sodainly place the watches and the guardes in their standing places, dispose the soldiars, aduertise all the Captaines and Lieutenants, and prepare all other thinges needfull to be vsed. Before the breake of the day, the com∣panies of the enimie came, and swiftly beat downe the sol∣diar that stood sentinell before the campe, before he could aduertise his fellowes that were behinde him: that error had bene remedied, if but one horsman had watched in the Di∣ke, and perchance by so litle a solicitude, that whole armie of the enimie, might haue bene cut in peeces: at least it cannot be douted, but that the, slaughter had bene greater then it was. The English with excellent courage of min∣de and audacitie setting vpon the first litle redout, by ca∣sting balles of wilde fire, driue away the Standerd-bearer, with a few Italians which were therin, and sleying some, got on the walles. Then placing shot behinde the redout, and being got downe into the ditches, of the same for the defence of those that went before planting more force in the haulf moone did succeed with the like audacitee and fe∣licitie, Ariued to the forte. and endeuor to inter in with their colours at the flāck of the forte, and with hādes and feete to scale the wal∣les. The ladders and the graples were left by the fearfull car∣ters in the rergard of the marche, who when they durst not aduance the wagons, they fled away for feare of the canons thus the successe of great attemprs, litle thinges do often in∣terrupt. euen then we also found the defect of our litle, re∣duts and of our ditches, wherto if stoccadoes, with a iust distance, had bene prefixed (as it was appointed, but was
ommitted, ether by obliuion, or by the difficultie of brin∣ging materiales) nether had the enimie so easily entred, nor could haue cast those balles of wild-fire, nor could haue lyen lurking in the ditches against the canons. The Italians therfore, who defended the trench of the di∣ke of Seuenberg, (retyred) admitting the enimie to ap∣proach The Inglish sought moste Valily. nerer, left that litle fort emptie vnto them, when, being open on that side, they in no wise could defend it. The English fought with this resolution, that it seemed to them they should get no other time then this for their en∣terprise; nor was any courage wanting in them. Carolus Ro∣ma, sardgent mayor of the Regiment of Marquis of Cam∣polatare sent Captaine Camillus Phoenices, whilst his we∣re in nede of helpe with a companie for the defence of the litle redout: but he, could nether by his coming cause those that fled to stand, nor could him selfe withstand the enimies violence. so that the supplied succour, augmented the perill. But when Carolus Roma saw him to retyre, with others be∣ate Valor of car∣los Roma. back from the redout, pulling away the shield from the arme of one that returned (because him selfe came without one) first vnsheathing his sword, and with his shield renew∣ing againe the declining fight, setting upon the English strongly resisting with a Cesarlike courage, more generou∣sly sent them back from whence they came, and staid their violence. Then they threw thēselues downe by heapes, who The enemy vver defea∣ted. from the fort, those who had cast ours from thēce, some be∣gan to come to themselues againe: many fell wounded, and slaine out-right: not a few sought to escape and saue them selues thorongh the marshes: he who endeuored to carry the colours into the fort, pierced with a pike, ended his life: three, who had inuaded ther strenght next adioyning the fort were slaine before the dore of the fort: all the rest, who fought hand to hand, hauing their heades and necks almost cut off, died of so faire woundes, which faire death they de∣serued for fighting valiantly, worthy to haue ouercome,
vnles ours had fought more brauely, as also for a better cau∣se. They which stood further off, were maymed with the cō∣tinuall strokes of the greater canons, for the most part rent and slaine in miserable wise, in their handes, feete, and heades; when scarce any ball was shot in vaine at them, so There great destruction. heaped together, which slew not feowe by reason of the diuers turnings of the ditch. The hindmost English and French, could hardly follow the formost for the narrownes of the ditch but a returning being made, they might; so had they throngd them selues together. VVhich being noted, ours enforcing them, they by litle and litle did retire back: so much the presence of Henrie of Nassau was of force, that The retiringe of the enemy. they should not be troubled with terror or danger. The re∣trait therfore, was nothing more trouble some, then the co∣ming on, so well did all of them keepe their orders. Aboue all others in that battaile, the most excellēt courage of Cor∣nell Vere, standing foremost in the company, was admired. The constan∣ce and va∣lour of Coro∣nl Very. He stood still with the selfe same vndanted constancie of minde, emongst the balles that were thick discharged, pla∣cing new for those that retired, whole for the hurt, freshe for the wearied, vntill the fight, with a slow encountre on ether side, was ended: although it appeared, that eache one was so well exercised in war, that what was meete to be do∣ne, they could no lesse fitly prescribe to them selues then be taught by another. That fight (being against the winde, carried all the noice of the Canons another way) was nether heard by the cit∣tie, nor by any of our other campes. Two messengers that were sent to Spinola, being ether ignorant or troubled, pas∣sing by that next Station, wherin he lodged, did not ap∣peare til al most all the fight was finished and so the first skir∣mishe The Marques as yet knevv no thing of his fight. was all past, before it was related to Spinola; first be∣houlding in the morning, the sight of the miserable slaugh∣ter: the ditch was all strawed with dead bodies, nor was the∣re
Num. 14. Agger Oosterhautanoe planiciei impositus. Agger Castello Beauuoxiano adiunctus aduorsus planiciem Oosterhautanam.
to be seeme, but blood mingled with the dust, and the ground embrued with blood: their guttes were torne out with the canons, their heades cut off, their handes and feete scattered, and the bodies of the slaine all rent in peeces, a horrible spectacle was seene on euery side: part cast them sel∣ues into the fennes, part halfe aliue did greuously groane which being brought by ours into the campe, after died. There perished aboue two hundred, vnderstood by the let∣ters of Prince Henrie to Iustinus, when their fugitiues made mention of full fiue hundred: amongst which were eight or ten Commanders or leaders of cōpanies, and others no∣ble by birth. Of ours there were slaine, no more then twelue, or fifteene. Amongst these, Camillus Phoenix. Captaine of Fevv of  vvere slained the foote was slaine, defending of the gate of the fort. Ioan∣nes Baptista Vrsinus, Captaine of the foote, whilst he fought valiantly, was maymed in his right hand. So that those two formerly had ill kept Breda for the Kinge, as much more ardently burned in minde, that so they might wipe away their vice, by true vertu. Number XIV. Spinola viewing those places which the enimie had got fortified them with stoccadoes, and shut up all entrie to the More forti∣fications vve¦re made. ditch on both sides of the water with this four-square forti∣fication, and with other workes of that kinde where he commanded also more artillerie to be placed. Further∣more the ould trench, which lay ouer against the shrub of Oosterhout, almost of the lenght of two thousand paces, he commanded to be strenghtned with a thicker wall, a∣gainst the shot of the canons, adding some new bulwor∣kes made without side, and changing the ould ones. And as that space was great (which was contayned in the di∣stance betwixt Hage and Heyden) he filled with
much foote and horse, building great houses of straw and clay for standing places, The newes of this victorie (least the beseeged should not know it) our soldiars published from each adioyning tren∣che, crying out in soldiarlike mirth, that succours were sent vnto the cittie. The besieged smitten at the hart with this report, when they nether saw succours come, and the freshe The besieged did indure great hun∣ger and mi∣serie. remembrance of Maurices losse occurred, and the soldiar now eate hors-flesh, and other victualls grew daylie dearer, so that a poūd of butter was sould for twelue shillinges, a Cal¦fe of seauenteene dayes ould, for eight and fortie shillinges, a litle hogge, for eleuen pound ten shillinges, a pound of Tobaco, for ten pound: that the granaries and the chests of all, were once againe narrowly searched, and some who we∣re found to had hid some corne, was taken from them into custodie: it was forbidden to the bakers, upon a penaltie, to sell no bread but only to the Officers of the war: the offi∣cers, to giue no more euery day, but halfe a pound of bread to the soldiar: that all were forbiddē to haue any bread twi∣ce baked (because it so might be kept whole, and hid, the longer) for these thinges so me be gon to breake up the ba∣kers houses wherefore an uproare being begunn betwixt They begon aalteration and great rumor. the French and the English had not been for the great care of there Coronelles but by and by, three of the authors being put in to prison, and the former liberty granted of buying bread, the seditiō was appeased before it was diuul∣ged. The Gouernor, and the commanderes, by admonish∣ment retayned others in their dutie, concerning all the vi∣ces of their garisons, no otherwise then the woundes of their owne bodies yet after a litle while, when necessitie cō∣peld them once againe, to visit all the barnes and granaries,  but very litle store of bread. the citie being diuided into two and thirtie barnes (least any litle cottage should be pretermitted) no more then fiue and twentie measures of meale were found.
Num. 15. OBSIDIO BREDAE PERFECTA.
A. Statio Marchionis Spinola. B. Statio Magistri Equitum. C. Statio Baronis Barhanconij. D. Statio Comitis Isenburgici. E. Statio Pauli Bullionij. F. Statio Baronis Beauuoixij. G. Statio Caroli Roma. H. Statio Comitis Anholtini. I. Aggeres tormentarij interni. K. Interior circulus. L. Niger Agger, vt vocabant. M. Agger nouus duplici sepe. N. Stagna arte facta. O. Fossa a Marchione iacta longitudine 2200. pedum ad deriuandas aquas.
Number XV. Henrie of Nassau, seeing the slaughter of the English, The Prince of orange vvas much trou∣bled. smitten, and doutfull what he should doe whilst he keepeth those in his campe he had receiued, and had lost many by flight, takes councell with his, whether he should againe make an irruption amongst vs, or whether by another, or by the same passage, or rather whether he should refraine. Spinola with all his companies nere at hand, expecting the But the Mar quese vvas very vigi∣lnt. enimie borth by day and night, did that especially, that he might vnderstand by some signe, what at last Nassauius re∣solued. Our messenger being most nimble, seeming fit for this purpose, to the end he should be knowen to Nassauius, as he was to Maurice; therfore by practise he came into knowledg. when he was kept. secretly in our campe, his Another fraud of acl∣vvne is vvi∣fe. wife going into the campe to Henrie of Nassau, complay∣ning much of a sicknes which her husband had got, by ca∣rying Maurices letters to Breda, thorough the winter wa∣ters, demandes the rest of that which was promised, but was yet vnpaid He ioyfull of the getting of a faithfull mes∣senger, promiseth to pay more liberally, if now her husband would carry one letter for him into the cittie, as he had do∣ne many of his brothers. The womā alleadgeth hir huslands sicknes, and the danger. At last the woman consents not vnwillingly, and yet as it were against her will, promises to do her best to perswade him. The wife departs; the hus∣band He also decey ued hinry of Nasavve. returnes halfe lame, as though his feete had bin spoi∣led with the winter frost. Henrie of Nassau, agrees with the man, as he thought faithfull, and deliuers him his letters to carry into the cittie to Iustinus, The messenger said, that he promised to performe a very difficult matter; and recei∣uing the letters with a reward, he so departs. Hauing recei∣ued
them, he presently bringes them into the campe to Spi∣nola, and rewarded with a perpetuall stipend, he departs. Henrie in those letters, aduised Iustinus, of the late ouer∣throw he had receiued, whilst he set vpon the fortificiones A copie of the contentes of the letter to Iustino of heyden. From that day, he saw vs also entrenched on e∣uery side with a stronger trenche, which could not possi∣bly be broken thorough. That he remembred, for how few dayes the besieged now had victualls left them. wherfore, lest by delaying of time he should at last be compelled, to receiue some disgrace with his companions, he should pro∣uide betimes, nor would he by his ouergreat pertinacitie, ouerthrow the fortunes of all. That hauing receiued these letters, he should giue a signe, by discharging at midnight three canons, and by the signification of fires made frō the Tower, an hower after, how many dayes prouision the be∣sieged yet had left thē. Assuring him in the meane space, that if any occasion of bringing helpe, offered it selfe, that it should be embraced of him, and of the whole armie. There came first into the cittie, another copie of the sa∣me letter, before ether Spinola had receiued his, or had vn∣derstood Iohn hanin a silder of stirub by day came to oure campe vvith letters it, by reason of the difficultie to explicat the notes wherwith it was written. A certaine horsman of the Count of Styres, very skilfull in all the wayes, in open day, escaped by our armie into the cittie, whom those of Breda seing co∣ming, receiued him ioyfully with the discharging of nine From the to vvre by si∣gnes of fire they signified for vvho ma∣ny daye they had victualls canons. That nightly signe therfore of the sound of the three premised canons was first made, before we could cer∣tainly know what it signified albeit we suspected. They a∣lighted fire eleuen times, shewing that they had victualls left, only for so many dayes. At that time, his Excellencie VVilliam wolfangus, Du∣ke of Bauiaria, Iuliers, Cleue, and Montz, returning from VVelfango Guillielmo Duke of ba∣utar  and bergas came to our camp. Spaine, came into our Campes with desire to see the same. Spinola went before to meete him coming far from the
campe, and departing from his owne Tent, he receiued so Excellent a man, with as much shew of loue as he possi∣bly could. He congratulated him, with a festiuall sound of all the canons, and with the other applauses of militarie ioy. After on other dayes, being led about all the workes, he much admired the greatnes and strenght of the siege. He related, that the Kinge of France said vnto him (by whom he passed as he returned) he could not beleeue, that Breda would be taken by Spinola by that siege: yet at that time ma∣ny The Kinge of France is opi∣nion touc∣hinge this siedge. thinges promised vs a fortunat successe of that siege, as, the continuall flight of the french from Mansfeld, the de∣lay in releeuing the enimie, the scarcetie of victualls within the cittie, the conflicts of the beseeged with sicknesses, so great a dearth of medicaments, that of the Tobacco that Tobaco vvas vvounder∣full dere. was brought, although else where it cost but four crownes a pound was sould in the cittie for twentie pounds, which re∣medy they vsed against the scuruey: besides that space of dayes, aboue six hundred horse were driuen from the eni∣mies campes, being ill looked vnto, as they grased. This bootie, when Monsieur of Marquet, leftenant of the horse, had hoped to requite, he prepares in number six∣ty eight companies of horse, to set vpon our conuoyes with all at vnawares. Sending therefore Captaine Rand∣wick The enemy set vppon oure conuoy. before with six companies, the rest lying hid in am∣bushe, set vpon the carriages) who without conuoyes con∣trary to Count Bergues commandment, tooke another way) draue away the horses, ransackt the charrets and the pacques, and poured oute the prouision. Henrie of Ber∣gues, warie of perils, albeit he were ignorant of this voya∣ge, had al ready commanded some companies of hor∣se, to watch all the passages of the wayes, lest the enimies should breake thorough by some places at vnawares. which that it might be done the more assuredly, first he charged very straitly that no Captaine, when the watch was, should
be absent from his companie. Moreouer, that he should place very far off from the campe, the standing place of the centeries. Next, that some watchers, should goe a good space from the standing place before the companie. Lastly, that some standing horsman, should watch before the o∣ther watchmen, to take notice of the enimies coming: which hearing, he should giue a signe, and should retire vn∣to the watch. They, seeing a greater troupe, retyred back to the standing place of the rest of the companie. The com∣panie prepared their armes, and had fought, had not the number bene vnequall; but at last returned to the campe. By this meanes, both the coming of the enimie was hin∣dred, and the watches, though placed a far off, retyred them selues without danger, and it seemed the whole campe had time enough to arme it selfe, By chance that day, the enemy met with the Count Her∣manus Valor of count Her∣man son to count Hin∣drick. of Bergues, sonne to Henrie of Bergues, a young man of a great spirit, and a patterne of his countries valor. He hearing (as he was nere at hand) a noise, and gathering together a smale companie he had, bouldly flies into the midest of the troupes of the despoilers, passing once, and againe, thorough the midst of them, some he layes vpon the ground, and both troubles and terrifies the others. The∣se The enemy put to flght. he puts to flight: those admonish others of the coming of all our horse, and so were their mindes preoccupated, with the feare and flight of the first, as that they thought nothing of resisting. They forsake their horses, they thro∣we downe their burthens, and leauing the prey, they de∣part. The enimies gathering so many companies together, in so long a time of the siege, in so wicked and long ior∣neis, yet could neuer intercept so much as one conuoye. The enemy all the time of the sage coul de not optai∣ne victorie in breaking of any of our conuoys. Henrie of Nassau, not slow in his affaires, lest he should pretermit (as he had promised) any industry to raise the si∣ge, sent some boores and contry clownes, corrupted with
mony and with promises, to set a fire, if they could; our campes, and store house wherin our warlike furniture was kept. Spinola catching some in cendiaries prouideth that his compes receiue no detriment. Henrie of Nassau, attempting all thinges in vaine, and setting the tentes of fire in the village of Dungens, the sixt of the calends of Iune, retyred by night into Langstrate, the tempest of the night, the blusteringe of the windes, and a ter∣rible The Prince of Orange oute of hope. shower of rayne, did denote by many titles that obscu∣re enterprise. The soldiar could scarce stir his foote, the ca∣nons stuckfast in the myre, the squadrones were disordered. Spinola, vnderstanding of this departure, thought good to Count Henry in the Mar∣ques name lought that they shoulde yeald rco∣me to com∣position. admonish Iustine Nassau, by the letters of Henrie of Ber∣gues (because he was both ioyned in blood to the house of Nassau, and vnderstood the contry maners and language of the contrie) what he was to hope for of the succours of the cittie now retyred. Bergues therfore writes to Iustine, and promisses upon Spinolaes worde, that he would bring to passe, that they should be receiued to mercy upon honora∣ble conditions, if they would treat of a composition: wher∣fore that at a certaine time and place he would vouchsafe Iustinus de Nassau is  The letters of Nassau bing pru∣deny found out by the Marques vvere sent by Count Hen∣drick to lu∣stino. to come out of the cittie, to talke with him. Iustinus (lest by being ouer-hastie, he should somwhat touch his reputation) sending back a trumpeter, makes him answer. How it stood touching the supply of succour, that he was but three dayes past aduised by the letters of Henry of Nassau. If he knew any thinge more, that he would not disdaine to aduise him by letters; that he was troubled with By vvhich he promised to render. an ague, and could not goe forth. The next day after, Spino∣la gaue the letters them selues of Henry of Nassau to be sent And the Mar¦ques the ho∣norable con∣ditions pre∣sented by Count Hen∣rick to vvho∣me he gaue full aucto∣ritis. to Iustinus, enfolded as they were in obscure caracters, and another copie of them in knowen characters, to Henrie of Bergues to be carryed, aduising him not to delay the ren∣dring any longer, Iustinus perceiuing, that all his owne
designes, and his frendes, were discouered, gaue thankes to Henrie of Bergues for his good will towards him, and promises, that he would compound with Spinola, so it we∣re with honorable conditions, wherof his so braue com∣panions and citisens, without dout seemed worthie (and which he had written vpon his word) had decreed to coue∣nant. Henrie of Bergues, hauing obtayned Spinolaes letters, wherin he promised to Iustinus, to the soldiars, and to the cittisens of Breda, honorable conditions of ren∣dring, if now they would cut off precisely without fur∣ther delay, nor require a longer day; he sent them present∣ly to Iustinus, affirming (as it was written in those letters) leaue to be giuen of treating of all thinges after his pleasu∣re: wherfore, that he should the next day come to meete The vvorkes ceased. them out of the cittie halfe way and declare what condi∣tiones he required, to be put in writing his and oure gar∣des standinge neer adioyninge. To that very time, the compasse of our inward trenche, by the perpetuall diligence of our shipmen and our sol∣diars, was yet a working, nether did there remaine much to doe, but it had bene fully finished; when the workmen by chance espied the Count of Bergues, with a soldiarlie mirth they demand of him, to what purpose it was to make an end of that trenche, if now they treated of a composition? He had scarce bid them leaue off, when they throw away their shouells, leaping for ioy, more enclined to take their ease then to labor. Iustinus hauing receiued both these of And ha∣ueing read the letters of the Marques and of count Hendrick. Spinolaes and of Bergues, calling together the councell of warre, proposeth the busines. It is concluded to returne an∣swer. That those thinges which Spinola and Bergues promi∣sed. wher about the Magistrates being consulted, sending Tyme and place vvas ordayned for to treate of this mat∣ter. their letters, they beseeche Henrie of Bergues, the next day after at seuen of the clock to come from the campe, and
sending trumpeter, to admonish them of the place where, they should meete him: and that there should come from the cittie, which should request conditions in the names of all. The day after, which was the last of May, Henrie of Ber∣gues, accompanied with much nobilitie, at the houre ap∣pointed, goes forth of the campe, and sending a trumpetter, aduertiseth Iustinus of his coming. They with whom they were to treate, issuing out of the cittie, the Count of Ber∣gues commandes the Nobilitie, to stand a far off, and goes forward alone only in the cōpanie of Routartius, the Kin∣ges, and the Marquis Spinolaes Secretarie. Standing in the midst, the Legates approached, and the Seargent may or Ca∣se Deyden, Captaine Zouche, Aertsenius Cōsull, and a few Magistrates: lastly Coronell Hauteriuius came. These let∣ters of assurance being giuen, they presented in writing the conditions of the accord. Of these it was disputed too and Those of the tovvne pre∣sented certai∣ne articles. fro, nor were there but two articles to be reiected, and a third douted of. The meeting being dissolued, the conferēce was deferred till three a clock in the afternoone. By diner ours were ready betwixt the outward fortification, vnder a Ta∣bernacle spread a broad for that purpose. (all looking in heapes from the walles. Here they began to treat of the be∣gun composition, and that was denied which disliked in The Marquis and Count Hendrick agreed uppon the articles excepting tvvo. the morning: to wit, of granting libertie of conscience to the hereticall cittisens, and of burying their bodies in hallo∣wed places. Next it was disputed, about four greater ca∣nons, and two murthering peeces, to be brought out with the sauegard. VVhich seemed litle to the besieged, but yet too much to Henrie of Bergues. Routartius therfore is sent to Spinola, to aske of him what The liberali∣tie of the Marques vvith the besieged. he thought. Spinola answered, that he would not deny thē of such a smale matter. The besieged glad of the answer gaue him thankes. Thinges being brought to that passe, a present
was brought forth. By and by Iustinus Nassauius Gouernor of the citie, and other Captaines with the principall Nobi∣litie which was therin, came. Ours also, who were in great number not far off, being gathered together, saluted one a∣nother Comple∣ments. with glad congratulations. In the Calends of Iune captaine deyden which was of The agree∣ment vvas brought to be singned. the company of the prince was sent to Spinola with a dou∣ble copie of the agreement, to set his hande on bothe, and he would by and by bring back the other, subsigned by Iu∣stinus, and to be sent back, retayning the other. Then were there a hondereth and twentie wagōes asked and three sco∣re shippes, to carry away the sick and the whole, and their houshould stuffe. More wagons were granted then were demanded, and as many ships as werein the riuer of Breda. Next pledges were giuen on both sides. By those of Breda, The vvago∣nes and ship pes demaun¦ded vvere granted. the Sargent mayor de la Caze, and Ogle Captaine of the English foote. By Spinola, Franciscus Losanus, and Caro∣lus Philippus le Count, Captaine of the German compa∣nies, were giuen for pledges. And these were the articles of the agreement set downe in writinge, by which Breda was rendred to the King. I. The Gouernor of Breda, the Coroneles Captaines Lieu∣tenants, and other Officers belonging to the warr, the sol∣diars, The condicio∣nes the Go∣uernor and officeres of Breda dema∣unded. whether they serued on horse or foote, that they be permitted to depart out of the cittie. That power be giuen of departing to all such as, are armed after the accustomed maer of war with ther colores displaied the drumes bea∣ting. after the acustomed sounde. That the horsmen be suf∣fered to depart, with their standards displayd, there trum∣petes soundinge after the accustomed manner, all armed, with their balles in their mouthes, their matches alighted on both endes with their beltes of poudre, with fierie touch and furnished with a number of bullets; the horsmen
sounding ther trumpets, their flagges displayed, armed, and carrying (as they ar wont to goe against the enimie.) That none of the pensionaries be detayned (of what nation soe∣uer.) for any cause (albeit they had in times past taken pay of the Kinge of Spaine, or of the Archduke, or of the Infanta Isabella.) That all be permitted to goe by the shortest and most commodious iorney to Gittenbergue in Holland, without any interruption, offence or iniurie, safe in life, in body, weapons, horses, vessells and cariages (by that coue∣nant of promise which was meet.) Moreouer, that leaue be giuen to bring forth their wiues, children, and familie, hous∣hould goods, vessells, horses, wagons, the weapons of the sol∣diars, dead, sick, or runne away, with out any obligation, of lett, upon what pretext soeuer. II. That the preachers of the word, the Ouerseers, the com∣mon people, and their scriueners, their Architects or Ingi∣neres, the Iudge of the militarie Senat, the ingineres of the fireworkes, the Lieutenant of pioners, the canonnieres, the Chyrurgians of the bandes and troupes the workemen ap∣plyed about the engines, the marriners, the letter-carriers, the ouerseers of the workes, the Prouost marshalls, the Pio∣ners, the carpenters and smithes, the prouiders of victualls and al other workmen of forts and engines, their wiues, children, seruants, horses, weapons be contayned in the for∣mer article, and enioy the same fauour. III. That all ships what soeuer shall be found for the present in Breda, arriued as well for the Captaines of war, as for o∣thers, be dismissed with al their necessarie instruments, into Holland. And let them be gouerned by ther one marriners, and be loaden as well with their families, as with their houshould stuffe, armour, moueables; alsoo the cariages of the Coroneles, Captaines, Lieutenants, and other officers of
war; Let them be fild with the sick, and the keepers, and others who shall desire to sayle into Holland by that o∣portunitie. That therfore the passages of thestopt riuer be laid open, for twelue dayes, from the first day of signing the agreement, before they goe out of their garison; to the end that the ships aforsaid may safely take their iorney with their loading, and with other thinges which shall be in thē, whilst they appleed them selues to other acts of warre at Blaec, from whence they may retyre them selues whether they please, as who by right hauing charge of the moueables, might rendre them to their owners whose they were. Gran∣ting the space of twelue dayes, that the ships be free from all iniuries, prouokements, and abuses, nor that ether they or their wagoners, be diuerted or disturbed from their course. That it shall be vniust to cause them to desist, vpon what pretext soeuer But if, ether because the riuer be not open, or for that it be not nauigable, their iorney shall not be hindred, by that delay, nothing shall be abridged of the spa∣ce of the granted twelue dayes, but all that to be granted to them void and free, that the mariners; and others (to whom it may be more commodius) may safely take their ioyney by riuer, or nere the riuer. But if some of these ships would tarry at Breda, let them notwithstanding be sent to tran∣sport the carriars, and the cariages of the conuoy before they presently returne to their owners. IV. That the full number of waggons (which the Gouer∣nor of Breda shall require) to carry to Gittenbergue the burdens and bagage of the Coronells Captaines and offi∣cers of war, and other soldiars of defence (and who from thence shall be brought back into the campes of Genike, by the interposition of a publike promise) to be supplied by the Marquis Spinola.
V. That the Gouernor haue leaue to carrie away together with the conuoye, four canons and two murthering pee∣ces, such as he shall make choise of, together with al that which belongeth to them, and as many balles and poudre, as shall be needfull to shoote off euery one six times. And to carry those canons with all their wheeles and instru∣ments, by land, or by water, as he shall thinke good, and as shall be best for his commoditie. The Marquis Spinola len∣ding for this purpose, horses charrets and wagons, together with wagonners, (if they shall be requested by the Go∣uernor) to draw the canons, the murthering peeces, toge∣ther with the wheeles and instruments belonging to then. VI. That the Prince of Aurange haue leane, to carrie all his moueables, which he hath ether in the Castle or in the cit∣tie, in to such place or contrie, whether he, orany other (to whom, the care of them shall be committed) Or that they be kept for a while in the Castle of Breda, vntill such time as the Prince of Aurange dispose of them, at the least for hal∣fe a yeares space. And that ther ships and shipmen co∣ming from Holland to fetch them, free passage to be giuen, no impediment being offered. VII. If perchance any of them, comprehended in the two first articles, cannot for lack of health, goeforth of the cit∣tie, together with the conuoye, that to such leaue be giuen of remayning in the cittie with their wiues, familie and ser∣uants without hurt, vntill they haue recouered their health and strength. Then also at the first, opportunitie, to giue them fauourable letters for their departure, that so they may goe safelie where the please. VIII. That no officer of war, or soldiar, or Lieutenant of a
companie, whether he shall prouide him selfe to depart to∣gether with the conuoye, or after his sicknes recouered (as if he were comprehended in none of the former articles) shall be retayned, but in fauour of the former points, euery one shall be suffered to depart freely. And that the credi∣tors content them selues with the only wordes or writinges for payment of their dettors. IX. The Gouernor, captaines and the reste of the Officers of war, the soldiars already cōtayned in the articles aforsaid, or other who soeuer, bound by stipēd and seruice to the vnited States, which shall haue any houses in Breda, farmes, inheri∣tances, or moueables (comprehending likewise the Cap∣taynes, Officers, the companies of horse of the Count of Culcnburge, of the Count of Styre, and of Monsieur de S. Martin, with the widowes and children also of the same or of other companies, which for these two yeares hence be∣tooke them to the cittie for sauegard) shall haue a yeare and a halfes space, counting from a month after the subsigning to the agreement, wherin they may at their pleasure, carry away their goods, sell, pledge, alienat, change, and occupie according to the law and common custome. Furthermore, that they shall enioy all that space of time, the reuenewes of their pensions, the profit of what they let out, with the o∣ther frutes of their inheritance, due or to be due: to the full of all thinges pertayning to them with in the cittie. X. The soldiars whether of garison, or of the campe (who whether they ar detayned prisoners in the cittie or in the campes) as soone as the conditions shall be signed, shall be sent back without paying any ransome, but only the valew of their expences made by agreement. XI. Against the garisons, no action shall be made of asking
againe any spoiles, but all booties shall be reputed al their owne. XII. After the articles of the composition are signed it shall be lawfull for the Gouernor of Breda to send them by some man of knowen trust, to the Prince of Aurange. XIII. The conditions being made, there shall be a truce, yet both shall containe them selues in their fortifications as before; whether shall it be lawfull to approache ether by day or night. XIV. First that the pledges be giuen two by two before the garison depart they shall follow the companies to Gitten∣bergue, and shall remaine there the space of twelue dayes, vntill the riuer be opened, and the couenants be accomplis∣hed. That time being past, if none of the couenants be bro∣ken, they shall returne. XV. The agreement being made: pledges shall be giuen on both sides, of like number and condition: and the cittie being rendred, ours shall be restored to us againe. XVI. It shall be further granted, that the pledges giuen by the citty of Breda, shall be sent back, as soone as the garison shall be brought in, to marche away together with the conuoye. XVII. The Gouernor and the garison of Breda do promise, to goe forth of the cittie of Breda on thursday next, the fift of Iune, early in the morning. VVe Iustinus Nassau promise to doe our endeuours, that those thinges be kept, which ar contayned in the arti∣cles aforsaid, hitherto so far as they do appertaine to us.
In witnes wherof, with the consent of the Coronells, Cap∣taines, and the councell of war, we haue subsigned the same this present day, the day after the calends of lune 1625. IVSTINVS NASSAV. The heades of the composition demanded of the Senat and people of Breda. I. That pardon and forgetfulnes be both promised and performed, of all those thinges which were commirted by the cittisens and inhabitants of Breda, of what condition soeuer they be, whether committed before, or after the reco∣uerie of the cittie, in the year 1590. Let no man be enquired of, nor let no euill be inflicted upon any, no not upon pretext of treason, or any fault whatsoeuet. II. That the cittisens and all the inhabitants haue power, as well absent as present, of what cōdition soeuer they be whe∣ther subiect to the seruice or oathe of the States, or of the Prince of Aurange, or of the cittie, whether they be free to inhabit the cittie the next two yeares, their life in safetie, no question made of their religion, no obligation to sweare to another religion, whilst they leade a modest life, far from all offence, that they may deliberate for those two yeares spa∣ce, whether they please to make their residence there, or to depart. But if they shall resolue to depart, that they be suffe∣red to goe at their owne pleasure. They shall also freely en∣ioy their owne goods, that they may ether carry them away sell, alienat, pawne, and ingage them at their pleasure, or let them hire them to be receued and gouerned by those that shall redeeme them. That their goods who haue dyed wi∣thin or without the cittie, leauing their will behind them
or not, come to the heires appointed, or to the next of their kinred. III. That it shall be lawful for euery cittisen and inhabitant (whether he be bound, or free) who after these conditions agreed upon, it shall please to remoue his dwelling, or to de∣part from the cittie for any other cause, to doe this at what time he shall please, by what land, by what water, with his wife, children, familie, houshould stuffe, marchandise, and other moueables, no impediment whatsoeuer being giuen, by no other, then by the authoritie of these coue∣nants. And for those that will ether make their aboade, or will depart into any other kingdomes, regions, prouinces, or neutrall places, or subiect to tributes, that it be free and lawfull for them, ether to make their aboade or to retyre them selues perpetually without any trouble of coming or going for their marchandise or affaires sakes, thorough cit∣ties and places subiect to the King of Spaine, and to haue right and leaue to dispose of their moueables, and others, and of their owne goods, according as they will thē selues. But touching the Catholiques returning againe, and occu∣pying their houses within the cittie, there is no deed of any other prouiso then these present conditions. IV. They who to see to their affaires, shall goe into the vnited prouinces, to them leaue shall be giuen four times a yeare to goe thither (admonishing the Gouernor, of whom they shall necessarily receiue authoritie of coming and going) which he, but upon iust cause, shall not refuse. Next they shall returne from thence within the space of two yeares frō the grant of this agreement: that afterwards they may ether goe forward to inhabit the cittie, or to plant their dwelling in free places, or of tribute. And let them enioy these pla∣ces, no otherwise then those already spokē of, and the leaue
of coming and going, and what commoditie soeuer of the∣se couuenants. V. It shall be granted to the preachers of the word, to depart freely with their wiues, children, familie goods and mouea∣bles, without all offence of damage. For these thinges, that waggons or ships be lent them, with time enough to dispo∣se of their affaires. VI. They shall be comprehended in this composition, who after the cittie shall be yelded, did serue the place of a Dea∣con: as also they, who boare any ecclesiasticall office. VII. Also Stewards, Aduocates, Substitutes, Treasurers, and others both cittisens and inhabitants, who ether haue char∣ge of treasure, or of accounts, or paying of wages, or any o∣ther office, shall be contayned in these conditions. And to haue free power to depart with all their goods, houshould stuffe, and writinges: and further haue right to vse the bene∣fit of this agreement, as of others. VIII. As many martiners as ar in the cittie, who haue their ships here, which they may take with them shall enioy the same priuiledge, IX. If there shall not be ships and wagons enough prouided, to serue the cittisens and inhabitants (who desire to depart together with their goods and houshold stuffe) to them with in the space of two yeares, it shall be granted to send for from else where for ships and wagons, from Holland or o∣ther places, which may afterwards returne freely in vertu of these conditions. X. That the cittisens and inhabitants of this cittie, shall be enioyned, with no burthens of impositions, more then
ar iustly imposed vpon those which dwell in greater or les∣ser citties thorough all Brabant. XI. That the garison of horsmen and footemen be placed in the cittie, after the best maner that may be, and with the lest damage that may be to the cittisens. XII. They shall also be contayned in this couenant who soe∣uer shall be absent, ether for their owne or the citties affai∣res, that they may freely returne into the cittie, and enioy the couenants that ar made. The contry people also who fled into the cittie, shall be suffered to retyre them safely in∣to the contrie. XIII. He who being of another religion, within the time of two yeares agreed vpon, shall dye in this cittie, that he be buried in some honorable place within an orchard in the cittie: or else according to the will of his kinred, that the corps be carried out of the cittie where pleased him. XIV. The decrees of the Senat, and all the ordenances of the capitall seate, not hitherto forbidden, be estableshed, and take effect. XV. VVho soeuer heretofore hath lent mony to the cittie, shall be suffered to receiue the rent and to make exchan∣ge. And yearely that their reuenewes and their other af∣faires be assisted by the Senat by whom the reuenewes ar to be paid. All these thinges whatsoeuer in this agreement ar de∣creed and written, ar agreed vnto, ratified, and confirmed by the Marquis Spinola, and ar subscribed vnto by the le∣gats of the cittee; the same Marquis promising, that he will endeauor that it be also ratified by the most Excel∣lent
Infanta of Spaine, sealed with her broade seale, within fifteene dayes. Giuen the second of Iune 1625. Many, whose dispositions were bent to more sharper courses, hearing of so good and so fauorable conditions, admired the Clemencie of Spinola towards the enimie; and Many acused the bean gni∣tie of the Marques some also blamed this pardon. They said, that this should haue bene handled more seriously, and ether to haue put the besieged to the sword, or not to haue receiued them to mercie, but vpon rendring vp their armes, who by their wilfull pertinacitie had brought them selues vnto that point, that they had died of hungar, if they had bene shut vp but two dayes longer. And why should such fauorable conditions be offered them of our free accord, to whom And the complaintes they made. euen to giue them their liues, was to grant them to great a benefit? That at least Spinola shoulde haue expected a litle, whilst that had hapned vnto them, which ordinarie hap∣pens to men thorough their ouer-much partinacitie, to make them seeke that, and earnestly to beg it, which at the first they contemned: and that they should first haue cra∣ued a composition, before of our owne accords it should The condition of preces and particu∣lar personos are diferent. haue bene offered to them. Next why the vnhappie part of the cittisens should be suffered to goe forth, safe with their houshould stuffe and their goods, before that mony were paid by the Senat to the Catholiques remayning, which was ex torted by publique and common oathe, to The  vvas vvel related. make the workes, and to pay the soldiars stipend? So wi∣sely seemed they to complaine, who tied to their priuat o∣pinions, ar wont to measure with the selfe same measure, euen the waightiest matters of gouerment, not vnderstan∣ding that princes ar to take another course, whose princi∣pall endeuours ought to be, to gaine renowne and the peo∣ples good will. But Spinola houlding them to be more wise who ar more gentle in crueltie, and that the fame of clemencie, was to
be preferred before the name of seueritie, not ignorant, how much better it was for the common good, spedely to release, then longer to detayne the Kinges armie before Breda (by reason of the sturres of French, Italians; Ger∣mans, and Danes) made more account of the gaining of a litle time, then of the no great spoiles of all Breda, or of so smale disgrace of the enimies, who yet perhaps would haue defended them selues: mindfull of that old prouerb, That it is better to be at the latter end of a feast, then at the beginning of afray. And truly he iudged it more expedient to prefer the Maieste and clemencie of his Kinge (whose person he The generall is bounde to take  of the  of his Kinge more then of any particu∣lar glorie of his ovvne person. bore in this place, then ether his owne glorie, or desire of reuenge. That he held it for a dishonor, of so great a num∣ber of prouision left behinde, and but litle, gon away, for testimonie of his longe patience and approued vertues the∣re remayned in the cittie, fortie three pices of ordnance (musquets) four hundred fiftie, wherof also a hundred and fiftie were suffered to be carried in the place of those that The munitio nes vvhich vvere in Breda. were ouercome. (hargubushes) three hundred, of poudre a thousand one hundred thirty fiue pounde; matche thir∣tie four thousand pound; of greater balles, two thousand; of lesser, an exceeding number; of balles of leade, fortie thousand pounde mouldes to make balles of leade fifteene; granados two thousand one hundred; of greater (which they call Bombars) three hundred fortie four; engines ma∣de to cast fire, a hundred and fiftie; thirtie barrells of pit∣che, poudre, brimstone, bitumen; six barrells of great nay∣les; long forkes of iron, eleuen thousand; of stakes with double forkes, an innumerable number; shouells, four thousand; pickayes, or iron pikes to open the earth, six∣teene hundred; whele-barrowes, which ar driuen by the hande, to carry earth, a thousand; fiue boates; four rolles of cable-ropes; fortie graples; horscollers, a hundred and thirtie four score couple of cart-ropes; instruments made
of fire, also innumerable; one linnen bridge, or made of canuas, gabians of wood or hurdles, behind which the ca∣nons ar placed, very many; nor fewer to dispatch the hastie bridge. Of all which a written catalogue was giuen to Tho∣mas VVingardius master of the Artillerie. Now the detts of the cittisens remayning, Spinola belee∣ued that the States ought to haue so great care of, as of their owne credit and authoritie, which should be vtterly lost in the common wealth, if they but once deceiued any one of the beseeged cittisens; and therfore he was not carefull hereof. Vpon the fift of Iune the day was appointed for the co∣ming forth of the enimies garrison. VVherfore Spinola The Marques commanded that none of the souldiars should  be the besieged. forbad, that none by soldiarlike frumpes or gibes, should vse any disgrace to those that departed: so modestly did he suppose the victorie was to be vsed. Aboundance of wa∣gons and boates, being prepared for that day, our soldiars were set to watch at three gates of the cittie and of the cast∣le. Count Hermanus Bergues, with fiue companies of hor∣se, went before the companyes of the garison departing, vnto Gittenbergue. Also betwixt euery ten wagons, went a litle company of our horse, for the sauegard of the baga∣ge. The troupes of horse of Bergaignius, led another com∣pany of horse who inclosed them behinde. In these two, scarcely were there any horse, besides the ensignes, so great∣ly were the horse decayed. The foote men went in the midst. Amongst these Iustinus went on horsback, one of the beseeged, Carolus Philippus le Count, accompayning him. Euery Captaine had his owne company, The Coro∣nels went before the troupes. The coulors wer borne di∣splayed, the Trumpets sounding before them. The num∣ber of the foote, were three thousand (for the sick were car∣ryed away in boates) Truly they were a gallant companie, whether one respect their persons, or their weapons, and of
greater beautie then ours were to wit, they were lodged mo∣re stately and more at their ease then ours were, and had sto∣re of fire; nether did their bread fayle, till the day that they departed. Spinola attended upon with a notable troupe of Nobili∣tie, betwixt the inward circle of the cittie, and the trenche, the conqueror him selfe beheld the beautifull pompe of his glorious triumphe. He curteously saluted all the Captaines The glorious triumphe of his victorie. at their going forth, and first Naslauius the Gouernor, vene∣rable for his gray haires, his wife and children, the sonn of Emanuell of Portugal, and two bastards of Prince Maurices and they againe with constant composed countenāces and voices, and with a modest enclining of the banners, saluted him. No ignominious voice of prouoking one another was once heard, but smiled with fauorable countenancs. The He vvas no less cour∣tens in gi∣uinge than∣kes. companies being past all opprest with the congratulations of all the standers by and runing thick together, admitted the duties of common curtesie, no more cheerfully, then mo∣destly, according to euery ones due praise, for his labor assi∣gned and industrie, in so great and so long difficultie of the siege. Iohanes Medices was sent to Isabella the Infanta of Spaine, who related to her the ioyfull departure of the gari∣son; to whom Isabella gaue a rich collour of gould and adia Headuertised of the victo∣ry the In∣fanta and the Kinge of Spaine. mant being indeed a Princely reward. Ferdinandus Guzmannus, master de campe of a Spanis Regiment, was sent with the same newes into Spaine to Phi∣lip the fourth. Theodorus Camargius Coronell, carried the first newes of the rendring of the cittie into Germanie to the Emperor Ferdinandus. The Count of Anholt, hearing of Mansfelds departu∣re from the campe, dismissed with his, presently followed him. The fame of the victorie diuulged into Fran∣ce, England, Italie, and Germanie, was scarcely belee∣ued euen by frendes. A short fable was spread abroad by the
enimies of the conuoyes of Breda, and was cryed about by the voice of a common ballet-seller, and sould in a prin∣ted The success byinge so great many vvoulde hardly beliue t. pamphlet the same day wherein the newes was brought of the rendring therof yea euen from Spaine also letters were brought from the Kinge into the low-contries, in which Isabella was admonished, that she should consider againe and againe, whether it were not more to the purpose, to re∣call Spinola from so long and doutfull a siege: so sharply did many write into Spaine to their acquaintance in high au∣thoritie, of the dispaire of getting the cittie. Isabella the Archdutches, resolued her selfe to goe in per∣son to the cittie that was wonne, and to visit the soldiars that The Infanta came to visi∣te the cittie. had ouercome. Spinola only keeping the gates of the ci∣tie, command ther houses, villages, the tower and the church to be made cleane, went to meete Isabella, three leages from the cittie. Almost all ther horse, ether was sent before to Antwerp to bring her on her way, or were placed in the mid∣le way to receiue her, and she was entertained coming with great ioy, and with a triple discharging of the Canons, as with a daunce of ioy. The footemen diuided into diuers squadrons, reioyced with no lesse signe of noice and of shouting upon the gate of Hage, thorough which Isabella entred into Breda, an Epi∣grame set upon the gate, was reade, that taking away the lit∣le word of enuie it pleased him to soften. PHILIPP VS HISPANIAE REX This inscrip∣cion vvas put vpt on the gates. GVBERNAN TE ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA OBSIDENTE SPINOLA HOSTIB VS FRVSTRA IN SVPPETIAS CONIVRANTIB VS BREDA VICTOR POTITVR. All the greater ordinances of the cittie, went off, once, twice, and the third time. The Archdutches for∣bid Hir alteza did forbid that thovve of mirth should be made til first sacrifice shoulde be made vnto god as the chse autor of the victo∣rie. bon-fires, or any other publique shew of ioy to be
made, in respect of the reuerence she bore to God, till first she had caused Sacrifice to be offered vnto him the day fol∣lowing in the great Church, as to the chiefe Author of the victorie. The next day therfore, Alphonsus Cardinall of Cueua, Ambassador of the Kinge of Spaine, first said Masse, Isabella, her wayting dames maides, and all the peo∣ple The first  vvas celebrated by the Carde∣nal de la Cuba am∣basador of Spaine. being present. From Masse, Isabella went about the Church, to behould (if any were left) of the oulde monu∣ments of religion. She found here and there, emptie pla∣ces, of the pictures of sepulchers, steps of hereticall pietie, against their Ancestors that were dead. Yet found she whole the notable tombe of Englebert the secon, dsom∣times Count of Nassau, builded by Henrie his nephue, of white and black marble. Another, which was of Engel∣bert the First, and of Iohn of Nassau, the picture of our blessed lady set theron being taken downe, and defaced. which was done by the instinct of a Sibell Henrie Boxhor∣nes, preacher of the word in Breda some times a Flamen priest of Iupiter amongst the high Priests. She, to wit, by the oracle of Sibill, after the sixt month of the siege of Bouldnes and impietie of sibilla vvife of Box∣orinck. Breda, prophecying that the cittie should yeld it selfe to the enimie, vnlesse they would throw downe a picture of the virgin Marie, kept at that time in that place which the religion of many of our very holie ancestors, had worshi∣ped so many yeares agoe in that cittie; but others ignorant in religion, durst not wronge it, being at that time safe and sound. In which thinge, I know not what I may cēsure most to be reprehended, whether the patience of the benumed Senat and people, in suffering so great a wickednes, as the treadding of antiquitie vnder foote, or their stupiditie in beleeuing, or the impudent boldnes of a meane woman, against the picture of the blessed virgin consecrated by the noble predecessors of the Nassaues, and set upon
his tombe for memorie to posteritie. An Epigrame or two of the fore-passed taking of, Breda being written on the This vvrit∣inges vver blottd And otheres put in ther place. walles of the church, iniurious to God and the Catholique Kinge, were put out, and these were set in their place, to signi∣fie the yeare wherin Breda was recouered. AMBROSI SPINOLAE VIGILANTIA BREDA EXPVGNATA. The sacred ceremonies being ended, the tower of the church by night, lighhtned almost with an innumerable Admirable fires of ioy. number of lāternes and fires, were seene to burne euen from Holland. All the cittie shone with bon-fires, and with bar∣rells of pitch. Then all the canons shot off againe. And which was a more beautifull spectacle, there was a circle of continuated shining fires for the compasse of two and thir∣tie miles thorough the circuit of the interior trenche, which Spinola hauing set with stakes, straw, and fagots, comman∣ded the soldiars to gather together and to burne them, per∣petuall flashes of smale shott shining betwixt, which like vnto starres a far off sodainly shining and vanishing, made a most pleasant sight. The liberalitie also fo Isahella that excellent Princesse, shi∣ned towards the Church of Breda; and towards two Reli∣gious orders, of Capucins and priests of the Societie of IE∣SVS, Liberalitie of her alteza no lesse then her pietie in sparing and praying to God to gaine that cittie. It was the common voice of all, that the Infanta by her perpetuall prayers, and those of her court, and And her pie∣tie and good life. of other places by there cōtinuall prayers in the fortie houre prayers to be made in all the Churches, and by powring out her almes amongst the miserable wonne Breda, and not with weapons. And truly that the diuine succours were mo∣re present, then humane stratagems, none can denie: for to whom shall we refer this benefit receiued, but to her so well
knowen pietie, to whom we may rightly proclaime that saying. One vvoman hath vvrought confusion in the house of Nabuchodonosor. Isabella therfore came into the cittie, as a restorer of the ancient religion; into the campes as to bestow in those dayes, the gifts and guerdons of a Captaine. She ordained an Anniuersarie Masse, in honor of the dreadfull Sacramēt (who began first in the eue of the rendring of Breda, and Liberalitie of hir alteza to the religouse. the garison went out on the octaue.) She gaue to the Capu∣cins to buy a housein Breda, four hundred poundes. To the priests of the Societie of Iesus, who were diuided into four quarters of the campe procuringe the health of the soldiars soules during all the time of the siege she ordained to giue fiue hundred pound, to helpe to defray the charges of buy∣ing a colledge, which she bestowed on them by way of al∣mes. To the repayring of an ould Abbie of Nunnes, and ruines of the Church of Ginick (which Maurice caused to be burnt) she gaue no smale somme of monie. All which ar∣guments of singular Religion, when Alphonsus Cardinall de la Cueua, Ambasador of the King of Spaine, did signisie vnto the supreme head of the church Pope Vabanus the eight, the pope wrote vnto him in this manner following. Our beloued sonne, health and Apostolicall benedic∣tion. A letter of the pope Vbano to the Cardenall de la Cueua. we felt those your last letters, to be those golden phials, full of odors, which recreat the soules of those that ar in heauen, and comfort the diseases of those in earth, we too∣ke breath a litle, tossed in the height of the raging sea, when we vnderstood Religion to triumphe in the towne of Breda. God is not forget-full of his mercies, and legions of Angells asist those Princes which fight for heauen. verely this victorie, is obtained, amongst so many conspiring ay∣des of impietie, and difficulties euen of nature it selfe strug∣ling against it, that although it will remayne in all ages a fa∣mous document of warlick fortitude yet let it be reputed
to be the benefit of that almightie warrior. For not only the force of the enimie is domted, but euen the very raging of the floods. And now doth the Prince of Austria, gather the excellent frutes of so great a triumphe, whilst with po∣werfull forces she fortifieth religon. Nether suPpose we that could be more prudently prouided, for, then by the duties of Priests, and endeuours of those Religious fami∣lies, which yee made manifest in repayring the Abbie of the Cittie. And you we blesse perpetually, who first, the An∣gels applauding, and the Church reioycing, performedst the dreadfull Sacrifice of the Masse vpon those Altars, which of late heretical temeritie had polluted. Furthermo∣re, we praise your pietie, when being adorned with the pur∣ple of Roman splendor, shew your selfe worthier in this pre∣sent occasiō, of so great a priesthood. Pious purposees may bring you into participation of this triumphall glorie: for the fortitude of the Soldiar, doth exterminate impietie frō the walles of the cittie; the pietie of the Priest, from the mindes of the people. Only wishing honor to your name, The particu¦lar care of the Infanta of the army. we perpetually promisse you our patrocinie. Giuen at Ro∣me at S. Maries the Greater, vnder the fishers ringe, the 11. August. 1625. the second yeare of our Pontificat. Isabella hauing performed the duties of Religion, com∣manded a whole monthes wages to be paid to the soldiars The giftes and liberali∣tie of hir be∣sovved in the campes, and a thousand garments to be made, by the name of a donation. Then in the ensuing dayes, she went about to behould the workes, both of the inward, and outward trenche, as a Reuerencer both of warre and of Religion. In the meane space Spinola with a great con∣uoye, set the citie in order, spoiled by so long a siege, and disposed the houses for placing the garison. Isabella placed Balancon trough his aproued ver∣tues vvas  Gouernor of Brede by the Infanta. the Barron of Balancone Master de campe of the Bur∣gundians, for Gouernor to rule the cittie. The virtu of that man, his modestic, and vigilance, were so well knowen
without enuie, that the soldiars of all nations, affirmed that office of right and merit to belong vnto him. The cittisens, who had heard only by report of his fame, designed the go∣uerment to him, and humbly besought it might be deliue∣uered him: thus virtue cannot be concealed, and being knowen, is beloued. Then was the Senat appointed for the people. Henricus Montens (from whom the same was taken wrongfully) was created Burgermaster, excellent in the knowledg of law, graue for his gray haires, who also administred that office, when the cittie by fraude of a fra∣ighted boate, was last taken from the Kinge, he alwayes was a true maintayner of his fatheres Religion. Cornelius vander Locht, a man of a peaceable cariage, and a keeper of the ancient faith, was giuen to him for Collegue. The other Senators, in virtu and faith, had bene approued be the common wealth. To the cittisens, the same forme of gouerment and lawes were appointed, as were to the cittie of Bolduke: although at first, for many reasons, all of them could not be kept. The Senat, with the furtherance of the Magistrates, gaue a publique schoole to be gouerned by the Professors of the Societie of IESVS: which order, Phillip Duke of Arscote, by the commandment of Isabella the Archdutches (be her letters was put in execusion.) All thinges so set in good order, the conuoyes being dispatched, a gard of three thousand foote, and seauen companies of horse being designed, the trenches, dit∣ches, The garison that vvas a∣pointed for Breda. and workes with which Spinola had encompassed the cittie, he commanded to be throwen downe: worthie to haue bene kept, and to haue bene shewed to posteritie, but for his vse, who was the chiefest of so great a victorie All ertes of fortificasiones of the campe vvere coma∣unded to be broken dovvne. obtayned, else should for euer haue remayned. Then the armie being sent before by some spaces; the Infanta was accompanied to Antwerp. The footemen being diuided
vnto, squadrones betwixt Hooghstrate and Breda, salu∣ted her passing by, with the applause of militarie ioy. The horsmen not far from Hooghstrate, placed in the great plaine by Henrie of Bergues, skirmished with militarie Militarie sporte . sports like as in earnest war. Fifteene companies, set here and there one against another, by a mutuall en countring, and a fayned fight, exhibited that comely aspect of war, as the vnexpert almost, frame to them selues in their minde. The sounding of the Trumpets, the runing and retyring of the horses, the raising of the dust from the ground, the glistering of head-peeces, and breast plates, the brande∣shing of the naked swordes, the shoutes of those that ran together, the fire and the smoke, and the sounde of the gunnes discharged, and the eccho of the greater cannons playing also a far off, lastly all the spectacles of a fight, saue blood and slaughter. Metuenda voluptas Spectanti, pulcherque timor. And which was most beautifull of, all Henrie of Bergues him selfe armed from top to toe, runing as it were for hel∣pe, betwixt two Princes his frendes, VVolfangus VVil∣helmus, Duke of Bauaria, Iuliers, Oliue, and Bergues, and Rodulphus Maximilianus Duke of Saxonie, which three together, the sport being ended of the vnbloody, war, ran together to the coache of the Infanta Isabella conque∣resse, The arimg of hir alteza and of the Marques to an vourp to salute her with their humble swords. Then Spino∣laes, (tents being placed some three miles from Antwerp) was brought into the cittie, with the reioycing eyes and voices of all that looked for him, together with the Arch∣dutches. Henrie of Bergues with his companies is lefte to Hooghstrate, to carry the rest of the conuoye back to Breda. Conde Hin∣drick remai∣ned inhoogh∣strot to con∣duct the prouisiones to Breda. In the last conuoye therefore, which was brought into Breda, before the enimie departed count Bergius about to
haing by the riband of Spinolaes laurell, studied to catch the enimie in a snare, by the inticement of a few prouokers to battell, the rest lying in ambushe, which should then soden∣ly appeare and inuade them. But the enimie, whether out of prudence, or out of feare, not coming out of their tents, Bergius departed, doing nothing. Isabella, whilst she remayned at Antwerp, was drawen with the pencill of rabens that excellent painter, and being grauen with an instrument in brasse, she saw her selfe crow∣ned with a garland of oake, in an imperiall table. VVorthie so to be pictured after that noble triumphe, nor by no o∣ther hand then by that of that Apelles. The Conqueresse Dauid was shewed in a Scene, by the schoole of the Societie of IESVS, after a new kind of mo∣dell, The tragedie of Dauid vvas repre∣sented by the fatheres of the Societie of Iesus. wherin after euery Act, all the historie of the thinge performed, was most delightfully exhibited, in the liuelie Images of dumme persons. VVith Isabella, the rest of the Nobles of the Court beheld the same. A few dayes after it being vnderstood, that the enimie was retired into garison, our armie also retired vnto garisones. VVhen Spinola came to Bruxells with a few, he was receiued with new congratu∣lations (albeit he auoided it by concealing his coming) a∣gainst his will and perforce, all runing together to meete him. Meffengers being sent in the meane space into Spaine, Kinge Phillip ioyfull of a double victorie, of the recouerie of Breda, and of the Bay in Brasile, gaue to the Marques Spinola, for so many labors employed, for so many enimies Amoste royal gift giuen be his maiestie to the Mar∣ques. ouercome without slaughter, for so impregnable cittie sub∣iugated, amost Royall gift as is the chiefe gouernment of the order of S. Iames, for ether that was to be the reward of so great a victorie or the liberalitie of so great a Kinge giuing, also greater then could be asked. Pope Vrbanus Letters of the Pope Vrbano. moued with the greatnes of the thinges done at Breda, first congratulated Isabella, and then Spinola for his fortitude
and felicitie, with most excellent letters: the copies wher∣of, I haue iudged meet to be published, both for their sin∣gular elegancie, as also for the excellent authoritie of the most prudent Pontifice. Pope Vrbans letter, vnto the Archdukes Isabella Clara Eugenia. Our Lord mightie in warre, hath lifted up his arme ouer the nations, which intended euill to his seruants, and the right hand of the omnipotent is glorified in you, Tri∣umphing with ioy for the noble victorie of conquered Breda, with the same Epitaph we speake to your Nobi∣litie, who hauing surpassed the praises of a womans virtu, prosperously turned the forces of the Austriacall power, for the defence of the orthodox faith. The band of the heauenlie armie fought in your campes; and the con∣stancie of warlike fortitude, hath taught noble na∣tions, inhabiting by the spectacle of so singular a sie∣ge, no hould in earth to be fortified with so strong helpes, and defences, which the power of acamp armed with ce∣lestiall helpes, doth not vanquish. You haue combatted with an enimie conteining of perils, and with a cunning artificer of vnheard of terror, he seemed to studie to send the very Ocean it selfe out of her prisons in to the Au∣striacall armie. He shut vp the raging floods with sea sluces ouerflowed that as it were with a new sea, he might swallow up the campes of your Nobilitie. But the wicked haue fallen into the ditch which they digged, and our Lord hath raigned. The Ocean restrayned the surging waues in their ould seates, and the floods with-drue them selues. Into dry places. VVe congratulate this victory to you, wished hartely with the desires of the whole Church,
to which Rome the mother of all Nations applaudeth, which the testimonies of histories in ensuing ages, will pro∣claime. And truly how well your Nobilitie doth vse them, we haue vnderstood by the voice of the report, and letters of our ministers. Vnlesse our lord keepe the cittie, in vaine do the statiōs of soldiars watch, and he doth arme those cit∣ties with legions of Angels, in which the Catholique faith doth prosper, the keeper of publique tranquillitie, doth pre∣dominate. we know with what solicitous pietie, and with what prudent actes you procure, that heresie may be cast forth from the people of Breda, the mother of perfidie, and nurse of sedition, wherefore, seeing you leaue no place for Pontificall admonitions, we worthely praise and extolle the glorie of your name, and with our most exact prayers recommend vnto God your Nobilitie, that of so healthfull a triumphe, you may receiue those frutes, which the Church wisheth, and impietie feareth, and we bestow upon you perpetually Apostolicall benediction. Giuen at Rome at S. Maria Maior vnder the Fishers ringe, the 9. of August. 1625. the second yeare of our Pontificat. Number XVI. Pope Vrbanus to the Marques Spinola thus congratulating. Heauen triumpheth in the victories of thy Nobilitie, And to Mar∣ques Spinola. whose branches nourished with the blood of heretiques, and the head of Catholique Religion crowneth. The ouerthrow of Breda will remaine a monu∣ment
to all Nations and ages of thy virtu. Let the whole world know euen at this day those Captaines to be borne in Italie, in whom the glorie of Cesar, and of Scipio, doth flowrish a new. Thou hast tamed those enimies, excelling in riches, mad in anger, and desying death. The floods shut vp with sluces, ar commanded to alter their course, and the heapes of fuming waters, to enter the campes of thy Nobi∣litie. The fauor of heauen hath thoroughly asswaged them all, and the constancie of thy courage. Truly that cittie which treason had taken away from the power of Austria fearfull of the light and lying hid in skulking corners, that cittie by thy Nobilitie, valor and virtu was recouered. The memorie of Bredaes siege, will remaine for euer, and from thence, the Captaines of ensuing posteritie shall lear∣ne, the art of warring, and examples of fortitude. A∣mongst the present stormes of tossed Italie, and of Princes disscordinge, the newes receiued from Breda, so far did this ioyfull beame of the diuine clemencie shine to our Ponti∣ficall solicitude, that we haue determined by the testimo∣nie of our Apostolicall letters, to extolle thee as the author of so great a good, promising our patrocinie to they Nobili∣tie; to whom we wishe the happines of long life, and bestow vpon thee for euer, our Apostolicall benediction. Giuen at Rome at S. Maria Maior, vnder the Fishers ringe the 9. of August 1625. the second yeare of our Pontificat. Great indeed, but true praises, now confirmed by Ponti∣ficall oracle. And verely, how great that victorie is, nether can the enimie as yet feele, the wound being yet to greene nor we, by the newnes of the ioy, can yet esteeme, the same according as it deserues such like or greater victorie, albeit great ought to be reputed whē the contention was, not for Breda, but for the losse of fame and honor by the rendring of that cittie, which in vaine the States vndertooke, to de∣fend with so greate commotion of all Europe, with calling
together the helpes of so many prouinces, with the exhau∣sting of so much treasure, which hath acquired an immor∣tal name to the Kinge of Spaine, to Isabella clara Eugenia Infanta and to Marquis Spinola. CHRONOGRAPHICVM REX BREDAM CEPIT QVINTA IVNII.
APPROBATIO. HIstoria haec latinè primū conscripta memorabilis est, in qua qui attente & grata mente considerauerit quae toto Bredanae obsidionis tempore ter∣ra marique diuinitùs contigêre, non dubitabit cum Debbora in haec diui∣nae laudis verba prorumpere De coelo dimicatum est contra eos. Qua∣propter eam dignam censeo, quae non vno idiomate sed varijs euulgetur, quem∣admodum hîc eadem, etiam Anglicano exhibetur. GVILIEL. FABRICIVS Apostolicus ac Regius Librorum Censor. VVITH PRIVILEGE. WIth Priuilege and auctoritie of his Catholike Ma∣iestie. as also of don̄a ISABELLA clara Eugenia Infan∣ta of Spaine, and of his Excellencie, the Marques Ambrosio Spinola cheef Generall of their Armies in the Palatinat, and lovve contries, and of the naual Army of the same.
LOVANII, Ex Officinâ HENRICI HASTENII, Vrbis & Academiae Typographi, M. DC. XXVIII.
END
