14090 99854602 20029
A LIGHT VNTO THE VNLEARNED: OR, THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST. Set downe most briefely, for the use of yong and igno∣rant Persons. To be learned and remembred, at all times: but specially, when they would come to the holy Communion. Divided into eight Sections. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Legatt for George Lathum, and are to be sold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard, at the Signe of the Brasen Serpent. 1622.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. I Propound (Christian Rea∣der) in this most briefe Treatise, the principall Grounds of our Religion, in the most compendious man∣ner. The cause of my bre∣vitie is this: There be many poore servants and laborers; many that are of trades and manuall Sciences; ma∣ny aged Persons of weake and decaied memories: Of these, some never learned so much as to reade, some very little, and the most of them haue, or will have, small leisure to learne long discourses: the world, or other vanities, taking up their thoughts and cares. Yet all these haue immortall soules, to remaine after a few daies, in eternall ioyes, or in endlesse paines. Of these care must be had: and the rather, because many of them haue little care of themselues. To these, the longest tractates be∣ing displeasing, I direct the shortest. For, better a little well learned, then a great deale not learned at all. In which, I comprehend much matter in few words: and draw together, into the narrowest
space, those things, which I iudged most needfull for them to know unto salvation. I haue confirmed the same in the margent with proofes of Scrip∣ture, selected out of many which might be produ∣ced: and for their greater ease and benefit, I haue expressed the words themselues; and where neede is, as the streightnesse of roome would permit, ex∣planed them: that they may see herein, not man teaching them, but God. Jf they would take a lit∣tle paines, to learne these few points without booke, they might haue matter of good meditation, when they are about their workes, and travailing in worldly affaires: and so their earthly dealings should be more blessed. Also, they may receiue greater profite by the Scriptures they reade, and Sermons they heare, when they know to what head or ground of Doctrine, to referre that which is de∣livered. And may by this meanes come better pre∣pared to the Lords Table. Wherefore, I earnestly exhort them, as from my heart desiring their sal∣vation, to reteine the grounds of heavenly Do∣ctrine, in perfect memorie: to labour to haue their hearts affected therewith: and to manifest there knowledge by an holy conversation. That living vertuously, they may die comfortably: and after this short and uncertaine life is ended, come to bles∣sed immortalitie. Fran: Inman.
THE PRINCIPLES of the DOCTRINE of CHRIST, set downe most briefely. Sect. 1. GOD is aIoh. 4.24. God is a Spirit. Spi∣ritualThis word, essence, signifieth a being. God is the first and chiefest being. He saith. Exod. 3.14. I am: implying his selfe-being. And he giueth beeing to all other things. Essence,Psal. 90. verse 2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Ier. 23.24. I fill heauen and earth. infinite andGen. 17.1. I am the Almightie God. Almightie,Psal. 147.5. His understanding is infi∣nite. most Wise andIsa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts. most Holy,2. Cor. 1.3. The Father of mercies. most Mercifull andPsal. 11.7. The just Lord loveth justice. most Iust. The Godhead is distingui∣shed
into1. Ioh. 5.7. There are three that beare record in heauen, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one. three divine Per∣sons: the Father, who is of himselfe; the Sonne, who is of the Father; the holy Ghost, who is of them both. All these three are one, and the same God. Sect. 2. This God; the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost;Nehem. 9.6. Thou hast made heauen, the heauen of hea∣uens with all their hoste, the earth and all things that are therein, the seas and all that is therein; and thou preservest them all. crea∣ted all things: things invisi∣ble, as Angels; and visible, as Men, and other creatures. And he gouerneth them all. Sect. 3. God created our first pa∣rents inGen. 1.27. God created man in his owne image. Man re∣sembled his Creator in excellent gifts: in soule, in body, in both. blessed estate. Hee adorned their soules with wise-dome, and righteousnesse: their bodies with beautie, and glorie: and both with immortalitie, and dominion over other creatures. But by theGen. 3.4, 5. The serpent said unto the woman yee shall not surely die: — Yee shall be as Gods— inticement of
the Divell, theyGen. 3.. When the woman saw, that the tree was — to bee desired to make one wise, (to wit, in her se∣duced iudgement) shee tooke of the fruite thereof, and did eate: and gaue also unto her husband — fell willing∣ly from God, andRom. 5.19. By the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners. This man was Adam, our first parent: his fosleri∣tie, who are many, which issue by genera∣tion from him, are made sinners by im∣putation of his sinne. wee, their posterity, fel with them. Here∣by, our whole nature is cor∣rupted, and inclined to all evil. Whereupon wee areDeut. 27.26. and Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that conti∣nueth not in al things which are written in the booke of the law, to doe them. The curse of God con∣taineth all troubles of this life; and torment of the text. subject to eternall miserie: beginning in this life, in manifold calami∣ties: and continuing after this life, in unquenchable fire. Sect. 4. Gal 4.4, 5. God sent forth his Sonne — made under the law: to redeeme them that were under the law.To redeeme us out of this miserie, and to bring us againe to felicitie, God hath given to us a Sauiour: His Sonne, Ie∣sus Christ. Christ consisteth ofIoh. 1.14. The word was made flesh. That is, the Sonne of God was made man: and so is, both the Sonne of God; and the Sonne of man. two natures: a divine nature, wher∣by he is perfect God: and an humane nature, whereby he is perfect man.
That being God, he might be able to beare the punishment due to us: and might make the obe∣dience of his manhood of infi∣nite value. And being man, sinne might be punished in that nature which sinned: and in the same, the righteousnesse of the law might be fulfilled. He hath three offices: Hee is aHeb. 5.5. God glo∣rified Christ, to bee made an high Priest. Priest. aLuk. 7.16. A great Prophet is risen up a∣mong us. Prophet, and aLuk. 1.33. He shall reigne for ever, over the house of Iacob. That is, over the whole Church of God: which was first confined with∣in Iacobs familie: and now into it all belee∣vers are adopted. King. He is a Priest, to make satis∣faction & intercession for us. Hee maketh satisfaction, by1. Pet. 2.24. His owne selfe bare our sinnes, in his owne body, on the tree. suffering the punishment of our sinnes: and byRom. 5.19. By the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. This one is Christ: the whole mul∣titude of beleevers in him, are made righte∣ous, by imputation of his righteousnesse. fulfilling, on our behalfe, all the righte∣ousnesse of the law. He maketh intercession, byHeb. 9.24. Christ is entred into heauen, to appeare in the presence of God for us, His appearing hath the force of an in∣treating. intreating God the Father to accept his satisfaction for us.
He is a Prophet,Ioh. 15.15. All things that I haue heard of my Father, I haue made knowne unto you. to teach us the will of God; and the meanes of salvation. He is a King, to governe us: and toIoh. 10.28. My sheepe shal never pe∣rish: none shall pluck thē out of my hand. keepe us in the way of salvation. Sect. 5. Of this Saviour, and of his salvation, we areIoh. 3.36. He that beleeueth on the Sonne, hath everla∣sting life. partakers by faith in him. Faith is a speciall grace of God, whereby weeIoh. 1.12. To as many as received him, he gave power to become the sons of God: even to thē that beleeue on his name. Here, the recei∣ving of Christ, is the same with beleeving on Christ. Therefore when hee is beleeved on, he is received. apply Christ to our selues: and are1. Ioh. 5.13. These things haue I writē unto you, that be∣leeue on the name of the Son of God, that yee may know, that yee haue eter∣nall life. assured, through his merits, of our eternall salvation. Sect. 6. They which beleeue in Christ, areAct. 13.39. By him all that beleeue, are justified. iustified, andAct. 15.9. By faith our hearts are purified. sanctified: and therefore en∣deavour to beIoh. 15.5. He that abideth in me — bringeth foorth much fruite. plentifull in all good workes.
Sect. 7. We must be carefull to use all good means, that faith may be wrought, and increased in us. The principall meanes are three: the hearing of the word of God, the receiving of the Sacraments, and Prayer. Wee must heare the word of God withAct. 15.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that shee attended unto the things which were spoken. diligent attenti∣on: and keepe it in our hearts byPsa. 1.1, 2. Blessed is the man that — doth meditate in the law of the Lord, day and night. continuall meditation. The Sacraments are holyRom. 4.11. Abra∣ham received the signe of circumcisi∣on, a seale of the righteousnes of faith. As circumcision was a signe of the Covenant of Grace, and a seale to assure the beleevers the remission of sinnes: so are the other Sacra∣ments. signes and seales, by which God declareth and sealeth, for the satisfaction of Christ, re∣mission of sinnes, and life ever∣lasting, to every beleever. There be two Sacraments Baptisme, and the Lords Sup∣per. Baptisme is a Sacrament,
whereby is sealed to us, ourCircumcision sealed to the people of Israel, that God for the merit of the promised seede would bee their God: and Baptisme, succee∣ding that Sacrament, sealeth the same to us. receiving into the Covenant of Grace, ourGal. 3.27. As ma∣ny as haue beene baptized into Christ, haue put on Christ. ingrafting into Christ, and ourTit. 3.5. God saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and re∣newing of the holy Ghost. regeneration by the holy Ghost. The Lords Supper is a Sa∣crament, whereby is sealed to us, the continuance and in∣creasing of the benefits con∣firmed by Baptisme. Namely our remaining in the Covenant of Grace: our further ingraf∣ting into Christ, and regenerati∣on by his Spirit: and so our nee∣rer union and communion with him. Foure things are required to the receiving of the Lords Supper. Knowledge of the Grounds of Religion:Exod. 12. The posts of every mans house were sprinkled with the blood of the Pas∣chall Lambe: So eve∣ry man must haue the satisfaction of Christ, by faith imputed to himselfe. This faith must shew it selfe in the fruits thereof. Faith in Christ: Repentance for our sinnes: Charitie to our neigh∣bours. Prayer is anPsal. 143.6. My soule thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land. earnest desire of aProv. 28.9. He that turneth away his eare from hearing the law, euen his prayer is abomination. converted heart to God,
according to his1. Ioh. 5.14. If wee aske any thing ac∣cording to his will, he heareth us. will, in theIoh. 16.26. Ye shall aske in my name. name of Christ, withMark. 11.24. What things soever ye de∣sire when ye pray, be∣leeue that ye receiue them. confi∣dence to be heard. Sect. 8. Having declared the estate of man in this life; what it was in his innocencie, and what it hath beene since his fall, both by nature, and by grace: I will also shew his estate after this life. THE estate of the dead is this. The soules of the godly are in heauen, inRev. 14 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord — that they may rest from there labours. blessed rest:Rev. 7.9, 10. A great multitude — stood before the throne — and cry∣ed-Salvation to our God — and unto the Lambe. praising God; andRev. 6.9, 10. The soules of them that were shine for the Word of God — cried—How long, Lord—doest thou not judge & avenge our blood. — de∣siring their perfect felicitie. The soules of the wicked are1. Pet. 3.19, 20. The spirits, which were disobedient in the daies of Noah, are in prison: So are the soules of all that haue died in their sinnes. imprisoned in hell: fee∣ling theLuk. 16.23, 24. The rich man in hell, being in tor∣ments, cried, I am tormented in this flame. horrour thereof; in
dreadfull expectation of the ful measure of their torments. Thus both remaine till the last judgement. Then, the dead shallIoh. 5.28, 29. All that are in the graues — shal come forth. rise, with theirIob 19.26, 27. In my flesh shall I see God: — Mine eyes shall behold him. — own bodies. The living shall be1. Cor. 15.51. Wee shall not all sleepe: but wee shall all bee changed. changed. And all shal2. Cor. 5.10. Wee must all appeare be∣fore the judgement seat of Christ: that every one may re∣ceiue — according to that hee hath done.— ap∣peare before Christ: and be judged according to their workes. After which, the godly shallMath. 25.34. Come yee blessed—inhe∣rite the kingdome prepared for you — Then, they shall bee Kings. inherite the kingdome of heauen. They shall haueRev. 21.3. God will dwell with men. ful communion with Christ: and with the Father, and the holy Ghost. There soules shall be indued with the1. Cor. 13.12. We shall see face to face. Evidently and clearely. The morall law, now impossible to our fallen nature, shall then be per∣fectly fulfilled. perfect knowledge, and loue of God. Their bodies shall beePhil. 3.21. Christ will change our vile body, that it may bee fashioned like unto his glorious body. like the glorious body of Christ. And all shall hauePsal 16.11. In thy presence is fulnesse of joy. ful∣nesse of ioy, for ever.
But the wicked shall be castLuk. 13.27: De∣part from me all yee workers of iniquitie. from God: intoIude vers. 13. The blacknesse of darke∣nesse. The greatest and thickest darkenesse. ex∣treame darkenesse, andDan. 12.2. Shame and everlasting con∣tempt. utter confusion; tormented in soule and body, in aRev. 21.8. The fearefull, and unbeleeving, and adhominable — shall haue there part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone. lake burning with fire and brimstone, forMath. 25.46. They shall goe into everla∣sting punishment. ever. FINIS.
