15111.3 99843856 8615
A PROPHESIE THAT HATH LYEN HID, ABOVE THESE 2000. yeares. WHEREIN IS DECLA∣RED ALL THE MOST PRINCIPALL matters that hath fallen out, in, and about the Ci∣uill and Ecclesiasticall Monarchie of Rome, from the rising of Iulius Caesar, to this present: and which are to be done from hence to the distruction of it, and what shall ensue after that. AS The liues and deaths of the Emperors. The rising of the Ecclesiasticall Monarchie. The storie of the greatest enemies of them both with manie other notable accurrences concer∣ning GERMANY, FRANCE, and SPAINE. With the inuasion of the Kings of the EAST. LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL FOSBROOKE, and are to be solde at the West-end of Paules Neere to the Bishop of Londons gate, 1610.
To the Reader. DEere Christian Rea∣der, thinke it not strange I pray thee, that Esdras the Scribe and Prophet of the Lord (in the prin¦cipallest of his bookes) should be so little regarded: Dani. 12.6.7.8 9.10. for Daniel the Prophet, prophecying of these times, foretelling the wonders that shold come to passe in them, sayeth,Esdras 12 37.38 That none of the wicked should haue vnderstanding, but the wise shall vnderstand: And therefore was Esdras commaunded to wright those visi∣on which he saw in a Booke and hide them, & teach them the wise of the people, whose hearts he knew were able to cō∣prehend the wayes of the highest: for as god himself doth not shew his secrets to the vnwise, Psal. 25.14. so no more would he haue the wise to whome he sheweth thē) to teach them but to the wise, least the vnwise, not being ca∣pable, should spurne and barke against it: wherefore he sayeth, Math. 7 6.giue not holy things to dogges, neither cast ye your pearles before the Swine. &c. And as wisedome is iustified of her Children, Math. 11.19. on∣ly because it is wisedome, and for no other respecte, so the vnwise resist it, because their tongues cannot taste it, nor their stomackes digest it, 1. Cor. 2 14.15. it being hea∣uenly
and they earthly, who iudge things by earth∣ly reason. Therefore hath God seene it good to lock vp, and hide his treasures and richest iewels, in most secret places, that the dilligent searchers for wise∣dome might onely finde them out, and that fooles might be fooles as they please to be, Prou. 2.3.4.5. though wise in their owne conceits. The Booke of Wisedome which hath it name ac∣cording to it nature; who knoweth not with what vehemency it is resisted, although it be the very flood of Salomons wisdome. If Iohn, The greatest that was borne of women, Math. 11 and Christ his Lord the bride∣groome, were iudged (of the vnwise children) to be possest of diuels, what maruell though Salomon and Esdras with other prophets and righteous men, be blasphemously delt withall? But the principall cause pretended is, for that it was not found compiled with other scriptures in the Hebrew tongue, for which cause they may aswell exclude some part of Daniel, and the greatest part of the new Testament: but they say it is full of lyes, and was neuer cannonized: darst thou say so? Because the wisedome of the vnwise neuer cannonis'd it, did the children of wisedome therefore neuer approue it? If all be current that hath bene cannonized, Then many deuils shall goe to heauen, & much falsehood shall stand for truth: and if all be lyes that is not can∣nonized, then much truth shall perish, and many Saints goe to hell: For some of the Epistles of the Apostles, As the second Epistle of Peter, and the two
last Epistles of Iohn, Iames, and Iudes Epistles were for a long time not receiued generally, and many hundred Saints were neuer cannonized, By the Church of Rome. wheras ma∣ny vncleane lyers and murth erers were: and darest thou blaspheme the truth and accuse it of lies for these causes? If Charity did rule thy heart, and wis∣dome gouerne thy minde, thou wouldest labour to reconcile it with the other scriptures, which, if men be so disposed, they may also cauill against. But let men take heede what they doe, let them not con∣demne that they know not, nor call that a lye which they vnderstand not. If I should say Saint Iohn spake vnaduisedly, when he sayeth, Iohn 21.25. (There are also many things that Iesus did, which if they had bene all written, I suppose the world could not containe the bookes) did I not belye the holy Apostle? If time prooue that to be of God which I in my ignorant boldnes, blaspheme and speake against, shall I escape vnpunished by that truth? let me therefore take heede and feare, and as I may not take vpon me to affirm that I know not, so let me take heede that I condemne not that which I conceiue not; especially such holy writings wherein such great wisedome doth consist, least for a words sake that I vnderstand not, I depriue my selfe of a great benefit that I might enioy. For if time prooue it to be of God (as sure it will) what shall I then excuse my selfe withall? was not the Reuelation of Saint Iohn doubted of (by many) a great while, & is it not now receiued as a most deuine Prophecy,? So shal it be fnd in time, that none of al the Prophets
of ould, did excell this Prophet Esdras, nor see more secrets, nor prophecie more plainely of Iesus Christ, and of the misteries of the Gospell then he. And also greater wisedome is not to be found in all Salomons writings, then is in the book of Wisedome so much condemned, why should we not iustifie the truth for it owne sake, and not shake it off, and take it vp, vpon such colde and weake occasions? If the maiesty and truth of the other Scriptures did not plead for it selfe, Time also bringing foorth all the Hebrues, Grecians, Latinists, and Cannonisers in the world could neuer make it good therfore let truth speake, and wisdome vtter her voyce, and let time bring foorth as they haue euer done, and for∣bid them not, and if thou be one of wisedomes chil∣dren, receiue it. And although there be too many that dooth take vpon them to discouer prophecies, whose false∣hoods time will discouer, yet there is a worke which is of God, and that shall stand mauger the spight of all it enemies: and let them that dare so boldly rage and rayle against it, knowe, that when the day doth declare it, they shall be ashamed, and wish they had held their tongues. Thus I thought good to aduertise thee by the way, least at the first sight of enuied Esdras, thou shouldst be dismayed: Enuied (I say) by enuious spirits, but approued of God and of his holy ones. I will say no more for him at this time, he is at hand, let him now speake for himselfe. FINIS.
The contents of the Prophecie. 1 THe liues and deaths of the Empe∣rors. 2. The rysing of the Ecclesiasti∣call Monarchie. 3. The storie of the greatest enemies of them both, with their principall actions, and of their ouerthrow and ends. 4. Of the three kingdomes, Germanie, France and Spaine, Roomes long approoned trusty friends, and their seuerall ends & destruction. 5. And how that Roome shall be burnt with fire, and when: 6. The earth refreshed, and Israell restored to life. 7. The comming downe of the Turke and his Army vpon Christendome, till fire come downe from heauen vpon them. Ierem: 20.10. For I haue heard the raylings of many, and how they watch for my halting, saying, it may be that he is deceiued.
A DISCOVERYE OF A PROPHESIE. Esdras 4. Chap 11. Then I sawe a dreame. AFTER this, the Prophet saw a vision, concerning the begin∣ning, continuance, & fall of th'Empire and supremacie of Rome. And this vision was shewed him in the dayes of Artaxerxes King of Persia, about 400. yeares before the first stone of her Empire was laide. Iu. Cesar. And behold, there arose from
the Sea an Eagle. And there arose among the Nations, the fierce and fearefull Kingdome and Empire of Rome, seene in vision by the Prophet Da∣niel, some few yeares before. Which had 12. feathered winges. Wherein should arise and reigne 12. Em∣perors, which should spred their power like winges ouer all the earth, in great feare sit∣ting on it. And it seemed good vnto the Pro∣phet to touch by an intellection these 12. only, both for they are a Iewrye sufficient to ar∣gue the whole suite of Emperors which did arise & raigne in her: as also because they on∣ly were natiue Romans, descended of the Iulij, Seruij, Saluij, Flauij, &c. vnlike therein vnto the rest, which were all (or almost all) like changeable stuffe of diuers colours, so of diuers Nations. Their rising, continuance, and end, is toucht in their proper place. And three heads. Her three heads are three Kingdomes,
fore-ordained to vpholde and maintaine the power of her pride, when all her winges and feathers should faile her. And are reserued to execute her last will, and finishe her fune∣rals, as shalbe hereafter more at full decla∣red. And I saw, and beholde, she spread her winges ouer all the earth, & all the winds of the ayre gathered themselues and blew on her. By the windes, are meant her prosperous and happie successe in all her proceedings. And of necessitie it must goe well with her, whom euery winde doth blowe to good. Witnes the limits of her territories, from Ganges to Gades, and from the Scythian Sea vnto the Cape of Hope: as testifieth one of her own, which saith: that she extended her tents, to the borders of the Ocean, and the feare of her name vnto the heauens. And I saw, that out of her fethers grew vp other contrarie fethers,
but they became litle fethers and small. And the Prophet saw, that among the Princes and gouernors which ruled in her, there arose and grew vp certain Kings, which were contrary vnto her, marking such as in∣tended to roote vp the crown and dignitie of her Empire, to plant themselues therin, & their house for euer. But their thoughts preuailed not, for as the verse concludeth, their power waned, and they perished like the rest: what those contrary Kings were; their number, names, attempts and end, shalbe de∣liuered in their place. But her heads rested, and the head in the midst was greater thē th'other heads, yet rested it with them. But the three kingdomes fore-apointed t'accomplish & finish the wickednes of this great Citie, were quiet and at rest, as not yet (during the reigne of her fethers) conceaued and brought forth. And the Prophet ob∣serued that th'oue of those Kings was greater in power then both his fellowes, yet rested it
with them. Concerning these three Kings, their names, their greatnes, and al that ap∣pertaineth, shal be spoken in due place. Then I saw, and behold, the Eagle flew with her fethers, and reigned vpon earth and ouer them that dvvelt therin. And I savv that all things vn∣der heauen vvere subiect vnto her, and no man spake against her, no not one creature vpon earth. And the Prophet beheld, that this proud citie flew with her Emperors and Legions ouer all her neighbors, subiecting all the dwellers on earth vnder her, in such sort, as there was not a Natiō or People to be found vnder heauen, that was not either rooted out by her, or inforced to receiue their Go∣uernors from her. And I savv that the Eagle stood vp vpon her clavves, and spake
to her feathers saying: VVatch not altogether, sleep euery one in his ovvn place, and vvatch by course. But let the heads be preser∣ued for the last. And the Prophet obserued, that this power∣ful Citie, in the daies wherein (ouergorged with pride) she stood vpon terms of her coun∣sell and armes, tooke such order (for in euill she was very methodicall) that her Kings and Kaysers, should neither sleep nor watch, that is neither perish nor rule all at once, but rise in a successiue course, as in the verses fol∣lowing is manifested. And she further com∣manded that the three last Kingdomes, or∣dained to conclude the number of her sinnes, should take their ease and not awake, till their time appointed. Neuerthelesse, I savve that the voice vvent not out of her heads but from the middest of her bo∣dye. As hee that vndertakes a dangerous leape
doth first retire, the better to aduance his strength: so to bound fairlye ouer the dacke vnderstanding of these words, we must of ne∣cessitie looke backe & carry before vs the true birth and perfect nature of this Empire: which the Prophet Daniel in his vision de∣signeth vnder the forme of a ten-horned beast, signifying thereby, that it should be a power vpheld by a succession of many Kinges: for the hornes betoken Kings, and the number of 10. comprehends all, be they neuer so ma∣ny, as all numbers are contained vnder 10. or made of their reduplication be they neuer so infinit. And addeth further, that his teeth were of iron, his nails of brasse, inferring ther∣by, the vnresistable force of his legions and Leaders. And proceding saith, that there arose amongst his Kings, one of an excee∣ding strange nature, signifying by that one, a strange race and succession of Princes, far differing in shape and forme of regiment from al their predecessors, obtaining dominion not by iron teeth and brasen nails, as did th' Em∣perors which arose before them, but by disceit and by a mouth which spake presumptuous things against the most High, blaspheming his name, his Tabernacle, & them that dwel in heauen, who by a hidden & vnknown force, should subdue the third part of the world, mea∣ning, al Europe with her Princes. By which
deliniation, it is euident, that the holy-Ghost accounteth the chalenged prerogatiue & su∣premacie of Rome, all one power, all one Em∣pire, whether it obtaine the spoile by force, or by fraud, that is, by power of Emperors, or crast of Popes, Cha. 7.24 who should be far vnlike them, as Daniel himselfe saith: And he shall be vnlike to the first. Meaning in forme of clai∣ming, obteining & maintaining Iurisdiction, not in pride, purpose and determination. So as we may beholde such an vnlikely likenes betweene them, as was betweene the two Sisters, of whome it is said, —facies non omnibus vna, nec diuersa tamen, qualem decet esse Sororum. And thus much concerning the Prophet Daniels description of the Empire of Rome: whence we note, that the same power which Daniel there describeth by a beast with horns, teeth and nails: our Prophet here doth de∣liniate by an Eagle, with wings, fethers and heads: whose imperiall winges after they were so clipt, as she could no longer fly ouer all in her proper colours, and stile of Roma tri∣omfante: deuised how by disceit she might vphold her throne (for to be high was all her care) and found nothing so fit as to dis∣guise her selfe, & chalenge prelation vnder the maske of Roma la Santa. And this is it which this Verse teacheth, that when the sinfull
Citie saw her feathers so pluckt, as the feare of her armes and forces, might no longer flye into al kingdoms, commanding them vn∣der the paine of Imperium Romanum: Lying by meanes of this distres, verye weake and in danger of falling, her counsell and bodie politique, deuised by lyes and witch-crafte (wherein was all her pleasure from her youth) to restore the supremacye and honor of her name, vnder the colour of Ecclesia Dei. Wherin this race of presumptuous horns excelled the sinne of all the hornes that fore∣time ruled in her, for they, as in whom Satan dwelt but literally, did but in open hostilitie fight against the highest, setting before him a god made of a wicked man, whose fathers bloud cryeth out for vengeance night and daye, whose bedfellow was & Soror & cōiux, and whose wife was id quod dicere nolo. But this race of presumptuous and deceitfull Kinges, as in whome Satan dwelleth spiri∣tuallye, in a hidden treasure of blasphemy, sets vp the Highest against himselfe, and vnder the visar of the Church, and the name of God, blasphemeth his Sanctuary, and the Lord thereof. No meruaile then, tho she and Syon be at ods, for as golde can bodye it selfe with any mettall liquifiable, latten excepted, which notwithstanding in outward face and shew of all mettals is most like vnto it: so, no
Church is more capitall enemie to the true Church, then shee, who in outward gesture, grace and countenance, is likest like the chast and virgin spouse, and is indeed a whore. Then I numbred her contrary fethers, and behold they were eight of them. In the third verse of this Chapter, the Pro∣phet made mention of these contrary fethers, which in their thoughts conspirde to raise their house with the ruins of Rome. And heere proceedeth more perticularly to declare their number, foretelling there should be eight of them, whom we will heere call out by name that if occasion serue, wee maye the better knowe them. The first were Mest∣gothes, vnder the leading of Alaricus. The second Hunns, whose King was Attalas. The third Vandals, their head, Genserick. The fourth Odoacer. The fift East-gothes, their chiefe, Theodorick. The sixt Totilas, bred in Spaine, with such followers as for those times that Country yelded. The seuenth Longobards, with their guid Alboinus. The eight and last, a home conspiracie, more to be fear'd (as all included diseases are most dan∣gerous) then all the rest.
And altho many others besides these, as Radagaise, the Alani now called Almans, the Burgonians conducted by Gundibald, the Vngers, Saracens, &c. were all in their time as costly enemies to the Empire as some of these, yet none did humble the great Citie, the mo∣ther of wickednes but these eight only. And therefore the rest may not be allowed to sit at this table, but may serue to iustifie the iudge∣ment of the Beast, which was thus wounded againe and stricken of all, as she had woun∣ded and stricken all. And if in reading doubt arise, how these eight fethers may be contrary to the Eagle, that is, resisters of her power and dominion, and yet be fethers of the Eagle, that is, main∣teiners of the same: The answer is, that they were aduersaries and contrary vnto her, as she stood vpon termes of Imperium orbis terrae: but after she had changed her coppie, and claimed supremacie vnder the cloake of Mater Ecclesia, they were for the most main∣teiners of her pride, and became drunke also with her worship, as other Kings and Prin∣ces of th'earth. And thus much for their number, and names, their seuerall attempts, their prospe∣rities and ende, shalbe presented in their place.
After this I saw, and beholde vpon the right side there arose one fether, and raigned ouer all the earth. This fether here described is the first of the twelue, namely Iulius Caesar, who (like an ill interpreter) translated Senatum Populum∣que Romanum, into Caesarem Augustum. Whose Image, which in this verse is so liuely resembled, consisteth of 2. features: the first, sheweth the manner of his rising, in these words. And behold, vpon the right side there arose one feather. Which serue in stead of art, to discouer the very true lines, and cast of his happines. For the house of Cornelij was as eloquent as he, and Marius doubtles as good a leader as he, and Catilin as nobly borne as he, and all these arose t'inuade the common-wealth, and to translate it into a Kingdome as well as he, but none of them rose on the right side but he. And thus much for the manner of this speech; so we take this with-all, that these words (right side) in their naturall and pro∣per intent, do signifie (as through all this
Chapter) the surest and strongest side. The second feature in this resemblance to be obserued, is his power, set forth in these words. And he reigned ouer all the earth. For after he had subdued France, broken the heart of Germany, made his name knowē to England, be returned into Italie, ouerthrew the great Protector of the libertie Sr. Pompey and his host, in the fields of Pharsalie. And like the fire of heauen (as one of her Pocts saith) with such celeritie drew after the reli∣ques of that stricken faction, both in Africa & Spaine, that in two yeares space he brought to pas, that nether citie nor creature durst open against him: which done, he ascended in∣to Italie, and tooke vpon him as Lord thereof, triumphing in the spoiles of the world, and the blood of his Country. And knowing that the name of a King (which he so much affected) was odious to the quality and nature of that People: inua∣ded the gouernment vnder the maske of a perpetual Dictator, preseruing therunder (for he was wise aboue all the fethers) some hope of recouering their late slaine liberty, but indeed establishing a kingdome from which it could neuer redeeme it selfe againe.
And when it had reigned the end of it came, and the place thereof appeered no more. But this new-borne prosperitie (as is the nature of all this worldes felicitie) lasted but a while; for in the third yeare of his Dic∣tatorship, he was slaine in the Senat, by the conspiration of 24. of whom the most both in his own (so dangerous is the name of trust) and other mens opinions, were thought his chiefest frendes. And thus was this fether blowen awaye, after it had inioyed his plea∣sure 56. yeares, and raigned 3. A man for let∣ters, armes and counsell, famous far aboue all his succeeders, and in discreete bounty, and Princely clemencie (rare vertues in such a fortune) without controuersie, surpassing all Princes made of earth. So the next stoode vp and rei∣gned, and it continued a long time, but after it had reigned his end also came, and as the first it appeered no more.
Next after him arose Octauius, the ado∣pted sonne of Iulius: otherwise also neere him in blood, as being the sonne of his neece Accia, who hauing taken reuenge vpon the mur∣therers of his father, and obtained in all his warres, forreine and at home: triumphed Lord ouer all, adding to his fathers pompe (which he had bought so deer) the honors of Parens Patriae, and Augustus. And this fether continued (as the Prophet saw) a long time, for it reigned Triumuir with Anthonie and Lepidus two yeares, and as Duumuir with Anthonie alone ten yeare, and then deuouring his fellow in a Sea-fight at Actium, reigned all alone 44. yeares. But after it had reigned, his end also came, and as the Prophet concludeth) he discended like the first, and appeered no more. For by the treason of Liuia his wife, impatient to tarie th'inthronizing of her sonne (as is the nature of ambition the nerer the goale, the faster it runnes) his lingring soule was taken from him at Nola, in the 70. and sixth yeare of his transgression, when he had reigned 20. lesse. Then there came a voice vn∣to it, and said. Hear thou that hast kept the
earth so long, this I say vnto thee, before thou beginst t'appeere no more. Ther shal none after thee at∣taine vnto thy time, nor yet to the halfe thereof. That we may know ther is no God like vnto the Highest, who only holdeth the mea∣sures and times of all thinges in his hand, the Prophet foresheweth, that none of the twelue should continue like to Octauius, nor yet attaine vnto halfe his time: which accor∣ding to the word of the Lord was accompli∣sbed: for his sonne Tiberius of all the rest rei∣gned longest, and longer by eight yeares then any of the rest, and yet could not attaine to halfe the time of his father, which descended before him. That God only might be honoured in all his workes, and iustified when he speaketh. Then arose the third, and rei∣gned as th'other afore, and it ap∣peered no more also.
Then stept vp Tiberius, and reigned in great abhomination, as did his fathers before him, but after a while he discended also, and appee∣red no more. He all his skill in sortilege and wisdome mathematicall, wherunto he had sold himselfe from his youth, could either fore∣tell or fore-warne him of Caius his nephew, by whome he was poysoned, in the 70. and 8. yeare of his mortalitie, and three and twen∣tith of his raigne. And so came it to all th'o∣thers, one after an other, so that euery one reigned, and then ap∣peered no more. In like sort (saith the Prophet) did all the rest which of the 12. remained, successiuely rise, reigne, and perish. Of whome the first, Caligula. in blasphemy excel∣ling, was murthered by the Captaine of his guard, after he had sat in the chaire of the scornefull 29. yeares, and in the throne of his fathers almost 4. The second, only wise in euill, Claudius. was poyso∣ned by his incestuous wife his neece Agrip∣pina, in the 64. yeare of his filthines, and 14.
of his reigne. The third, Nero. a monster, deformed in life, in mariage, and end: his life scornefull to the height of his fathers, his mariage thrice more detestable, his end more vnnaturall then any of theirs: for after he had reigned in sinne fourteene yeares, and sinne in him eighteene more, fel by his own sword into the graue of his fathers, and in him descended the house of the Iulij. The fourth was of an other extraction, Galba. but not of a better, descended of the antient familie of the Sulpitij, rose vp late, but pe∣rished early: for he was 60. and 3. yeares olde before he tasted the Empire, which he got and lost in 7. moneths. The fifth likewise of a new house, Otho. but of the old building, got possession by the bloud of his Predecessor, and by spilling his owne in three moneths and od daies, lost it againe, after he had walkte in the abhomination of his fathers, eight and thirtie yeares. The sixt also, Vitellius. was new and olde, in no∣thing (saue gluttony) excelling his fellowes, in life and death like filthie: descended in the eight moneth of his tyrannie, after he had wearied himselfe in the pleasures of Capri∣neum (where first his youth was branded) 7. and 50. yeares. After him arose the seuenth, Vespatian. who bought
the crowne with the bloud of his M. and ware it in base couetousnes ten yeares, but then was likewise blowen down, hauing full∣fild the pleasures of 59. more. The eight was he which executed the ven∣geance due to the great murtherers, Titus. the earthly Hierusalem: who in the 40. yeare of his pleasure, after he had reigned 2. yeares and so many moneths, was also blowen down, not without the suspected treason of his brother, and successour. The ninth and last, Domitian and (if it were possible) the worst of all, who after he had reigned in the lust of his Fathers 15. yeares, and liued therein 30. more, was murthered by the Gen∣tlemen of his chamber, and beaten downe after the rest which descended before him. So that euerie one of them (as this verse Pro∣phested) reigned, and then appeered no more. Then I looked and behold in processe of time, the fethers that followed stood vp on the right side, that they might rule also, & some of them ruled, but within a while they appeered no more.
And the Prophet obserued and saw (after the twelue were descended) the Emperors that followed to rise, that they might rule also; and as many of them as rose on the right side, that is: in the strength and power of the twelue, did in their place (according to the proclamation published in the eight verse) spred their winges and reigne also, as Nerua. Traian. Adrian. Antoninus. Marcus. Commodus. Pertinax. Iulian. Seuerus. Caracalla. Macrinus. Heliogabalus. Alexander. Maximinus. And the rest, to the third Valentinian. In whose daies, the power of the Eagle was so wounded, by th'incursion and saccage of the two first contrary fethers, that she could neuer after recure her selfe again but lay sicke and kept the chamber some ten genera∣tions, which also lasted but twice so many yeares, to the rising of Momillus in whome
descended all that was left of the Empire, name, and tittle for euer. So that all the fethers which the Prophet beheld in processe of time to follow the 12. and in their strength, their sinne and crueltie, to defile the earth: namely from Domitian, to the third Valentinian, were 50. and 3. Kings. All which in a while (as this verse conclu∣deth) vanished like the 12. and appeared no more. And some of them were set vp, but ruled not. As, Vindex. Piscenius Niger. Albinus. Diadumenus. Maximus. Balbinus. 30. Tirants. Firmus. Saturninus. Proculus. Bonosus. Aper. Eugenius. Quintillus. Rufinus.
Constantinus non Magnus. Heraclianus, and others, as in the descri∣ption of times, may more plainly appeare. After this I looked, and be∣holde, the twelue fethers appee∣red no more. Vnder the 12. winges or fethers (for both betoken one) are comprehended by an intel∣lection (as in the first verse) all, which in the strength of the twelue followed, from Domi∣tian to the third Valentinian, who perished in the yeare 455. after he had reigned 30. and liued 5. more. And thus according to promise made in the first verse, is presented a tragicall succes∣sion of all the Eagles winges, from her first fether Iul. Caesar, in whome the power of her pride began, to the third Valentinian, with whome it ended: who after they had shewed themselues, and trodden down the earth 500. & 30. yeares, they departed for euer the stage of this world, and all their pompe and glorie descended, and appeered no more. And here my pen like to the earth which being deliuered from her oppressors, did thirst to be refreshed: so hauing ouercome this part of her taske, did think to and some ease, but
in their hopes they are both deceiued, for after the Eagles fethers decended, the sorrowes of the earth increased more and more, and ther arose (as seldome comes the better) a race of Sodomiticall, and vnnaturall Kings, who vnder the visar of Successors to Peter, and vicars to the Lamb, so far excelled the whor∣domes of their fathers the Emperors (whose Vicars and Successors indeed they are) that they inforced the Highest, to poure his deter∣mined vengeance, vpon the children of men. Who according to the iudgement fore-de∣nounced by his seruant Iohn, Reuel. 16. Poured out his wrath vpon the Sea, that it became like to the blood of the dead: that is to say, vpō the great Citie and Empres of the world, by scourge after scourge (as how often and greuous in the vew of her contrary fethers may appeere) so at the the full auenging himselfe, that there was not a drop of Roman blood to be founde on earth, these many hundreth yeares. And as the defection and vncleannes was generall, so was the punishment: for (as the Apostle in the same chapter prophesieth) The wrath of the highest, Reuel. 16 was poured out vpon the riuers and fountaines likewise, and they were turned into blood also, that is: vpon all Peo∣ple and Nations whatsoeuer, in such sort, as ther is not a kingdome this day on earth to be
found, that hath not bin (since the rising of the beast) cut downe by sword, and yeelded her stock to strange griffes, as by the bloody Registers of euery perticular Nation doth so cleerly appeere, as if it were written with the beames of the Sunne. And as the dayes were euill aboue mea∣sure, so they exceeded in darknes & ignorance: that my pen hath no lesse trouble, to be de∣liuered of the rest of her labor, then had the then-dwellers on-earth, to indure the paines of their oppression and trauell: but to take into my way againe, the Prophet addeth. Nor the two winges. Figuring by the two winges, the two first contrary fethers, Alaricus, and Attalas. The first arose in the 19. of Honorius, pre∣decessor to the third Valentinian: And was the first that slewe the great Citie, the mur∣therers of all the world, measuring her by fa∣min, sworde, and fire: according to the square whereby shee had iudged others almost 12. hundreth yeares. Which wofull end (or ra∣ther beginning of her wofull end) made a certaine antient friend of hers, bewailing the night wherein shee was smitten, to crye, Hierom.Nocte Moab capta est, nocte cecidit murus eius, quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando
explicet? And when this feather had thus troden downe the pride of the Eagle, in the yeare 410. a 1157. yeares after Romulus had raised her walles, with the blood of his bro∣ther: proceeded to rip vp her bowels, spoi∣ling and burning her principall partes, La∣tium, Campania, Apulia, Lucania, Calabria, where raging in his highest thoughtes, deui∣sing now to spred his glory ouer all, was by suddeine death blowen away, and his place appeered no more. Th'other arose in the 27. of the third Va∣lentinian, in greater feare then did the first, deuouring at his entrance all that rest of Italie which Alaricus had left vneaten, Aqui∣leia, Verona, Mantua, Cremona, Brixia, Con∣cordia, with all the now territorie of Venice: but by the cunning dealing of the deceitfull King, whose name was then Pope Leo, was intreated to sel the great Citie, and to depart Italie, which he left as a wast, stinking in her fierie ruins, & so repassing the Danube, retur∣ned into his Scythia againe: where the yeare following in top of his fulnes, was in a night found strangled in his owne blood, wherein∣to he was disolued, by the intemperate vse of a wedding feast, and a new spouse. And thus perished this sonne of Mundzuc∣cus, the scourge of God, and terror of men (for so he called himselfe) and which not only
the fiers of Italie, but his very shape may well iustifie: for he is described a man of litle sta∣ture, square set, great head, litle eyes, thin hair'd, thinner bearded, a nose great and pro∣minent, his colour foule and gypson-like. And ther was no more vpon the Eagles body, but two heads that rested and six winges. And ther were no more triumphing fethers to be found on her, for all her glorious power was decended to two weak and feeble heads, which for they reigned not in the strength of their predecessors, the Prophet daineth not to call ruling fethers, but resting heads. Martian.Th'one slept in th'east at Constantinople, whom Genserick the third contrary fether, not long before had dishonorably taken pri∣soner. Valentin.Th'other in the west at Rauenna, taken with such a Lethargy, that he neither heard nor felt the Massacre of Vngarie, committed by Hunns: nor the loud and pitifull crie of his cheefest Prouinces, Spaine and Africa, de∣uoured by Gothes and Vandals; nor the teares and deepe lament of Gaule and Britanie, ouerflowen with Franks and Angles, people
from beyond the Rhene, who not only with their blood and posteritie, but with their name also haue stain'd both kingdomes to this day. So as the Prophet well conclu∣deth, ther was no more to be found vpon the Eagles bodie, but these two drowsie heads, which refted, and six contrary fethers, viz. Genserique. 1 Odoacer. 2 Theodorick. 3 Totilas. 4 The Longobards. 5 And th'intestine faction. 6 of which, in the verses following. Then saw I also, the two winges deuided them-selues frō the six, and remained vnder the head that was vpon the right side, but the foure continued in their place. And the Prophet saw, that two of the six de∣uided thē-selues in counsell & manner of pro∣ceeding, frō th'other foure: for wheras the four sought to be Lords of Rome in fee, resoluing
in their thoughts, t'extinguish the name and maiestie of her Empire for euer, these 2. were of an other minde, for they agreed to re∣maine vnder the countenance and fauour of the Eagles right head, contented to weare a crowne tho with leaue of it: meaning by the right head th'east Empire, so called, in re∣gard it was far stronger in power then the west: whose broad-spreading honor (as in the verse fore-going) was now become a starueling, onlie his name and appellation continued some ten successions, viz. 1 Valentinian. 2 Maximus. 3 Auitus. 4 Maiorianus. 5 Seuerus. 6 Anthemius. 7 Olybrius. 8 Glycerius. 9 Iulius Nepos. 10 Momyllus. Which all also vanished (as before is toucht) in 20. yeares. And the Eagles pompe which was at full in Augustus, was enterred with Augustulus (for so was Momyllus called) and with him descended the name and title of Imperium Romanum for euer. And the two winges thus deuided in pol∣licie from the foure, were Genserick and
Theodorick. Of which the first, trained into Italie by treason of the Empres, entred Rome 43. yeares after she had bin hūbled by the Gothes, and led into captiuitie all her treasor, and (as is the fatall reward of such offenders (the traitres also her-selfe. And after 14. daies thus loaden, departed into his Africa againe: wher-ouer he reigned in peace and pleasure 51. yeares. Th'other, hauing obtained of th'East∣head the scepter of Italie, according to his patent proceeded, and got it by Conquest from Odoacer. But after he had reigned ther∣ouer 30. yeares, descended also, leauing his fame and kingdome to his posteritie, hauing fullfild his pleasures two and fortie more. But this counsell pleased not th'other 4. for as the verse concludeth, they remained in other thoughts: drifting in their place to rise and reigne, without leaue or licence of any. So I looked, and beholde, the vnder-winges thought to set vp them-selues, and to haue the rule.
And as the Prophet beheld the foure con∣trary fethers which were left, he saw how they also stroue in their hearts to establish them-selues, but like a dreame their pur∣pose vanished, in the next immediate verses following. Then was ther one set vp, but shortlye it appeered no more. Then arose Odoacer, the first of the foure: leading a people begotten in the bowels and inmost parts of the North, who hearing of the deuided and weak estate of the Empire, was encouraged to moue from beyond the Danube, in much feare and blood descended into Italie, slew her last Lord and Emperor Momyllus Augustulus, destroyed the name of her Consuler dignitie, and blotted out for euer the memory of her holy Senat, the murthe∣rer of Romulus their first King, and Iulius their first Keyser: And not daring as base be∣gotten, to put on the presence and stile of an Emperor (which name this fether fatallie re∣sisted) contented him-selfe with the title of King of Italie. But his glory indured not, for after he had reigned eighteene yeares, Theodorick (as in
the 24. verse) tooke his kingdome from him by force, and his life by fraude: and he descen∣ded, and appeered no more. And the second, was sooner gone then the first. After him arose Totilas the second fether of the foure, by birth a Spaniard, by blood a West-gothe, (whose fearefull fires burne in Rome to this day) but these daies were more in trouble, and (as the Prophet fore-saw) in number fewer then Odoacers: from his first rising alway in armes, and after many hopes and as many dispaires, was at last put to flight by Narses, whom the East head had made gouernor of Italie, and flying was wounded so deadlye, that assone as he gat his Inne he lost his life, after he had worne the crowne (if to fight for a crowne be to weare a crowne) 11. yeares. Then I beheld, and loe the two that remained, did thinke also in them-selues to reigne. So as of all th'eight, ther remained but the Longobards, and th'intestine faction: which
thought also in them-selues to reigne. The first inflamed by the letters of Narses, and with the goodnes of Italie, left their northern dennes, and like a fearefull storme fell down vpon it, and in two yeares ouer∣threw it, crowning their leader Alboinus, King thereof at Milan: who after he had spred him-selfe ouer the great Citie, and ouer all her Italie three yeares and a halfe, was murthered by the treason of Rosimond his wife, leauing his kingdome but not his honor to his successors, who possessed it for 24. gene∣rations. The eight and last, and of all other the most dangerous, was a home conspiracie, plotting to raise from the dead, the antient long-before buried gouernment of Rome, te reedifie her S.P.Q.R. And to root out the Priestly prehe∣minence and Church-superiority, which had so cunningly eaten and destroyed the seculer: Which faction after it had taken fire in the hearts of many, and secretly burned a long time, at length brake out, like the fury and violence of a risen stream, so as it might not be quencht, but with much blood and exceeding labor, as in the one & thirteth verse appeereth. But whilst they so thought, beholde ther awaked one of the
heads that were at rest, which was in the midst, for that vvas greater then the tvvo And whilst they thus thought, beholde there awaked one of the three Kingdomes, appointed to finish and end the wickednes of the Eagle, figuring by this resting head, the new West-Empire, which title of suprema∣cie the Beast bestowed (as hath bin alwaies his practise to runne with the strongest) vpon Charles King of France, and sonne to Pepin the traiter. This head is said to be awaked, when it was first raysed, which was in the yeare 801. wherein it receaued his augustal robe his crowne, and stile, viz. Carolo Augu∣sto a Deo coronato, magno & pijssimo Impera∣tori Romanorum, vita & victoria. And the title of dignitie Imperiall, which had laien dead aboue 300. yeares, was in this yeare on Christmas day, thus raised vp to life againe, to the end it might defend the proceedings of the great adulteres and murtheres of the earth, as by the forme of othe exhibited at his consecration appeereth: In nomine Christi spondeo, atque polliceor ego A. Imperator, coram Deo & beato Petro Apostolo, me prote∣ctorem, ac defensorem fore huius Sanctae Rom. Ecclesiae, in omnibus vtilitatibus, quatinus di∣uino
fultus fuero adiutorio, pro-ut sciero, po∣teroque. In that this head is said to be in the mi∣dest, is ment, that it should be chosen from a∣mong the Nations and Kingdomes of the earth, as by experience hath bin proued: first from France, then from diuers kingdomes and parts of Germany, where it still remaineth. And that the feare and power of this head hath bin greater, then any other Christian King or Kingdome whatsoeuer, is it not suffi∣ciently read in the particular registers of e∣uery Nation? And I sawe, that the two heades were ioyned there∣with. By the two heads, are shadowed the two Kingdomes of France and Spaine, whose vn∣halowed leage the Prophet fore-seeing saith: they shuld be ioyned with this middle-head, and like three parts in one, accord and agree together, to humble themselues, their autho∣ritie, and power before the Beast, and for their Idol-shepheard should fight against the Highest, till by the breath of his mouth they be scattered, like the dust which the winde disperseth.
And these ar the 3. heads mentioned in the first, fourth, and ninth verses of this chapter: and are therefore said to finish and determine the last end and wickednes of the whore, be∣cause tho all other Kingdomes hate her and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, as England, and others haue done: yet these three heads shall loue her still, and to their dying day shall burne in delight with her, but when those three and euery of them, shall also forsake her, ther shall not be found ether kingdome or creature vnder heauen, that shall fall down and worship her. And behold, the middle head was turned with them that were turned with it, and did eat vp the two vnder winges vvhich thought to reigne. And the Prophet saw this middle head (the head of euill,) impart his felowship to all Princes and Kingdomes, which desired to be in leage with it. But my taske which hasteth to an end, will not suffer me now, and here, to sound this gulfe of Santa Liega suffiseth that for Syons sake the Prophet passing by, doth
point therat. And the Prophet beheld, that this middle head did deuoure & eat vp the vnder winges, namely, the power of the Longobards and the intestine faction, which thought also to reigne. The first by the sword of Charles, surna∣med (for his exceeding power) the great, who at the command of Babylon his god, ascen∣ded into Italie, took her King Desiderius pri∣soner, and led him capture into France, and gaue his Kingdome to an other. And thus vanished this seuenth contrarye feather, after it had humbled the whore, and spred it selfe ouer all her quarters 200. and 4. yeares, and the feare thereof discended, and it appeared no more. Th'other, first began in the daies of Cono the Emperor, who hauing an action of con∣trary opinion, against Gregory the second (for so the Beast was then called) followed it so hotly, that he brought his holines into such disgrace, as that he kindled a desire in the hearts of many, to change their Prelat for a Prince, and to edifie their first and an∣tient forme of gouernment againe. This desire thus begun, by time (as naturally all conspiration doth) gathered strength, and ad∣uentured (but some-what to yong) to check the Beast, who by reason he was so well
guarded by his foresaid head and champion Charles, easily neckt it. Notwithstanding some 100. and 50. yeares after, this vleer now growen to a riper head, vnder the practise of one Alberique and Octauian his sonne, brake out a new, and charged the Beast in so sharp a manner, as without dout he had receaued the mate, had not his head in the midest auoi∣ded it once againe, whose name was now changed from Charles the great, to Otho the great: who as being by oth deuoted, came to Rome, banisht her new risen Consuls, hanged her Tribuns, and mounted her Prefectus vrbis, Mr. of misrule, naked on an Asse, crouned and attended through the citie with great deri∣sion: from thence committed to prison, and ther executed with exquisite torments. And by this means, the heat of this defection was so assuaged, that it appeered not for 7. yeares after: but then (vnder the leading of one Cin∣cius) flamed out a new, in so furious a sort, as it had doutles fyr'd the Beast out of all his holds: had not his middle head (Otho the se∣cond) hasted into Italie to quench the same: who (knowing how much it imported to pu∣nish exemplarly so dangerous an euill) pre∣pared in the Vatican a sumptuous feast, inui∣ted therto all the nobilitie and chiefe of the citie: when all were come, saluted and set: caused forth-with to be proclaimed, that no
man on pain of death, should either speake or moue at any thing that should be seene or heard: presently entred armed men and com∣passed the place round where the guests were: wherat whilst euery one amased, doub∣ting what this first course ment, this middle head drew forth a paper, and whose names were therein written, cōmanded to be drawen from the table, and in presence of all there to be slaine. The rest were curteously entertai∣ned, and were as merrie as the feare of so cruell a feaste would giue them leaue. Ne yet for all this the feuer so lefte these patients, but that they fell some 162. yeares after into relapse againe, but Frederique the firste (for so was now this head called) with the blood of a 1000. and the wounds and impri∣sonment of as many more, so branded this Hydra, which had bin so often headed, as it could neuer after recouer head againe, but her breath departed, and her purpose vanished, and appeered no more. And this head did put the vvhole earth in feare, and ruled therein, and ouer the dvvellers thereof, vvith much labor; and it held the gouernment of the
vvorld more, then all the vvings that had bin. That this head and his fellowes, haue more mainteined & aduanced the rage and blasphemie of the Beast, then all the fethers that arose before them, and made more dili∣gent and cunning inquisition after the blood of Sion then they, is it not eternally croni∣cled in the registers of euery perticular Na∣tion? And therefore they are called the heads of the Eagle, and who knoweth not that heads are more able in euil then fethers? And the Prophet beheld that this head con∣tinued longer, and held the gouernment of the world more then all the fethers that had bin, for from the rising of the first fether Iulius Caesar, to the end and expiration of Momyllus Augustulus the last, were not 560. yeares, whereas this head arose in the yeare 801. and hath alreadie continued aboue 800. and yet still continueth, and shall, till he that now is be taken away. And after this I savv, and be∣holde, this middle head sodenlie vanished as did the vvinges.
In that the Prophet saw this middle head sodenly vanish, as did the winges, he signi∣fieth that it shall not be rooted out by force or sword of any, but depart quietlye, and die as it were in bed: but yet (as the truth fore-saith in the chapter following) not without paine: meaning, that the Electors shall not chuse to the liking of the Beast, nor the Beast conse∣crate to the liken of them. And in this diffe∣rence this head shall die, ne shall this differen∣ce be exempted from paine. But the two heads remained, vvhich also reigned ouer the earth, and ouer the inhabitants thereof. And when the power of this great head, (which is now so little) like a tale that's told shalbe cleane ended: yet the feare of th'other two shall still remaine, and haue dominion ouer the earth, and those that dwell therein, till the fulnes of their malice and tiranny be accomplisht also: which may not long be vn∣fulfild, for beholde, in the verie next verse their distruction commeth. And I savve, and behelde,
whilst the head on the right side, deuoured that which was on the left. By the right head is ment (as through all this prophesie) the strongest; so as the Prophet implyeth, that the sworde of Spaine, shall deuide the strength of France, that her pride, by deuision made lesse, may at the last (as euery deuided kingdome doth) returne to nothing. Nether shall the prosperitie of this right-head, be long free from like retaliation, but as the truth foresaith. Esd. 4.12 He that deuideth with the sword, shall perish by the sword. For how may the sword for euer escape him, whom heauen hateth, and earth doth persecute? and of whom may be truly said, which was spoken of Ismael, Manus corum contra omnes, & om∣nium contra illos. And thus shall these heads perish, and hast the faster to their end, because the iudgment of the Beast is nigh, in the very next verses attending to come in. Then I heard a voice, vvhich said, looke before thee, and consi∣der the things vvhich thou seest.
So I saw, and behold, as it were a Lyon came hastily out of the wood, roaring; and I saw that he sent out a mans voyce vnto the Eagle, and spake, saying: Heare thou and I shall tell thee what the most High doth say vn∣to thee. The roaring of the Lyon is the breath of the Highest, which shall rebuke th'Egle for her vnrighteousnes, and cast before her al her spoiles, and set her aliue in iudgement, and with the spirit of his mouth rise vp against her, and lay vnto her charge, as in the text followeth. Art not thou he which of the foure Beastes remainest, whome I made to reigne in my world, that by them th'end of thinges might come? And the fourth is come, and
hath ouercome all the Beasts that were past, and obtained povver ouer the vvorld vvith great fear∣fulnes, and ouer the whole com∣passe of the earth vvith extreame oppression, and hath possessed so long time, all the vvorlde, vvith deceit. For thou hast not iudged the earth vvith truth. But hast troubled the meek and hurt the peacefull, and thou hast loued lyers, and destroyed the dwellings of them which brought foorth fruit, and hast cast dovvne the vvalls of such as did thee no harme. So as thy vniust dealing is as∣cended to the most High, and thy pride vnto the mighty.
And therefore he that is High∣est, hath beheld the proud times, and beholde they are en∣ded, and their abhominations are finished. And if thou plead not guilty hereunto, be∣holde, a thousand witnesses shall rise vp a∣gainst thee, and proue th'inditement true: that the iust iudgment which hath so long atten∣ded for thee, may at the length be pronounced against thee, in forme as in the text fol∣loweth. Therefore appeere no more thou Egle, nor thy fearful vvings, nor thy vvicked feathers, nor thy malitious heads, nor thy cruell clavves, nor thy vaine bodie. And least in thy drunkennes thou maist thinke, thy sinne may ouer-shoot this iudg∣ment to come, and in thy madnes glorifie thy
selfe as thou hast euer done, perswading thy selfe thou shalt euer be, because thou hast bin king long, and like a foole hast not considered; the more thy yeares the nigher thy graue, & be∣holde, thus saith the truth: in the yeare which shalbe 1666. Reuel. 13 18. this iudgment here pronounced shall lay hands on thee. And as all thy feare∣full winges, and fethers, be already descended and blowen downe; so before that day (which is so nigh at hand) the tyrannie of thy mali∣tious heads and cruell clawes, shalbe con∣sumed and brought to nought. And in that day, thy vaine body shall be burnt with fire, and shall so cleane be cut of from the land of the liuing, that neither sonne nor nephew (as the Prophet saith)Esay. 14.22. nor branche nor remnant of thy name, shall be found vpon the earth. For as it is purposed,Esay. 14.24. so shall it come to pas: and as it is consulted, it shall stand. Goe to now, take counsell of thy Seers, and call thy in∣chanters about thee: build thy deuises as high as heauen, & lay their foundations low as hell, yet shal they not deliuer thee from the day appointed: but as Salmanazar. destroyed Beth-arbel in the day of battell, wherein the mother with the children was dasht in pee∣ces: or like the milstone, which the mightie Angell did cast into the Sea, with such vio∣lence shalt thou be throwen downe, and be found no more.
And all hell shalbe moued at thy comming and prepare it selfe, and raise by all her dead against that day to meet thee, and all the Princes and Kings of Nations, whom thou hast slaine with the cup of thy fornication, shall rise out of their torments against thy cōming, and at thy sight shall wonder, and cry, Esay. 14.10. and say vnto thee. Art thou become weake also as we? art thou become like one of vs? Is thy pompe bowed downe vnto the graue? and are thy pleasures departed like ours? and is the worme spred vnder thee, and do the wormes couer thee also? how art thou falen from heauē O Lucifer, sonne of the morning, which hast cast lots vpon the Nations? and saidst in thine heart: I will ascend into heauen, and exalt my throne aboue, besides the starres of God, and I will sit vpon the mount, euen the holy mount of his Sanctuarie, and Congregation: I will as∣cend aboue the height of the clouds, and will be like the most High. And all hell, which once did wonder, wor∣ship and kisse thy feet, beholding now thy na∣kednes, thy shame and iudgement, shall die for greefe of mind, Esay. 14. and dying shall say. Is this the man that made the earth to tremble? and with his worde did shake the Kingdomes? that made the world a wildernes, and a wast of the Cities thereof? Then shalt thou lying in torment, death gnawing on thee, answere
Wisd. 5.them and say. We haue erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousnes hath not shined vpon vs, nor hath the Sonne of vnder∣standing risen ouer vs. We haue wearied our felues in the wates of wickednes, and we haue gone through dangerous pathes, but the way of the Lord we haue not knowen. What hath pride profited vs? or what profit hath the pompe of riches brought vs? all these things are vanished like a shadow and as a poste that passeth by. And casting vp thy eye to heauen, shalt see the righteous stand in great boldnes before thee, and before the face of such as tormented thē, and tooke away their labours, and thou shalt ware exceedinglie at the sight of them, and be amased at their wonderfull deliuerance, and die for greefe of minde, and dying shalt say. Wisd. 5. These are they whome we sometime had in derision, and in a parable of reproche: wee fooles thought their life madnes, and their end without honor, But how are they counted a∣mong the children of God, and their portion a∣mong the Saintes? That all the earth may be re∣freshed, and come againe, as one deliuered from thy violen∣ce, that she may hope for the
iudgement & mercy of him that made her. And thy death shall comfort and refresh the earth, and deliuer Syon from her great and violent oppression: but their prosperities may not longendure, as testifieth the Prophet Daniel. Chap. 12.12. For may Israel dwell safe, and the Kings of th'east not know it? Nay verily, they shall arise, Ezec. 39. and come down like a storme, and like a cloud shall couer the earth, and compas round the tents of the Saintes, Reuel. 20.9. and the beloued Citie, till fire disceud from God out of heauen (as it is written) and deuout them. And in those daies shall be finished the mistery of God, fore-declared to his seruants the Prophets, and witnessed by the mighty Angell which came downe from heauen, and stood vpon the Sea, and vpon the earth, and raysed vp his hand and voice to heauen, and sware by him that liueth for euer and euer. . Reuel. 10. Beholde it is come, and it is done saith the Lord, Ezec. 39. this is the day whereof I haue spoken. For the hope of which day, the stones of Syon die day by day: tho little esteeming seuen thousand deaths, in regarde of the preeious assurance ingrauen in their brests, that they shall then and in that day, beholde the Lo
hath so mercifully gathered them from a∣mong the Nations: That hath so wonder∣fully preserued them, from the sorcerie of Babylon, which hath destroyed all the earth. That dayly leadeth them in and out, before the scorners, the couetous, and foolishwise of this world, so prudently, and so inuisibly, that they seeing are not seene, and lyuing are not knowen. That hath bestowed on them, a thousand trea∣sures more then these, so secretly, as no man suspecteth but they that haue them. That hath so surely and fully perswaded them, that tho they now goe on their way wee∣ping, yet they shall then returne againe with ioy, and bring the sheafes with them: and all the earth shall then knowe, which now is hid, howe much the Lord their Redeemer loued them, and night and day, shall praise and magnifie the iuste iudge∣ment and mercie of him, that hath done all things for them. Which day in due time, He that is High∣est, shall manifest to all, He that is Prince an boue all, who only hath im∣mo  elleth in the light, which none , whome no man
euer sawe, nor can see: vnto whome be all hour and power euerlasting. Amen. Zachar. Saue thy selfe O Syon, thou that dwellest with the daugher of Sebel.
