17546 S120319 99855518 21013
The ROSARIE of our Ladie. Otherwise called our Ladies PSALTER. With other godlie exercises mentioned in the Preface. ANTVERPIAE, Apud Ioannem Keerbergium. ANNO M. D. C. the Virgin and Child flanked by adoring angels and saints
THE PREFACE, Containing diuers Annotations concerning the Rosarie of our Ladie: and the other Exercises here folovving: VVith the causes of compo∣sing and printing the same, in this forme; and certaine commodities ensuing hereof. FOR so much (benigne Catho∣like reader) as euerie thing is better vnderstood, by the expli∣cation of his proper, or vsual name, it is first of al to be noted, that the name of ROSARIE (vvhich properly signi∣fieth the place vvhere roses doe grovve, or be reserued) is here vsed for the forme of praier, vvhich the renovvmed religious father S. Dominicke, about the yeare of our Lord 1200 (or as some thinke, a Reli∣gious Priest called Peter of Amiens in Picardie, aboue an hundred yeares before) instituted, of certaine Pater nosters, Aues and Credes, together vvith certaine principal Mysteries to be meditated, in honour of our blessed Ladie, the virgin MARIE, framed by the number of fiue, like to a Rose, that hath fiue leaues: Whereof it is called the ROSARIE OF OVR LADIE. Which name of Rosarie is vsed someti∣mes largely, and sometimes strictly, Taken largely it containeth fifteene Decades or Tennes (that is to say, fifteene times one Pater noster with tenne Aues) and three Credes; and hath fifteene Mysteries ap∣plied thereunto, that is, to euerie Decade
one Mysterie. And the same is also called OVR LADIES PSALTER, because it hath so manie Aues, or salutations of our Ladie, as there be Psalmes in the Psalter of Dauid, which are an hundred and fiftie. But strictly taken (as it is cōmonly ment, vvhen one is appointed for penance, or for pardon, or for other like cause to say a Rosarie) it containeth only fiue Decades, to witt, fiue Pater nosters and fiftie A∣ues, with one Crede. So that in the great Rosarie (or Ladie Psalter) be con¦tained three particular Rosaries. And these three are resembled to three sortes of Roses, white, read, and damaske. For as these three colours doe signifie, ioye, payne, and glorie: so these three Rosaries do containe three sortes of Mysteries to be meditated, ioyful, sorowful and glorious. This forme of praying, the first institu∣tor of the Rosarie, did so accommodate to the vse of al faithfull persons, as it might be both a necessarie helpe to vnler∣ned people, and also a most profitable exercise to the most lerned in the world: as vvel for the better auoiding of idle, and hurtful distractions in the often repeti∣tion of the same prayers, as also for the more fruitful eleuating of the mind, meditating vpon the chiefest Mysteries of our faith, vvhich concerne our Lord and Redemer his coming into this world,
and his going our of the same, and the happie effects of both. For touching his coming into this world (which vvas so long and earnestly desired and expected) in the first Rosarie are to be meditated these fiue ioyful Mysteries. First, how the Archangel Gabriel declared to the immaculate virgin MARIE, that she should conceiue and beare the Sonne of God. Secondly, hovv the same sacred Virgin visited her cosine Elizabeth. Thirdly, the Natiuitie of our Lord, with his Circumcision, and adoration by the Sages. Fourthly, the Purification of the vnspotted virgin mother, and Presentatiō of our Lord in the Temple. Fifthly, the finding of our Lord in the same Temple, vvhen at the age of twelue yeares, he had bene lost three dayes. Lykewise in the second Rosarie, are to be meditated fiue sorowful Mysteries pertaining to our Sa∣uiours going forth of this world, by his most painful Passion, and death, which are these. First, his great agonie, and pensiue prayer in the garden. Secondly, his cruel whipping, vvith other manie extreme and vile iniuries. Thirdly, his crovvning vvith thornes, and condem∣nation to death. Fourthly, his carying of his ovvne Crosse. Fifthly, his crucifying, and death thereupon. Finally concerning the effects of his coming into this vvorld, and of his going forth of it againe, in
the third Rosarie are to be meditated these fiue glorious Mysteries. First, the Re∣surrection of our Lord. Secondly, his As∣cension into heauen. Thirdly, the coming of the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, the blessed death and Assumption of our Soueraigne Ladie in soul and bodie. And fiftly, her Coronation and singular dignitie, aboue al other Saincts and seruants of God. Thus much in general is euident by the tradition, and continual practise of al Catholike nations, for the space of foure or fiue hundred yeares at least: that is, since the time of S. Dominicke, or before. And of the same antiquitie and authoritie is the vse of Beades, which were inuēted for the better obseruing of the prescribed number of prayers, in saying the vvhole Rosarie. And considering, that no man can vvel meditate vpon anie Mysterie, ex∣cept he both particularly know, and per∣fectly remember, the special points therof, vve can nor doubt, but that Christian people vere both taught the particular pointes of al the aboue mentioned fiftene Mysteries, and also had some forme or order prescribed, vvherby they might the better remember the same pointes, euerie one in his place. Which instructions being, not commonly extant, and the vse of Beads also inhibited, and made dangerous to Catholikes, liuing amongst Heretikes in this age; for remedie of both these defects, a certaine Catho∣like
Priest, and prisoner for the Catho∣like Religion, in the tovvre of London and there also depriued both of bookes and Beades, framed for him self a forme of meditation in saying the Rosarie, by noting so many particular pointes in eue∣rie one of the fiftene Mysteries, that ech Mysterie seruing his owne decade, euerie Pater noster, Aue and Crede should haue their competent and particular pointes alotted. Wherby as wel the iust number of prayers, may without beades be exactly obserued, as also sufficient and apt matter be redely remembred, and the mind more eleuated to God, and idle distractions bet∣ter auoided. This priuat Exercise, albeit very vnper∣fect (as not purposed for the print, but rudely writrē, and geuē to a priuat freind) yet did so content and please some wel dis∣posed persons, that presently, without knowlege of the author, they caused it to be printed, and so made common to ma∣nie. Wherby at last it came into the handes of one, that knew better the authors mea∣ning. who finding manie faultes and de∣fects in the edition, thought good to cor∣rect and a mend the same, and adorning it with Images to set it forth anew, as wel to satisfie the good desires of such as first did print it, as also for the like profite to others, who either had it not, or vnder∣stood not the vse therof before. And for al their sakes hath also added
hereunto, the Corone of the same most facred virgin, first instituted by the afore∣said religious father S. Dominike, or by some of his folovvers, and lately reduced into the like forme, by the same author, and novv first printed vvith the like pictu∣res. For the better vnderstanding of the name, vse, and fruite vvherof, it is to be noted, that it is called the CORONE, or Crowne of our Ladie, because it contai∣neth so manie AVES, or salutations of the B. Virgin, as she is supposed to haue liued yeares in this vvorld, before she receiued her Crovvne in heauen, vvhich are three∣score and three. And it is diuided into seuen partes, Euerie part containing one Pater noster and tenne Aues, sauing the last, which hath one Pater noster and only three Aues, with a Crede in the end. In saying of vvhich Corone, certaine parti∣cular points of the singular priuileges, vertues, and dignities of the same B. vir∣gin, grounded vpon the testimonie of ho∣he Scriptures, and auncient Fathers, are so accommodated to euerie Pater noster, Aue, and Crede, in historical order, from before her Conception vnto her most glorious Coronation, that as nere as vvel may be obserued, in the first part are proposed tho∣se things to be meditated, that belong to the preparation made for her coming, be∣fore she was borne. In the second, such as pertaine to her birth and education. In
the third, how she cooperated with the B. Trinitie, in Christs incarnation and nati∣uite. In the fourth, her participation with him, both in ioyes and afflictiōs, most part of his life in this world. In the fifth her sin∣gular compassion in the time of his Pas∣sion, and death. In the sixth, the rest of her life, with her death and assumption. And in the seuenth and last part, her most glo∣rious Coronation, and exaltation aboue al Saincts and Angels, next to her sonne abo∣ue al created persons. And because Christs Crowne and glo∣rie is aboue al, here is added also an other godlie exercise called the CORONE OF OVR LORD. Which albeit in dignitie is first and chiefest, yet here it is placed in order of the time in which it was institu∣ted, by a certaine holie Heremite in monte Camaldulensi, in the yeare of our Lord 1515. alowed and priuileged with indul∣gences by Leo the tenth, and others his successors. This Crowne consisteth of thir∣tie and three Pater nosters (according to the number of yeares, which our Saui∣our liued in this world) and foure Aues with one Crede. And so is diuided into foure partes, ech part cōtaining tenne Pater nosters, and one Aue, sauing the last which hath but three Pater nosters, and one Aue, with the Crede in the end. And to
these prayers are likewise applied certaine Articles or points, of our Sauiours acts and sufferings, to be meditated in this order. In the first part, of his coming into this world. In the second, of his conuersation amongst men for their saluation. In the third, of his going forth of the world, by his bitter Passion and death. And in the fourth part, of his most glorious victorie and Exaltation. Finally here is also added an other briefe ROSARIE of fiftene Pater nosters, with so manie Aues, and one Crede, in memorie of seuen principal sorowes and eight ioyes of our B. Ladie. Which Rosarie who so euer saith dayly, shal in the space of a yeare, re∣cite so manie Pater nosters, and Aues, as our Sauiour susteyned woundes for vs in one day, as is sayd to be reueled to S. Brigit. And thus much might suffice for this Preface, touching the contents, and occa∣sion of printing this litle booke, but that some may perhaps moue a doubt or two against this maner of praying, which I thought necessarie here to solue before I conclude. The first doubt is, vpon what authoritie or godlie example this numbring of pray∣ers is grounded. To which I answere, That we haue for this, not only the practise of the whole Church of later time, that is, of foure or fiue hundred yeares (which is a sufficient
warrant to al Catholikes, for that so vni∣uersal a practise of the whole Church, can not be erroneous (as S. Augustin Proueth in his exposition of the. 118. Psalme. v. 43. and very often against the Donatists) but also the confirmation of holie Scriptures, and examples of Christ him self, and of diuers Saincts euen from the primitiue Church to our time. As for example, we read in the 6. chap. of Isay, and in the 4. of the Apocalyps, that the Angels and other Saincts, ceasse not day nor night to repete continually one thing, saying: HOLIE, HOLIE, HOLIE Lord God of Hostes. Which forme of praising God. the Church militant in the self same wordes obserueth in the Canticle TE DBVM, and in the Preface of the daylie Sacrifice. Likewise the Royal prophet Dauid offered vp his holie prayers, and praises to God seuen ti∣mes euery day, as him self testifieth in the 118. Psalme. And the whole Church of Christ doth the same, in the seuen Cano∣nical houres. Also our B. Sauiour in the garden of Gethsemani, the night before his death repeted the same prayer three ti∣mes, as the Euāgelists do exactly note. And (in the 18. of S. Luke) he cōmandeth, that we continue and perseuere in prayers. Which the vulerned (especially) can not doe, but by often repeting the same pray∣ers. S. Barthlemew the Apostle, agreably to his Masters instructions, prayed euery day an hūdred times (as witnesseth Abdias)
The same did St. Machaus in Aegypt, manie yeares together (as Zozomenus recordeth lib. 6. cap. 29) And St Paul the Heremit recited euerie day three hundred prayers (as is written in his life). For obser∣uing of which number, he put so many litle stones in his bosome and taking them forth one by one after euerie prayer, when al were so remoued, he knew thereby that his taske of prayers was accomplished. Euen as Catholike people doe now by their beades, and may do by obseruing the particular pointes of the Mysteries, set downe in this booke, and that without booke (after some diligent practise) or by anie other like meanes. An other doubt is. How this maner of praying, with meditation, vpon such My∣steries, as are not expressed by the wordes of the prayers, may helpe attention, or pro∣duce the fruit of prayer, and not rather hinder the same, by leading the mind of purpose into other cogitations, different from the proper and literal sense of the wordes? For solution hereof it is to be noted, that in vocal prayer there be three sortes of attention that may be obserued, and three fruites which may be reaped (as the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas teacheth 2. 2. q. 83. a. 13.) One attention is to pronounce the wordes perfectly, and distinctly. An other is to attend to the sense of the same wordes, either literal or spiritual. The third atten∣tion
is, to remembrer the cause why we pray, or the thing we pray for, which ought euer to be the glorie of God, the saluation of our owne and other soules, or some other good thing directed thervnto. And the first effect of prayer is, to merite: the second, to obtayne that which is due∣ly requested; and the third is a spiri∣tual refection of the mind. So then I an∣swere to the doubt proposed: that to al the three effects it is necessarie, that we intend and purpose to haue the first at∣tention. but if afterwardes of frailrie the mind be caried away, the fruit of that prayer is not therfore lost, or frustrat, but hath his effect, by vertue of the former intention and purpose. And the same is to be said of the second attention, if one (that vnderstandeth the language, in which he prayeth) doth purpose to marke the sense of the wordes, and yet afterwards faileth to performe it. But betvvene this second, and the first attention this is the difference, that albeit this second is profi∣table, yet it is not so necessarie as the first, neither in the beginning nor in the rest of the prayer. For those that pray in a tongue they vnderstand not, can not haue this attention, and yet their prayer is profitable, and fruitful, by the vniuersal iudgement of al Doctors. The third attention, by which the mind is lifted vp to God, and good spi∣ritual desires and cogitations, is not
only necessarie in the beginning (like as the first attention is) but also most neces∣sarie of al the three, to be kept stil without interruption, in respect of the third effect. And this the vulerned may also haue, pray¦ing in an vnknowne tongue. And it some∣times so aboundeth, that the mind forget∣teth al other things; as S. Thomas, and be∣fore him S. Hugo de Victore, and others do teach. And in this case it supplieth also the defects, which often happen in the other two attentions, as wel in those vocal prayers which we are bound vnto, by pre∣cept of the Church, or other obligation (so there be no notable defect in reciting the wordes) as in other prayers, which we are not bound to say. And finally this atten∣tion perfecteth, so much as can be in this transitorie life, the spiritual repast of the faithful soule: which attention ceassing, necessarily the refection of the mind ther∣with also vanisheth, but yet the other two effects do not therfore ceasse, but remaine stil. For not with standing the mind be ca∣ried, by humane frailtie without volunta∣rie consent, to thinke vpon base and terre∣strial things, yet the prayer may both me∣rite increase of grace, and obtayne the things that be asked. And much lesse is euery euagation of mind in prayer to be reputed a sinne, but that only which we either volunrarily admitte or willingly de∣sire, of some vaine or hurtful thing. And so you see the maner of praying proposed
in this booke doth not hinder due atten∣tion, as the obiection presupposeth, but greatly helpeth the same, and bringeth also other spiritual commodities. Of which some may be here briefly noted. For first, besides that the mind is hereby directed to the best and most necessarie attention required in prayer, such also as be not so wel instructed already, may by this forme of saying the Rosaries and Co∣rones here ensuing, learne many particu∣lar, and most necessary points of Christian doctrine: which being once knovven, can not but moue a true Christian hart to so∣me, more or lesse, cogitation and medita∣tion of so great and singular benefites, be∣stovved vpon vs by Almightie God. And the more one shal meditate vpon the same, the more also shal his knovvlege be stil increased. So knovvlege and meditation do mutually helpe and increase ech other, but one vvithout the other auaileth little. For as meditation vvithout knovvlege is erroneous: so knovvlege vvithout medi∣tation is drie and fruitles. But both toge∣ther vvil easely inkindle the soul vvith the loue of God, and feede it with a spi∣titual refection, and sturre vp and inflame the desire to al possible endeuour for the increase of Gods glorie, and health of their ovvne and other mens soules. Likevvise out of this varietie, and copie of diuine Mysteries and benefites, the vvel disposed may at al times and occasions, choose suf∣ficient
and fit pointes to meditate vpon in al their prayers vocal or mental. And fi∣nally, by diligent vewing and beholding the pictures here placed, euerie one may better conceiue and consider the Myste∣ries by them represented, and be perhaps more moued to deuotion by sight therof, then by only reading. If any therfore wil vse this exercise, no doubt but for revvard of their paines, they shal reape hereby no smal fruite and increase of pietie. You at least (my deerely beloued in our Lord Iesus Christ) vvho haue not better meanes to further your deuotions vvithal, vse this helpe. And vouchsafe of your charitie to commend al vs, (vvho to do you good haue bestovved labour and cost, in setting forth this little vvorke) amongst your other deere frendes, vnto our B. Lord, and to his B. mother our Ladie, to our propre Angels, and special Patrons, and the vvhole Court of heauen, in your svveete deuotions. Amen. 25. of March. 1590. Your ovvne al and euer in Christ, T. VV. P.
THE FIRST ROSARIE OF OVR LADIES PSALTER; resembled to a white Rose, contai∣ning fiue ioyful Mysteries. In nomine Patris & Filij ✚ & Spiritus Sancti. Amen. cross encircled by five roses WHat soeuer thou doest (ô my soul) in word or in worke, do al in the name of our Lord IESVS CHRIST, and to the glorie of God. For God forbid I should glorie, sauing in the CROSSE of our Lord IESVS CHRIST.
1. Mysterium gaudiosum. the annunciation and incarnation 1. PATER NOSTER
The Annunciation, and Incarna∣tion of Christ. THe most Blessed Trinitie, one God Almightie, most iust & most mer∣ciful, forseeing al makind fallen from most happie estate (wherin he was cre∣ated) into infinite miserie and calamitie; As to haue lost original iustice, grace, vertues, and most excellent gifts, and qualities, by transgressing Gods cōman∣dement: And contrariwise to haue in∣curred, sinne, death, and eternal damna∣tion: And that he could not be restored to his former estate, by the worke or vertue, of anie man, or Angel, or anie other pure creature: of his infinite loue (which is most agreable to his Diuine goodnes) decreed defore al worldes, that the Sonne of God (the second Per∣son of the same most Holie Trinitie) should take mans nature, and being made man should pay our ransome by his death on the Crosse. And so not only in general take away the sinne of the world, but also in particular iustifie, san∣ctifie, and bring al those, to whom this most souereigne meanes is rightly ap∣plied, to euerlasting life, for which we were first created.
1. Aue Maria. Our merciful Lord promised this ME∣DIATOR, immediatly after the fal of Adā saying: that the seede of a womā should crusse in peeces, the serpentes head. 2. Aue Maria. Our heauenlie Father renewed the sa∣me promise to the holie Patriarch Abra∣ham, saying: In thy seede al nations shal∣be blessed. 3. Aue Maria. Almightie God eftsones iterated the same promise, to king Dauid saying: of the fruit of thy Ioynes, I wil set vpon thy seat. And establish his kingdom for euermore. 4. Aue Maria. About 4000. yeares from the creation of the world, the Archangel Gabriel being sent from God, to the most pure virgin Marie, saluteth her: HAYLE FVL OF GRACE, OVR LORD IS WITH THEE; BLESSED ART THOV AMONG VVOMEN. 5. Aue Maria. The most humble virgin is trubled with this speach, thinking with her self, what maner of salutation this may be! For she expected nothing lesse, then to heare herselfe so highly praised.
6. Aue Maria. Feare not MARIE, sayeth the Angel: for thou hast found grace with God. Behold thou shalt conceiue, and beare a Sonne, and shalt cal his name IESVS, 7. Aue Maria. She inquiereth: How (or by what meanes) shal this be donne, for I know not man? Hauing before this vovved perpe∣tual virginitie. 8. Aue Maria. The Angel answereth: the Holie Ghost shal come vpon thee, and the powre of the Hieghest shal ouershadowe thee. Therfore, that which of thee shalbe bor¦ne Holie shalbe called the Sōne of God. 9. Aue Maria. Behold Elizabeth thy cosin, she also hath conceiued a sonne, in her old age, and this moneth is the fixt to her that is called barren. For there shal not be anie thing impossible with God. 10. Aue Maria. The holie virgin answereth: Behold the hādmaide of our Lord, be it done to me according to thy word. And imme∣diatly THE WORD IS MADE FLESH, and dwelleth with vs; God and man in one Diuine Person.
2. Mysterium gaudiosum. Mary visits St. Elizabeth 2. PATER NOSTER.
Our blessed Ladie visiteth St. Elizabeth. THE most humble virgin, vvho euen now, receiued an Ambassage from heauen, by an Archangel sent from God: who by the same Archangel is denoun∣ced ful of grace: vvho hath novv concei∣ued in her virginal vvombe, the Onlie Sonne of God, Christ our Lord, Redemer of the vvorld: vvho is novv made the mother of God, and Queene of al creatu∣res: by hovv much she is higher exalted, so much the more lovvly she be haueth her selfe; iudging it a dutifull office for her selfe, the younger, to visite her aged Cosin Elizabeth, novv six moneths gone vvith childe. Wherupon, neither preten∣ding her ovvne preeminent dignitie, nor disdayning the meane estate of her cosin, nor terrified vvith the length or sharpnes of the iourney, nor hindred vvith vvhat other impediment soeuer, vvhich might stay her in this purpose, addressing her selfe to trauel al on foote, goeth vvith speede into the hil-countrie, into a citie of Iuda, called Hebron. Admire therefore (my soul) as vvel the humilitie as magna∣nimitie of the virgin, mother of God. Who thought no office to base nor hard, for her to vndertake that perteyneth to pietie.
1. Aue Maria. The blessed virgin coming to the citie, goeth into Zacharies house, saluteth her cosin Elizabeth, congratulating her conception of a Sonne, by Gods special fauour. 2. Aue Maria. As Elizabeth heareth the salutation of the sacred virgin, the infant leapeth in her wombe for ioy. And is withal sanctified in his mothers wombe. 3. Aue Maria. And Elizabeth replenished also with the Holie Ghost, crieth out with a loud voice, saying: BLESSED ART THOV AMONG WOMEN, AND BLESSED IS THE FRVIT OF THY WOMBE. 4. Aue Maria. And further cōsidering the worthines of the humble virgin, and her owne meanes, admiring saith: Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord doth come vnto me! 5. Aue Maria. The virgin mother prophecieth, and praiseth God with a Canticle, saying: MY SOVL DOTH MAGNIFIE OVR LORD. AND MY SPIRIT HATH REIOICED, IN GOD MY SAVIOVR.
Au Maria. Elizaeths time being come to be deliuered, she bareth a sonne, wherof her neighbours and kinssolke hearing come and cōgratulate the same with her 7. Aue Maria. The eight day the childe is circūcised, manie desiring to haue him called Za¦charie, after his father; his mother would haue him called IOHN At last his father writeth, IOHN IS HIS NAME. 8. Aue Maria. And forthwith Zacharies mouth is opened (vvho had bene tenne moneths dumme, because he did not beleeue the Angels vvordes, that his vvife should beare a sonne) and he prophecieth, saying: BLESSED BE OVR LORD GOD OF ISRAEL. 9. Aue Maria. And al that heare these things admire in their hartes, saying: What an one, trowe ye, shal this childe be! For the hand of our Lord was vvith him. 10. Aue Maria. Our B. Ladie taking leaue of her cosine, returneth towards Nazareth the next day after the circumcision of the child. as it seemeth, for the text sayth; She taried vvith Eli∣zabeth about three monethes. And this day the Church celebrateth the Visitation of our Ladie.
3. Mys terium gaudiosum. the Nativity 3. PATER NOSTER.
The Natiuitate of our Lord. AFter the holie virgin returned to Nazareth, from visiting her cosin, her husband Ioseph perceiuing her to be with child, is much trubled in mind, and doubtful what to do. For on one side he feareth the law, if he conceale, that his wiues conceiuing is not by him: On the other side, he knoweth the virgin, his spouse, to be of so godlie, chast, pure, and immaculate life, that he dare not accuse her, nor bring her into anie (be it neuer so smal) suspicion. She in the meane time being most hūble, and most modest, re∣ueleth not, no not to her most deare hus∣band, this so great a Mysterie, wrought in her by the powre of God. In fine Io∣seph being iust, and holie, to auoide per∣plexitie, determineth secretly to leaue her: But while he thus thinketh, behold an Angel of our Lord appeareth to him in sleepe, saying: Ioseph sonne of Dauid, Feare not to tarie with Marie thy wife. For that which is conceiued in her, is of the Holie Ghost. And she shal bring forth a Sonne: And thou shalt cal his na∣me IESVS. For he shal saue his peo∣ple from their sinnes.
1. Aue Maria. By cōmandement of Caesar Augustus, that al should be enrolled, euery one in the place whence they were descended: Ioseph with his spouse goeth to Beth∣leē, a citie of Dauid, because they were of his house and familie. 2. Aue Maria. There by reason of their pouertie, and great concurse of people, not finding row me in anie Inne, they take a poore lodging (as they may) in a stable. 3. Aue Maria. In this place our Lord and Sauiour, King of al kings, the Sonne of God is borne, wrapped in clothes, and laid in a manger by an oxe and an asse, and is warmed by their breaths. 4. Aue Maria. Forth with an Angel appearing to Shep∣heards saith to them: Beholde, this day is borne to you a SAVIOVR, which is Christ our lord in the citie of Dauid, and you shal find him swadled in clothes, and laid in a manger. 5. Aue Maria. And sodenly, there was with the Angel an heauenlie armie, praising God, and singing: GLORIE IN THE HIGHEST TO GOD: and in earth peace to men of good wil.
6. Aue Maria. Then say the shepheards: Let vs go to Bethlehē, and see this thing which God hath done, and shewed to vs. And going with speede, they finde the childe laid in a manger, and so returning glorifie God. 7. Aue Maria. The eight day the childe is circūcised, and his name called IES vs: that is SAVI∣OVR, according as the Angel had before signified to the virgin mother, and to Ioseph his supposed father. 8. Aue Maria. Three Sages (Kings or Princes) knowing by the apparition of a glorious starre, that the king of Iewes (their expected MESSIAS) is borne, come from the Last to Ierusalem, to adore him. 9. Aue Maria. King Herod and al Ierusalem with him are trubled, hearing these newes: yet there the Sages lerne of the hiegh Priests, that Christ shōuld be borne in Bethlehem. 10. Aue Maria. The Sages going towards Bethlehē see the starre againe, and it leadeth them euen to the house, where they finde the childe, and adore him; euerie one offering three giftes; Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrhe.
4. Mysterium gaudiosum. the presentation of Christ at the temple 4. PATER NOSTER.
The Purification of our Ladie, and Presentation of our Lord. KIng Herod expecteth the returne of the Sages, whom he had willed, to seeke diligently for the childe, and when they should finde him, to informe him therof, that he also might go and adore the same new borne king (for so he pre∣tended, meaning in dede to murder Christ in the cradle) but God vvarned the Sages by an Angel in their sleepe, not to returne to Herod; and so they teturne into their countrie by an other vvay. In the meane time, the immaculate virgin (needing no purification, nor being bound to that cere∣monie of the Lavv, yet vvilling to obserue the custome of other vvomen) prepareth for her iourney, as also to make her obla∣tion, according to, yea and aboue the same lavv, a pare of turtles and tvvo pigeons; for albeit a pare of either of both sortes vvoud haue suffised for that purpose: yet she offereth of ech sort a paire: And that not vvithout Mysterie, the turtles being soli∣tarie birdes, signifiing the secret sighes and cries of the seruants of God: and the pi∣geons being sociable, signifying the pub∣like prayers of the vvhole Church. Both vvhich she offereth novv in heauen, as Patro∣nesse of al.
1. Aue Maria. The virgin mother goeth vp to Ieru∣salem, carying thither her sonne, with her oblation, Ioseph her husband, and supposed father of IESVS, accompai∣ning and assisting her. 2. Aue Maria. The sacred virgin presenteth her Sonne to God in the Temple, the four∣tith day after his birth. 3. Aue Maria. Simeon, a iust and religious old man, had receiued an answere of the Holie Ghost, that he should not die, til he had first seene the ANOINTED of our Lord, that is, CHRIST the expected MESSIAS. 4. Aue Maria. This holie old man Simeon (by the particular prouidence of God) is present in the Temple, when the childe IESVS is brought thither by his parents to be presented. 5. Aue Maria. The venerable old man seeing the childe IESVS, taketh him by and by in∣to his armes, and his hart ful of ioy re∣ioyceth in spirite.
6. Aue Maria. So soone as he can speake for ioy, he blesseth God, saying: NOVV THOV DOEST DIMISSE THY SERVANT, Ō LORD, ACCORDING TO THY VVORDE, IN PEACE. BECAVSE MYNE EYES HAVE SEENE THY SALVATION. 7. Aue Maria. The parents admiring the things that are sprokē concerning the childe, Simeon blesseth them, and sayth to the mother: Behold this childe is set, vnto the ruine, and vnto the Resurrection, of many in Israël. 8. Aue Maria. And he sayth moreouer to the mother; A sworde shal pearce thyn owne soule; that is, griefe and compassion of this thy sonnes Passion, shalbe to thee as death it selfe, or, as a svvorde passing through thy hart. 9. Aue Maria. An auncient religious widowe called Anne, who remayned night and day in the Temple, seruing God by fastings and prayers, doth also prophecie of this childe, to al that expect the redemption of Israel. 10. Aue Maria. After they haue done al things accor∣ding to the lawe, they returne homewards in peace and safetie, God not suffering Herod to suspect, that this is the childe, vvhom he feareth, and seeketh to destroy.
5. Mysterium gaudiosum. Mary finds Jesus at the temple 5. PATER NOSTER
The finding of our Sauiour, when he had bene three dayes lost. KIng Herod perceiuing, that he is de∣luded by the Sages, is exceeding an∣grie, and sending a troupe of soldiars, murdereth al the men children, that are in Bethlehem, and in al the borders ther∣of; from tvvo yeares old and vnder, To the number of fourteene thovvsand: vvho al, by special priuilege receiue crovvnes of Martyrdome. In the meane time Ioseph admonished by an Angel, taking the child and his mother, and parting the same night, fleeth into Aepypt: and so is fulfilled the prophecie of Esay: Our Lord ascendeth vpon a light cloude (Christ being caried by his mother à virgin) and shal enter into Aegypt: and the Idols of Aegypt shalbe ouerthrovvne be∣fore his face, and the hart of Aegypt shal lan∣guish; verified by the falling dovvne of Idols, whilest Christ is in Aegypt, vvhich vvas about the space of six yeares. Then Herod dying, they returne into the land of Israel. But hearing that Archelaus reigneth in lurie, for Herod his father, they feare to goe thither; and Ioseph being so vvarned in slēepe, they repaire into the quarters of Galilee, and dvvel in Nazareth, vvherof our Sauiour is called IESVS of Nazareth.
1. Aue Maria. IESVS being twelue yeares old, ac∣cording to their custome at the solemne day of Pasch, he and his parents goe vp vnto Ierusalem, to keepe there the Feast. 2. Aue Maria. The dayes of the Feast being expired, the childe IESVS remaineth in Ierusa∣lem, his parents returning homewards not knowing of his abode. 3. Aue Maria. They supposing him to be in the com¦panie, goe a dayes iourney without him and at night they seeke him among their kinsfolke and acquaintance, but finde him not. 4. Aue Maria. The next day they returne very so∣rowful and lamenting, towards Ieru∣salem to seeke him there. 5. Aue Maria. After three dayes they finde him in the Temple, sitting in the middes of the Doctors, hearing them and asking them questions.
6. Aue Maria. Al are astonied that heare the childe speake, as wel at his wisdome in deman¦ding, as in his answeres. 7. Aue Maria. His mother sayth to him: Sonne, why hast thou so done to vs! Behold, thy father and I sorowing did seeke thee. 8. Aue Maria. He sayth to them: What is it that you sought me? did you not know that I must be about those things which are my fathers affayres? 9. Aue Maria. He then goeth downe with them to Nazareth, and is subiect to them; Dwel∣ling there together the greatest patt of his life in this world. 10. Aue Maria. The virgin mother obserueth and keepeth in her hart al the doings, and sayings of our Sauiour; diligently medi∣tating thereupon.
Caepit IESVS facere et decere. Jesus preaching to a crowd CREDO IN DEVM PATREM.
THe eternal Sonne of God, the in∣created wisdome of the Father, our Lord and Sauiour, hauing taken vpon him the forme of à seruāt, esteemed vul∣garly à carpenter, and a carpenters sonne and as altogether vnlerned, in the thir∣tith yere of his age, bidding his mother farewel, being now to dwel no more in her familie, goeth to Iohn the Baptist, and is baptized of him in Iordan. And thence he departeth presently into the desert, there fasteth (not eating nor drin∣king anie thing at al) fourtie dayes and fourtie nights, then is tempted by the Diuel, and vāquisheth him. Afterwards he manifesteth him self to the world; preacheth penāce; calleth disciples; And by good life, heauenlie doctrine and miracles, draweth vnto him īnumerable folowers; He institeth the Sacrament of Baptisme, for the Remission of sinnes (wherof Iohns Baptisme was only a fi∣gure) teacheth the perfection of iustice, namely of Almes deedes, Praying and Fasting. For which albeit the High Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Saducees, He∣rodians, and the rest of the wicked, do diuers waies persecute him, yet he ne∣uer thelesse perseuereth doing good to
al; confuting their errors, reprouing their sinnes, soluing their malicious and captious questions; derecting their calū∣niations, euen the secret cogitations of their hartes; and to auoide their vila∣nous purposes seeking to murder him, he flieth often from them, and that sometimes miraculously. Finally hauing in this maner conuersed in the world, three yeres and something more (hauing also lately in his Transfiguratiō, shewed to certaine of his Apostles, some glimse of his glorie) at last he entereth into Ierusalem riding vpon an asse colt, his disciples and the people triumphing, spreading their garments, and strawing boughes of Palmes and other trees in the way, receiue him as their king, with ioyful acclamations; the children also crying in the Temple: HOSANNA TO THE SONNE OF DAVID. Blessed is he that cometh in the name of our Lord! HOSANNA in the hieghest! O King of Israel!
The second Rosarie of our La∣dies Psalter: resembled to a redde rose: containing fiue sorowful Mysteries. In nomine Patris, & Filij ✚ & Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Jesus crucified encircled by five roses GOD forbid that I should glo∣rie, sauing in the Crosse of our Lord IESVS Christ: who humbled him self, made obe∣dient vnto death, euen the death of the Crosse.
1. Mys terium dolorosum. Jesus prays in Gethsemane while his apostles sleep 1. PATER NOSTER.
Our Sauiours Agonie in the gar∣den of Gethsemanie. Ovr Lord and Sauiour the night be∣fore his passion, when he had eaten the Paschal lambe with his twelue Apo∣stles, taking water and a towel was heth al their feete. And then exhorting them to humilitie, and puritie of life, he insti∣tuteth and administreth the most blessed Sacramēt, and Sacrifice of his owne bo∣die and bloud, in the formes of bread and wine. And withal instituting the Holie Sacramēt of Orders, cōmādeth his Apo∣stles (for them selues and successors) to do the same, that is, to consecrate and offer in Sacrifice, his bodie and bloud (being, according to the order of Melchi sedech, the Sacrifice of the newe Testa∣ment) til he come againe to iudge the world. Iudas then goeth out. And our Lord instructeth, exhorteth and cōfor∣teth the rest, promiseth them the Holie Ghost, praieth his Father for al the elect. And so goeth with the eleuen Apostles into the garden of Gethsemani. which place Iudas also knew, for that our Lord vsed to goe often thither with his disciples.
1. Aue Maria. Our lord entring into the garden with his disciples, said to them: Sitte you here, whilest I goe yonder and pray. 2. Aue Maria. IESVS taking Peter, Iames and Iohn, a litle further, beginning to waxe sorow∣ful and sad, saith to them: My soul is so∣rowful euen to death: abide here, and watch with me. 3. Aue Maria. And parting also from these three a stones cast, he prayeth saying: My FA∣THER if it be possible, let this chalice passe from me. but yet not my wil, but thine be done. 4. Aue Maria. IESVS cometh to his disciples, and finding them asleepe, saith to Peter: Euen so? Simon sleepest thou? couldst thou not watch one houre with me? watch ye and pray, that ye enter not into tentation. 5. Aue Maria. He goeth from them againe, and prayeth as before: MY FATHER if it be possible, take this chalice from me. yet not as I wil, but as thou wilt.
6. Aue Maria. He cometh againe and findeth them sleeping: for their eyes were very heauie, and they wist not what they should an∣swere him. Neither saith he anie thing to them 7. Aue Maria. Leauing them he goeth againe, and prayeth the third time, the self same prayer: MY FATHER, if it be possible, take this chalice from me. yet not my wil, but thine be done. 8. Aue Maria. And there appeareth to him (either al the three times, or at least the last time) an An∣gel from heauen, strengthening him.  singular humilitie! the Lord of al is comforted by his seruant, the Creatour by his creature! 9. Aue Maria. And whilest he prayeth long in agonie, HIS SWEATE BECOME THAS DROPPES OF BLOVD, trickling downe vpon the ground. 10. Aue Maria. Coming the third time he saith: sleepe ye now and take rest (shortly after) it sufficeth, the houre is come: behold, the Sonne of man shalbe betrayed into the handes of sinners; rise, let vs go: behold, he that shal betray me is at hand.
2. Mysterium dolorosum. Jesus is scourged 2. PATER NOSTER.
Our Sauiours apprehension, contu∣melious handling, and most cruel vvhipping. AS our Lord and Sauiour was yet speaking behold the traitour Iudas Iscariote one of the twelue cometh, and with him a great troupe with lanterns, torches, swordes and other weapons, who al at the voice of IESVS saying: I AM HE, going backward fal to the ground, yet he suffereth them to rise againe. And Iudas saluting his Master with a kisse (which was the signe to know him from his Apostles) they lay handes vpon IESVS. Peter draweth his sworde, and cutteth of the right eare of Malchus, one of the high Priests seruāts. Which our Sauiour presently restoring, and healing, biddeth Peter put. vp his sworde into the scabbard; for that it is his Fathers wil, he shal now suffer for al mākind, otherwise he could haue manie legions of Angels to defend him, if that were more agreable to Gods goodnes, and mans saluation. Then the disciples leauing their maister, runne al away. And so is the prophecie fulfilled: I vvil strike the shepheard, and the sheepe shalbe scattered.
1. Aue Maria. IESVS being bound is first brought to Annas, then to Caiphas. By them both he is examined of his disciples, and of his doctrine, falsly accused, and strooken on the face by à seruant. 2. Aue Maria. Caiphas adiureth our Sauiour to tel him, if he be Christ the Sonne of God; who answering that he is so, they iudge him a blasphemer, and guiltie of death; vsing him most spitefully and cruelly. 3. Aue Maria. Most base fellowes do spitt in the face of Christ our Lord; they strike him with their fistes, and couering his eyes beat him, and bid him read, who is it that striketh thee? 4. Aue Maria. In the meane time Peter denieth our Lord thrise. but IESVS looking vpon him, he goeth forth of the palace, and weepeth bitterly. The Iewes calling à councel, con∣demne IESVS as guiltie of death. 5. Aue Maria. Early in the morning the chiefe of the Iewes, with their whole councel deliuer IESVS, prisoner to Ponce Pilate, Caesars deputie. Then Iudas, seing that IESVS is condemned to die, hangeth him selfe desperatly.
6. Aue Maria. Pilate asking what accusation they bring against him, they say: if he wer not a malefactor, we would not deliuer him vnto thee. Pilate testifying his īno∣cēcie, they wil nedes haue him crucified. 7. Aue Maria. Then they accuse him, of subuerting theit nation, of forbidding to pay tribute to Cesar, and of calling him self king. not answering at al to the first two (being fri¦uolous) he cōfesseth, that he is à king, but his kingdome is not of this world. 8. Aue Maria. Pilat perceiuing that Christ is of Gali∣lee, sendeth him to Herod, by whō he is demāded many curious questiōs, mocked as à foole, and sent backe to Pilat. 9. Aue Maria. Pilat biddeth the people choose of two only, either Barabbas or IESVS to be deliuered; they choose Barabbas. he offe¦reth them also IESVS, but they al crie; Away with him, and geue vs Barabbas. 10. Aue Maria. Pilat (to mollifie their stonie hartes) cau∣seth our B. Sauiour to be so cruelly vvhip∣ped, that from the head to the foote al his bodie is torne thervvith, reciuing (as is said to haue bene reueled to S. Brigitte) 5490 vvoun∣des in one day.
3. Mys terium dolorosum. Jesus is crowned with thorns 3. PATER NOSTER.
The crovvning of our Sauiour vvith thornes, and his condemnation to be crucified. AFter that our Sauiour is most cruelly whipped, the souldiars bring him in∣to the court of the palace, where (as to à scorneful stage play) the whole band co∣ming together, they mocke both him and the whole natiō of the Iewes, in sul∣ting vpon their poore and miserable title of a King and Kingdome. They pul of againe his owne clothes, and put on his bodie (al imbrued with bloud) à purple garment. Then platting a crowne of horrible strong and sharpe thornes, they put the same on his tender and most sacred head. And leauing nothing vn∣done, that may serue either to scorne or torment him, they put à reede in his right hand, and so setting him in à high place, bowing their knee in derision sa∣lute him, saying; HAILE KING OF THE IEWES. And withal most spite∣fully defile his most sacred face with their abominable spitle, beating him also with their fistes, as the Iewes had done the night before.
1. Aue Maria. They take the reede out of his hand, and ther with beate the crowne of thor¦nes into his head; forcing therby more sacred bloud to burst out, and runne ouer al his bodie. 2. Aue Maria. Pilat supposing that the sight hereof should moue the Iewes to so much pitie as to spare his life, brīgeth forth our Sa∣uiour thus arayed, into the vtter court. 3. Aue Maria. So shewing him, in his purple garmēt, with his crowne of thorns on his head, a reede in his hād, al his bodie miserably torne, and imbrued with bloud, saith to the Iewes, BEHOLD THE MAN. 4. Aue Maria. The high Priests and the people crie a∣loud, Crucifie him, crucifie Him, as if they said, Thou hast now wel begun, hold on, crucifie him: for this maner of whipping wel besemeth one that is to be crucified. 5. Aue Maria. Pilat moued with this crueltie in an∣ger saith, Take you him, and crucifie him: for I find no cause to do it. They reply, that die he must, and he must be cru∣cified.
6. Aue Maria. The Iewes seeing Pilat for al their importunitie not disposed to crucifie Christ; they threatē him with his allege∣ance to Caesar, crying: If thou release this man, thou art not Caesars freind. 7. Aue Maria. Pilat hearing this new crie, bringeth forth IESVS, and sitteth againe in the iudgements seate resoluing rather to put Christ to death, though he know him to be most innocent, then to hazard his credite with Caesar. 8. Aue Maria. Yet once more he sheweth IESVS to the Iewes, exprobrating and saying: Lo here your king. they crie, Away, away with him, crucifie him, we haue no king but Caesar. 9. Aue Maria. Seeing al this nothing preuaileth, he washeth his hādes, protesting before the people; I am innocēt of the bloud of this iust man: looke ye to it. the people crie: His bloud be vpō vs, ād vpō our childrē. 10. Aue Maria. So Pilat ouercome vvith clamour of the people, and vvith feare of Caesar, geueth sentence, that IESVS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE IEVVES be nailed vpon the crosse, and there hang vntil he be dead
4. Mys cerium dolorosum. Jesus falls while carrying the cross 4. PATER NOSTER.
Our Sauiour carieth his Crosse tovvards Caluarie. THE souldiars leade our Sauiour (now condemned to death) from the iudge∣ment seate into the court of the palace, vvhere they cal againe together the vvhole band, and pulling of the purple robe, which sticked fast in his former vvoundes, they drawe our more fresh bloud, and put on him his owne clothes, but leaue the crowne of thornes fast fixed in his head, both for his greater torment, and greater ignominie, lest perhaps he might appeare like no king at al, or should lacke à pil∣lowe, to rest his hèad on, hanging on the Crosse. And hauing in the meane time prepared à most terrible heauie Crosse, they lay the same vpon his sore shoulders, to carie to the mount of Caluarie; tor∣menting him by the sight and vveight of so huge à burden, before he come to be nailed theron. And yet much heauier to him is the continual meditation of our sinnes, for vvhich he suffereth al this, espe∣cially our ingratitude, in that vve neither go about to imitate his example in taking vp our crosses, and folowing him, not yet duly consider, vvhat he hath done for vs his miserable creatures and vnvvorthie seruants.
1. Aue Maria. So IESVS going forth of the citie, be∣wayling vnder the crosse our sinnes, marketh the way as he passeth with his owne bloud, that whosoeuer wil folow him, may not misse of the right path of his steppes. 2. Aue Maria. His most sacred mother, the immacu∣late virgin (carying also her most heauie crosse of compassion) meeteth our Saui∣our, whose sight and presence greatly in∣creaseth his former sorowe and paine. 3. Aue Maria. Our Lord being now weake of bodie and extreme wearie after so great trauel and losse of bloud, falleth downe groue∣ling on the ground, vnder his Crosse. 4. Aue Maria. The cruel tormenters beate our sweet Sauiour (lying on the ground as à meke lambe, or à poore worme, and not à mā) and spurne him with their feete, thru∣sting and haling him forward. 5. Aue Maria. Yet fearing he should die in the way, and so escape death on the Crosse, they compel one Simon Cyrenean to carie the Crosse of Christ, the rest of the way to Caluarie.
6. Aue Maria. A great multitude of people folow IESVS: among which certaine deuour women bewayle and lament him, kno∣wing how vniustly he is tormented, who did hurt to none at al, and good to verie manie. 7. Aue Maria. IESVS turning to them saith: Daugh∣ters of Ierusalem weepe not vpon me, but weepe vpon your selues, and vpon your children. For the daies shal come, when al Ierusalem shalbe more misera∣ble, then now yee thinke me to be. 8. Aue Maria. A special deuout womā, called Vero∣nica, reacheth him à handkerchiefe, to wipe his face with al, being al embrued with sweate and bloud, and with filthie spitle of the abhominable tormenters. 9. Aue Maria. Our Lord geueth her the handkerchiefe againe, not fowle (as might be expected) but al faire, and in it the most comfortable image of his owne sweete visage expressed. 10. Aue Maria. Our Sauiour cometh to Caluarie: à place execrable, ful of carkases and dead mens bones, in vvhich none but notorious ma∣lefactors vsed to be crucified. Here manie thinke, that Adam vvas buried.
5. Mysterium dolorosum. Jesus is crucified 5. PATER NOSTER.
Our Sauiours crucifying, and death vpon the Crosse. COming to the toppe of mount Calua∣rie, in steede of such confortable good wine as vsually was geuen, to refresh and strengthen the hartes of them that were to die, they geue vnto our swete Sauiour (al vvearied and afflicted) vinegre mingled vvith myrrhe and gal, vvhich vvhen he had tasted, he vvould not drinke. Then againe rhey pul of al his clothes, with such furie and fiercenes, as bringeth more bloud out of the innumerable vvoundes of his sacred bodie, and so racking his armes and legges, vvith great violence to the length of the Crosse, vvith manie knockes of ham∣mers they naile him fast therunto, pear∣cing through the most tender vaines, sine∣vves, flesh and bones, of both his handes, and both his feete, vvith great and rugh nailes. And for more reproch and igno∣minie, they place our B. Sauiour▪ betwen two theenes, as though he were the wic∣kedest of them al, and put a title ouer his heade, containing his name, his countrie, and the cause of his death, vvritten in He∣brew Greeke and Latin, IESVS OF NAZA∣RETH KING OF THE IEWES. And so they set vp the Crosse, the foote falling into à hole made for that purpose.
1. Aue Maria. Cōsider now my soul, and thinke with thy self, hovv al his holie bodie is misera∣rably shaken, and vvhat fluddes of most pretious bloud, do runne forth of those foure great vvoundes. 2. Aue Maria. What sorovv also it is to our Sauiour to heare the Priestes, Elders, Scribes and others, both of the greatest and vilest sorte to blaspheme him, novv hanging on the Crosse, for their sakes, and for al mankind. 3. Aue Maria. Meditate also his most perfect charitie, vvho not only prayeth for al the vvorld, but also particularly for those that novv crucifie him, and blaspheme him, saying: FATHER FORGEVE THEM, FOR THEY KNOVV NOT VVHAT THEY DOE. 4. Aue Maria. Likevvise consider, and admire his ex∣ceeding mercie tovvardes paenitents, so graciously graūting to the poenitēt theefe, more then he asketh, saying; THIS DAY THOV SHALT BE WITH ME IN PARADISE. 5. Aue Maria. And much more maist thou admire the depth of his loue, tovvards al iust persons, and namely towards his deere mother, and beloued disciple, vvhom he cōmendeth ech to other, saying to her, BEHOLD THY SONNE, and to him, BEHOLD THY MOTHER.
6. Aue Maria. Great darknes continuing three houres together, al are astonished. Christ as man offereth him self in Sacrifice to God: and that in extreme paines. vvhich at last he expresseth saying: My GOD, MY GOD, VVHY HAST THOV FOR SAKEN ME? 7. Aue Maria. Our Lord afflicted with bodelie drynes and most sollicitous to saue mankind, saith: I THIRST: his flesh in dede desiring to be refreshed vvith drinke, and his spirite to be recreated vvith the saluation of soules. 8. Aue Maria. They vvrappe a sponge ful of vinegre, in hyssope, & offer it to his mouth. which out svveete Lord mekely taking, saith: IT IS CONSVMMATE. 9. Aue Maria. Hauing therfore accōplished al accor∣ding to Gods ordinance for mankind, vvith strong and loud voice he sayeth: FATHER INTO THY HANDES I COM∣MEND MY SPIRITE. 10. Aue Maria. And so preuenting death, though he could haue liued longer, bowing his heade he geueth vp the ghost: fulfilling that him¦self had said before, No man taketh my life avvay from me, but I yelde it of my selfe.
Erit sepulchrum eius gloriosum. Jesus is taken down from the cross CREDO IN DEVM.
AT what time the Sonne of God dyed vpon the Crosse, for the re∣demption of mankind, it pleaseth also the same Diuine power, intestimonie and confirmation of so vvnderful a Mysterie, to shewe sundrie miraculous and strange euents, apparent to the whole world.  First, the Creator of hea∣uen and earth, by the iniurie of his creatures, hanging on the Crosse, the earth is al darkened at midday, so con∣tinuing three whole houres together, by ecclips of the sune, aboue al course of nature, ouer al the earth at once, and that in the fulmoone.  After vvhich, the author of life before nature cōpelleth, yeldeth vp the ghost, at his owne wil, vvhich no other liuing creature can do.  Then the veile of the Temple is rent in two peeces, from the toppe euen to the bottome.  The earth doth quake.  The rockes are torne in peeces.  The gra∣ues are opened; and (after our Lords re∣surrection) manie bodies of the Saincts, that had slept, do rise, and appeare to manie.  The Capitaine and souldiars, vvhose hartes vvere euē novv hardened vvith malice, going avvay confesse openly, that in deede this man is the Sonne of God.  And manie of the most obstinate Iewes goe also avvay repēting, and striking them selues on the brest.  A souldiar vvith a speare pearcing his side incontinent there cometh forth bloud
and water.  Ioseph of Aramathia, a noble Senatour, who before, durst not professe him self a disciple of Christ, now goeth boldly to Pilate, and beggeth his bodie, and so taketh it frō the crosse.  In which holie worke an other principal mā of the Ievves, called Nicodem' (vvho vvas vvōt to resort to Christ by night, not daring so do in the day) ioyning him self, brought a mixture of myrrhe and aloes, about an hundreth pounds.  To al vvhich miracu∣lous accidēts, happening at the death of out Sauiour, thou maist iustly adde in thy meditation, the singular modestie, in uincible courage, most heroical fortitu∣de, and vnspeakeable pietie of the sacred virgin, his mother. Who seeing vvith her eyes, ād feeling in her ovvne hart al that passed, and vvas done and suffered by her only svveete sōne; yet admitteth nor committeth no act vnsemely to her per∣son, and most high perfectiō in al vertues but taking into her ovvne armes the de∣ad bodie of her former ioy and life be∣vvaileth the same, & deliuering it again assisteth in burying therof. And so the precious bodie enbalmed vvith spices, and vvrapped in fine linnen, is buried in à nevv monumēt made in à rocke, wher∣in none hath bene laid before, and a∣great stone is rolled to the doore, vvhich also the Ievves by permission of Pilate, seale vp, and set a gard of vvatch men, to kepe the sepulchre, lest his disciples steale him avvay, & say, he is risen from death.
The third Rosaire of our Ladies Psalter: resembled to a damaske rose: containing fiue glorious Mysteries. In nomine Patris, & Filij ✚ & Spiritus Sancti. Amen. the risen Christ encircled by five roses OVR Lord IESVS Christ was obedient vnto death: euē the death of the Crosse. For the which God hath exalted im, and hath geuen him à name, which s aboue al names.
1. Myst̄erium gloriosum. Christ rises from the tomb 1. PATER NOSTER.
The Resurrection of our Lord. THE most holie, and euer glorious soule of our Lord and Sauiour, leauing his bodie dead on the Crosse, goeth incon∣tinent into the lake called Limbus Patrum by whose presence the soules of the Saincts of the old Testament (hitherto kept in darcknes) are replenished with most cleare light, incomparable gladnes and ioy, receiuing their long expected beati∣tude, vvhich consisteth in the vision of God. And so our Sauiour there performeth that which he promised the penitent thefe saying: This day thou shall be vvith me in Paradise. The third day (shortly after midnight, as the ancient Fathers of the Church do thinke) the same most glorious soule returning into the bodie, both toge∣ther making à perfect man, cometh forth of the graue vvithout opening the same. And by and by an Angel descending from heauen, remoueth the stone from the doore of the monument, and sitteth ther∣on. Wherat the vvatchmen are frighted, and running into the cittie tel the High Priests that vvhich had happened. Who ssembling together vvith the Elders in ouncel, geue à great summe of money to e souldiars, to say, that his disciples came y night and stole him away, vvhen they vere a sleepe.
1. Aue Maria. In the meane time our glorious Sauiour appeareth to his deare mother, before al others meriting this consolation. As al god∣lie Christians may easely conceiue, though the same (as needles) be not recorded in the vvritten Gospel. 2. Aue Maria. To holie Magdalē and other two, cōming to annoint the bodie, an Angel testifieth, that he is risen: she runneth to tel the A∣postles, and returneth vvith them: they de∣parting againe our Lord appeareth to her. 3. Aue Maria. He appeareth againe to holie Magda∣lene, and to the other two returning ho∣mewards, they adore him, and he biddeth them go tel his disciples, that they shal see him in Galilee. 4. Aue Maria. The same day he appeareth to S. Peter, and confirmeth him in faith. Perhaps also to S. Iohn, for his consolation. for he, after he sawe the sepulchre, beleeued. Ioan. 20. 5. Aue Maria. Likewise our Sauiour appeareth to S Iames the iust, called our Lords brother as it is most like the same day. for it is said, the after the chalice of our Lord, he did neither eat nor drinke, til he had seene him risen from death
6. Aue Maria. The same day he appeareth to tvvo disciples going towards Emaus, talking of him but not beleeuing his Resurrection, til (hauing inuited him as à stranger) they knowe him in breaking of bread. 7. Aue Maria. Also the same euening our Lord appea∣reth to tenne of the Apostles gathered together, the doores being shutt. Only Thomas being absent wil not beleue the rest of the Apostles telling him, that they had seene our Lord. 8. Aue Maria. The eight day our Lord appeareth again to the eleuen Apostles, and saith to Tho∣mas. Put here thy finger into the holes of my hands, and thy hand into my side, and be not incredulous, but faithful. Thomas answereth: MY LORD, AND MY GOD. 9. Aue Maria. Againe our lord appeareth to Peter, Ia∣mes, Iohn, Thomas, Nathanael, and other two, at the sea of Tiberias. There he ma∣keth Peter his Vicar general in earth, and chiefe Pastor of his Church; vvithal fortel∣ling him that he shalbe crucified. 10. Aue Maria. He appeareth againe to the eleuen in Galilee, where he commandeth them to preach the Gospel, and minister the Sacra¦ments in al the world, promising to assist them by his Spirite, til the worlds end.
2. Mysterium gloriosum. the Ascension of Christ 2. PATER NOSTER.
The Ascension of our Lord. HOw oftē, and to what persons our Lord and Sauiour appeared, be∣twen his Resurrection and Ascension, besides the apparitions here to fore men∣tioned, is vnknowne to al mortal creatu¦res. Neuertheles we may not doubt, but he often appeared to his blessed mother, who for manie causes, best of al others, deserued his most comfortable conuer∣sation. And it is also vndoubtedly belee∣ued, that he appeared somtimes to his seruants Enoch and Elias, as yet liuing in their mortal bodies, in the terrestrial para∣dise. And that he appeared often to his Apostles, and familiarly conuersed vvith them, not only the Anciēt Fathers, but also the holie Scriptures do testifie, affirming that he shewed him selfe aliue to them, after his Passion in manie arguments, for fourtie daies appearing to them, and spea∣king of the kingdom of God. to vvit, of the Church, and of al functions and offi∣ces to be done therin. Amongst other things, he instituteth the rest of the seuen Sacraments, not instituted before, and ge∣eth ful authoritie powre and commission o his militant Church, for the bringing of oules into the Church triūphāt▪ the soules deliuered from Limbo, the meane while olowing him whither soeuer he goeth.
1. Aue Maria. Finally, the fourtith day after his Re∣surrectiō, our lord appearing in Bethania vnto his Apostles (lately returned from Galilee) cōmandeth them not to depart from Ierusalem, til they be endued with powre from aboue. 2. Aue Maria. He saith moreouer vnto them, that they shalbe witnesses of his Passion, Re∣surrection, and Remission of sinnes, in Ierusalem, and in al Iurie, and Samaria, and euē to the vt most part of the earth. 3. Aue Maria. In the mount Oliuet our Lord now readie to ascend into heauen, for his last farewel in earth, lifting vp his handes blesseth the whole Church, imparting his grace (as at diuers other times he did) by an external signe. 4. Aue Maria. Hauing thus bestowed his blessing, he ascendeth directly into heauen, a great nū∣ber beholding him, vntil he being couered with the clowdes, they lose sight of him. 5. Aue Maria. And vvhilest they looke stil after him, if perhaps they may see him amiddes the clowdes, behold two Angels (in shape of men) stand by them in vvhite garments.
6. Aue Maria. The Angels say vnto them: Ye men of Galilee, what stand ye looking into heauē? This IESVS vvho is assumpted from you into heauen, shal so come as you haue seene him going. 7. Aue Maria. Then they al adoring him, goe from mount Oliuet into Ierusalem, vvith great ioy thanking our Lord, for his vvonderful benefites, bestowed and prepared for mans saluation. 8. Aue Maria. And being come into the citie, our B. Ladie the mother of our Lord, vvith the Apostles and other faithful, in al almost an hūdreth and twentie, going vp into a chā∣ber, vvith one mind perseuere in prayer. 9. Aue Maria. There S. Peter as chiefe Pastor of the vvhole companie, publisheth an election to be made of an Apostle, to supplie ludas too me. VVich he doth not by anie commandemēt of Christ expressely vvritten, but by suggestion of Gods spirite, agreable to the Scriptures. 10. Aue Maria. They appoint two, Ioseph and Mathias, and praying God to declare by directing of the lottes, vvhich of them he had chosen to the Apostle shippe, the lot falleth vpon Mathias, and he is numbred vvith the other eleuen Apostles.
3. Mysterium gloriosum. the Holy Ghost comes to the Apostles and Mary 3. PATER NOSTER.
The Comming of the Holie Ghost SEing the most holie virgin the mo¦ther of God, ful of grace, the holie A¦postles endued also with power and au∣thoritie, and al the faithful being alreadie iust, did neuertheles perseuere praying tenne continual daies, for the comming of the Holie Ghost, promised them by our Sauiour: how much more ought we wretched sinners, most fraile and weake vessels, to perseuere in penāce prayer and obsecratiō, that we may receiue the Ho∣lie Ghost, either for remissiō of our sinnes if yet we remayne in that state, or for in∣crease of grace, if we be alreadie restored into Gods fauour? And here, ô my soule, thou oughtest to be so much more dili∣gēt in meditating this Mysterie, because here thine owne free cōsent, and coope∣ratiō is necessarily required to thy iustifi∣catiō; wheras in thy creation, redēption, and vocation, thou diddest, nor couldest nothing at al further nor hinder Gods worke. But now except thou doest volū¦tarily accept of the grace offered thee, and cooperate therewith, thou shalt not only neuer attayne eternal life, but also incurre greater damnation, for so great benefites by thee neglected.
1. Aue Maria. The tenth day after the Ascension, being the fiftith from Easter, the third houre (frō sune rising) sodenly cometh à sound from heauen, as of a vehement wind and filleth the whole house whe∣re they were praying. 2. Aue Maria. And immediatly there appeare to them parted tongues, as it were of fire, which do light and rest vpō euerie one of these 120. persons, so praying together. 3. Aue Maria. And they are al replenished with the Holie Ghost receiuing abundāt increase of grace, with the seuē gifts: of wisdome, vnderstanding, counsel, fortitude, know∣lege, pietie, and of the feare of our Lord. 4. Aue Maria. This voice being heard the people flocking together of manie nations and diuers languages, euerie one heareth the Apostles speake in his owne tongue, the great workes of God. 5. Aue Maria. Some deriding say, These men are ful of new vvine. But S. Peter confuteth this sur∣mise, prouing that IESVS, vvhom they had crucified, is risen, and ascended, and hath sent the Holie Ghost. And 5000. are con∣uerted and baptized.
6. Aue Maria. The Apostles preach boldly Christ cru∣cified, confirming their doctrine by Scri¦ptures, and miracles, notwithstanding the Iewes commande them, and that vvith threates, not to speake at al of IESVS. 7. Aue Maria. Ananias and Sapphira for their sacrilege, at S. Peters vvorde fal downe dead. Others are cured of diseases euen by the shadowe of S. Peter, vvho vvith others being cast in prison, are deliuered by an Angel, and preach openly in the Temple. 8. Aue Maria. They are al apprehended againe and brought into the councel, indited for trās∣gressing the commandement of the High Priests, but they answere, That God must be obeyed rather then men. Finally they are vvhipped, and therof they reioyce. 9. Aue Maria. S. Steuen (vvith six others) is made Dea∣con, preacheth Christ, vvorketh miracles, confoundeth the aduersaries, is accused of blasphemie, and stoned to death. But is crovvned in heauen. And manie, by his death and prayers, are conuerted. 10. Aue Maria. The twelue Apostles make the Crede, and going into diuers partes of the vvorld preach the Gospel. Saul à notorious perse∣cutor is conuerted, and made à chiefe Apostle. And so preacheth Christ conuer∣ting manie nations.
4. Mysterium gloriosum. Mary dies in bed 4. PATER NOSTER.
The death and Assumption of our B. Ladie. VVhen the Apostles, according to their function, preach the Gospel of Christ, and trauel in gaining soules (in diuers and specially in these parts of the vvorld; Peter first in lurie, then in Syria, Antioche and other places, finally in Italie: Andrew in Achaia, Iames the greater in Spaine, Iohn in Asia, Thomas in India, Iames the lesse in Ierusalem, Philip in Phrygia, Bartho∣lomew in Scythia, Matthew in Aethiopia, Simon in Persia, Thadaeus in Mesopota∣mia, Matthias in Palestina, Paul in most parts of the world) the whole Church floorishing in al kinds of vertue, aboue al others the most sacred virgin, the mother of God excelleth: vvho albe it so excel∣lently endued with diuine knowlege that she teacheth the Euangelists manie things, concerning our Sauiours Incarnation, Natiuitie, education, and other like Myste∣ries, best knowne to her of al mortal per∣sons; yet being a vvoman, and most hum∣ble of al creatures, she neither preacheth openly, nor conuerseth with manie, but liueth in priuate state, in cōtinual exercise of al vertues, leauing in the world by her vvhole life, a most perfect Rule and liuely example, to al those that desire to tend towards perfection.
1. Aue Maria. After our Lords A scension, his B. mother our Ladie, being more frie, then euer be∣fore, from vvorldly cares, imployeth her selfe vvholy to deuotion. S. Iohn the Euā∣gelist prouiding for her al necessaries tem∣poral and spiritual. 2. Aue Maria. After fifteene yeares more expectation, it is reueled to the sacred virgin, that she shal change her mortal life for life immor∣tal, and so enioy the euerlasting fruition of her blessed sonne. 3. Aue Maria. She humbly beseketh her sonne our Lord, that he vvil voutchsafe to graunt her, the sight of his Apostles, before she part out of this transitorie life. 4. Aue Maria. Al the Apostles at one instant are taken vp into the ayre, and brought into lerusa∣lem, to visite the B. virgin, except S. Iames already martyred, and Thomas vvho by Gods special prouidence cometh some∣what later. 5. Aue Maria. The Apostles and other Apostolical men being thus met together, the most holie soule of the sacred virgin, sweetly parting from the bodie ascendeth into heauen with à troupe of glorious Angels.
6. Aue Maria. Her sacred bodie (of which God tooke flesh) is most honorably buried in Geth∣semani, with Apostolical and Angelical musike, most heauenly melodie. 7. Aue Maria. The same Angelical quier remayneth three whole dayes at the sepulchre, singing Psalmes Hymnes and spiritual Canticles, praysing God and the mother of God. 8. Aue Maria. After three dayes the Angels cease sin∣ging, and Thomas the Apostle arriuing, with most feruēt deuotion beseketh the rest of the Apostles, to graunt him the sight of the most venerable and sacred bodie. 9. Aue Maria. To satisfie his deuote desire they opē the sepulchre. Where finding only the linnen, most sweete and fragrant, in vvhich the holie bodie had bene wrapped, the bodie it selfe can nowhere be found in earth. 10. Aue Maria. Wherupon these so many and so excellēt eye witnesses do assuredly deme, that he who tooke flesh of this imaculate bodie, hath assumpted the same into heauē, re∣united to the soul in eternal glorie.
5. Mysterium gloriosum. Mary is crowned in heaven by the Holy Trinity 5. PATER NOSTER.
The Coronation of our B. Ladie. THE Apostles are againe restored to the places from whence they were brought: and by them and others the death and Assumption of the most im∣maculate virgin, mother of God, is de∣nounced in al parts of the world. And so beginneth more and more to be fulfil∣led that prophecie of hers, saying: FROM HENCE FORTH AL GENERATIONS SHAL CAL ME BLESSED. For euen from her Assumptiō, the whole Church of Christ begā (as stil it cōtinueth) most solemly to celebrate, not only the ascē∣ding of her most holie soul into heauen (as of other Saincts) but also the resur∣rection assumption and glorification of her bodie in heauē, where she enioying the perfect vision of God, in the highest degree, after her sonne of al creatures, is established Quene of heauen, and of al blessed Saincts and Angels, adorned with so excellent à crowne, as no earth∣ly thing can expresse, though often prefi∣gured by diuers excellent things and persons, but al infinitly inferior to the thing it self.
1. Aue Maria. She is crowned Quene of al holie Cō∣fessors, and holie Angels: for that fhe in this life keeping in Matrimonial state, Angelical puritie, was blessed with fruite wherby mankind is redeemed. 2. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of holie widowes, and of Archangels: who being saluted by an Archangel, conceiued the sonne of God; And afterward became an exāple and consolation of al faithful widows. 3. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of virgins, and Ange∣lical Principalities: vvho so farre excelled al others in virginal puritie, as a Quene excelleth her subiects in princelie dignitie. 4. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of al Religious Or∣ders, and of Angelical Potestats: because she renouncing the vvorld, and by vowe of virginitie excluding the ordinarie ma∣ner of conceiuing, conceiued by the Holie Ghost our Redemer. 5. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of Euangelists, and of Angelical Powres: for that she in∣structed euen the Euangelists in diuine Mysteries, and conceiued and bare him, vvho only is the author and vvorker of al miracles.
6. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of al holie Bisshops and Postors, and of Angelical Domina∣tions: because she (by geuing her special assent to that the B. Trinitie had decreed) brought into the vvorld the bread of life, the true foode of soules. 7. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of Patriarches, and of the Angelical Thrones: for that she by an ineffable meanes conceiued, and nine moneths bare in her wombe, the Sonne of God, her owne also proper sonne. 8. Aue Maria. She is crowned Q. of al holie Prophets, and of the holie Cherubims: for that she more perfectly knew al diuine Mysteries (being the mother of God) then any other mere creature vvhosoeuer. 9. Aue Maria. She is crovvned Q. of al Christs Mar∣tyrs and Apostles, and of the burning Se∣raphims: for that she farre excelled them (vvherin they excel the rest of Gods ser∣uants) in feruent charitie. 10. Aue Maria. She therfore, vvho excelled in grace al orders of men and Angels, doth also excel the same in most high degree of glorie; and is placed and crowned, by her owne most excellent sonne, the Quene of al creatures.
Omne iudicm dedit Filio: quia Filius Hominis est. Christ presides over the Final Judgment CREDO IN DEVM.
BE thankful (ô my soul) to the most B. Trinitie, one aeternal God: who created thee after his owne Image, to the end thou shouldest serue him, and therby inherite his heauenly kingdome. who also to redeme thee, being through sinne become the bond slaue of the Di∣uel, and guiltie of aeternal death, and damnation, sent his owne only Sonne (the second Person of the same Holie Trinitie) to take flesh of man and to be borne of à virgin, to liue in pouertie, la∣bours, tribulatiōs, and worldlie miseries: and finally to suffer the most ignomi∣nious, and painful death of the Crosse. who the third day rose againe, for thy iustification: the fourtith day folowing ascended into heauen, for thy glorifica∣tiō; And after tenne dayes more, sent the Holie Ghost (the third Person of the same most B. Trinitie) in visible signes to his Church (thē beginning in Ierusalem) to continue with the same Church, to the end of the world; that by his grace and operation, thou, and euerie soule, shouldest be made partaker of these so great benefites, so dearly purchased by our sweete Sauiour. And in particular be thou most thankful, for that by this
grace of the Holie Ghost (which thou by no meanes couldest deserue) thou art now a mēber of the Catholike Church; and therby partaker of diuers Sacramēts, and other most holie Mysteries, and of al the prayers and merites of the faithful in this world, yea and of al the court of heauen. By which graces also thou hast bene washed from thy sinnes, iustified and sāctified. and that not once only but often, thy Redemer not hitherto suffe∣ring thee to die in thy sinnes, as manie others haue done, but stil offereth thee his grace and sweete pardon, readie to receiue thee, whē and how often soeuer thou doest truly conuert, and sincerely wilt accept thereof; euē at this instant, except thou thy selfe repel the same from thee. And finally, so thou perse∣uere in his seruice to the end, he wil geue vnto thee (my soule) shortly after death, and to my bodie for thy sake, in the general iudge∣ment day, when al flesh shal rise againe, an inae∣stimable crowne of glorie, and life euerlasting. AMEN.
The Corone of our B. Ladie: With certaine particular points to be meditated, in saying the same. In nomine Patris, & Filij ✚ & Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Mary encircled by a crown of thorns BE mindful (ô my soul) of the Passiō of our Lord, and of the Compassion of our Ladie, his mother. Suffer thou with them in this world, that thou maist reigne with them in glorie.
In sudore vultus tui, vesceris pane Adam and Eve labor after the Fall 1. PATER NOSTER.
Certaine singular Priuilegies of the B. virgin Marie, before her Natiuitie. THE aeternal vvisdom of God orday∣ning before al vvorldes, that Christ our Lord should be borne of a virgin, die vpō a crosse, and therby redeme mākind from the captiuitie of sinne and damnation, in∣to which we fel by the trāsgression of A dāordayned withal, that there should be ex∣tant in the world, at the time designed, a certaine virgin excelling al other creatures euen the pure Angels, in grace and sancti∣tie, who should be the mother of this our Redemer. And by cooperating with him to our saluation, as old Eue had done with Adam to our fal and destructiō, should do more then recompence the hurt of the for∣mer. For as Adam was the proper and prin¦cipal cause, and Eue the next occasion of sinne and death: so Christ is the only pro∣per cause, ād his mother the next occasion of grace and life. Wherupon saieth sweete S. Bernard: Albeit by one man in deede and one woman, we were excedingly damaged yet (God be thanked) by one man and one woman al losses are repared. And that not without great increase of graces. For the benefite doth farre excede the losse. Our merciful Father geuing vs for à terrestrial Adam Christ our Redemer; and for old Eue Gods owne mother.
1. Aue Maria. Our merciful Lord promiseth this sin∣gular virgin, straight after the fal of man, saying to the serpent: I vvil put enmitie, be∣tvven thée and the vvomā, betvven thy seede and her seede, but she shal bruyse thy head in peeces. 2. Aue Maria. The first woman being by sinne the mother of death, yet is called EVA, that is, the mother of the liuing, in figure of this blessed virgin, ordayned to be the Mother of life. 3. Aue Maria. Likwise Sara, Rachael, Anne, Eliza∣beth and others, being long barraine, but afterwards mothers of notable issue, are figures of this singular virgin the Mother of God. 4. Aue Maria. The bush also of Moyses, Aarons rode Gedeons fleece, the arke of the couenāt, the glasse without spot, the garden in closed, and other shadowes of the old Testament, doe signifie the same fruit∣fulnes of this sacred virgin. 1. Aue Maria. And for other singular vertues of al sor∣tes, she is prefigured by Rebecca, Marie the sister of Moyses, Debora, Iael, Iudith, Hester and other most noble persons, and things.
6. Aue Maria. The Prophets do most cleerly fortel this blessed virgin: A rodde shal spring of the roote of Iesse: A virgin shal con∣ceiue and beare a sonne: A woman shal enuiron a man. And manie the like. 7. Aue Maria. This singular spouse of God is likewise described by Salomon: A lilie amongst thornes: Al bewtiful: Faire as the moone: Chosen as the sunne: The sea starre. &c. 8. Aue Maria. Of this meruelous virgin the Sybilles (Phrophetisses of God among the Hea∣thens) do thus sing: (vves nigh: Novv comes the virgin cleare, the golden age dra-Nevv Ofspring doth appeare, sent from the he∣auens high, VVhich is Gods issue deare. 9. Aue Maria. Anne the wife of Ioachim, after twentie yeares barrainnes, conceiueth by Gods special fauour this noble virgin, so often promised, prefigured, prophecied, and be∣fore al worlds elected the Mother of God. 10. Aue Maria. And lest she should be at anie time, the child of vvrath, Gods enemie, or slaue of the diuel, she is by singular priuilege (as manie piously thinke) preserued from al sinne, and vvith the infusion of her soul replenished vvith grace.
Que est isa qu progreditur quasi aurora cousurgs̄. Mary's nativity 2. PATER NOSTER.
The Natiuitie of the B. virgin; and her life til she vvas espoused. LIke as the morning driuing away the nights darknes, besides the light which it bringeth, for sheweth à greater light to be at hand: euen so after foure thousand yeares darknes in the whole world, first shineth the most pure virgin voide of al sinne, and ful of grace: plainly signifying by her singular vertues, the true light and fountaine of al grace (which lightned her, and al that be light∣ned) to be very nere at hand. For now is borne the singular spouse, ordayned to be the mother of God, who was so long since promised to her noble Ancesters; prefigured by manie miraculous Myste∣ries; for told by Prophetical oracles; the renowned virgin without spott, borne of the blessed seede of the Patriarkes, of the excellēt race of the Prophets; of the holie stock of Leui, and of the Royal bloud of Iuda; euerie way adorned with al kind of generositie, and endued in the highest degree with most cleare sanctitie because she is to conceiue, and beare the fountaine and flowre, the beginning and end of most holie and true Nobilitie.
1. Aue Maria. This virgin is called MARIA, that is, The sea, Bitternes of the sea, Mistresse and Ladie of the sea, or Exalted. Wherby are noted diuerse things happening vnto her, ioyful, sorowful, and glorious. 2. Aue Maria. Coming to the vse of reason and thin∣king seriously of God, she dedicateth her whole life to his seruice, firmly pur∣posing neuer to offend him more nor lesse, in thought, word, nor deede. 3. Aue Maria. At the age of three yeares she is pre∣sented in the Temple: where (alacritie of mind supplying imbecillitie of bodie) she ascendeth the fiftene stepps before the dore without helpe of anie. 4. Aue Maria. From morning til nine a clock she is only occupied in Diuine seruice: thence til noone in handie vvork. After meat (being very smal) she imployeth the rest of the day in reading sacred bookes. 5. Aue Maria. Her vvhole life (as a most perfect rule of al perfection) shineth in al vertues: namely in humilitie, obedience, prudence, mode∣stie, grauitie: in singular faith, hope, cha∣ritie, and contempt of the vvorld.
6. Aue Maria The vertue of virginitie (hitherto vn∣knowne in the world) she doth singu∣larly obserue therto binding her self for euer by religious vowe: as also to po∣uertie and obedience. 7. Aue Maria. She is of al chast persons most chast, of al good the best, of al vvise the vvisest, of religious the most religious, amongst al she onlie attayneth the ful perfection of Religious state. 8. Aue Maria. She attayneth also to that special know∣lege of Gods counsel, amongst other Myste¦ries reueled vnto her, that God shal be borne of a virgin, and by death vpon the Crosse shal redem mankind. 9. Aue Maria. Wherupon she desireth aboue al, that she may once see this our Redemer, and that she may be admitted to imploy her humble seruice to that most noble virgin his mother. 10. Aue Maria. Being by the Priests (her Superiors) espoused to Ioseph (a godlie yong man) she signifieth to him her vowe of per∣petual virginitie. Wherof he alloweth so wel, that he also voweth perpetual chastitie.
Eit m magna qui potens est. the Wise Men present Mary and child with gifts 3. PATER NOSTER
The Annunciation with other Mysteries to the Purification. AL things being accomplished that should go before the coming of Messias, the most blessed Trinitie sēdeth an Embassadour Gabriel an Archangel, or (as some holie Doctors thinke) one of the high Seraphins, to the most gracious virgin Marie, as it may seeme for three special causes. First, to signifie vnto her in the behalfe of God almightie, the ma∣ker of heauen and earth, that she shal conceiue and beare the Sonne of God, that is, the second Person of the same most holie Trinitie, the long promised SAVIOVR of the world. Secondly to re∣quire, to the effectuating hereof, the cōsent of the same blessed virgin, with∣out which the Diuine goodnes wil not accomplish this most excellent worke. Thirdly, that by Angelical testimonie this great Mysterie may be notified to the who∣le vvorld, vvhich is so ioyful to Angels and men. For by this meanes Angels receiue à Head, by vvhom the ruine of their felowes is to be repared. And men enioy à Rede∣mer, by vvhom al mankind is to be ran∣somed from captiuitie of sinne, and of euerlasting death.
1. Aue Maria. The holie virgin being in contemplatiō the Angel vnexpected saluteth her saying: HAILE FVL OF GRACE, OVR LORD IS WITH THEF: BLESSED ART THOV AMONG WOMEN. wherat she is trubled. 2. Aue Maria. Feare not MARIE (saith the Angel) for thou hast found grace vvith God. Behold thou shalt conceiue and beare à sonne, and shalt cal his name IESVS. He shal be great, and shal be called the Sonne of the Hieghest. 3. Aue Maria. She then demanding, by what meanes she shal conceiue, seing not by man, the Angel answereth: The Holie Ghost shal come vpon thee, and the powre of the Highest shal ouershadow thee. 4. Aue Maria. The B. Virgin answering againe: Behold the handmaide of our Lord, be it donne to me according to thy vvord: the Sonne of God i the same instant made the Sonne of man, and the virgin is made the mother of God. 5. Aue Maria. Presently she visiteth her cosine Eliza∣beth, at vvhose coming the Infant in Eli∣zabeths vvombe leapeth for ioy of Christs preseuce. And the mother admireth the great humilitie of the Mother of God.
6. Aue Maria. The B. virgin, after three moneth, returning home, appeareth to be with childe: Ioseph is therwith trubled, but an Angel telleth him, that she hath con∣ceiued by the Holie Ghost. 7. Aue Maria. They go to Bethleem according to an Edict made by Caesar. There our Lord is borne, and laid in a manger; the Angel, sing, the shepheards visitie the Infant, and glorisie God. 8. Aue Maria. The eight day the child is circūcised, and his name called IESVS, a name that is aboue al names. For God in geuing vs. SAVIOVR, powreth as it were vpon vs al his owne bountifulnes. 9. Aue Maria. Three Sages, seeing à strange and bright starre appeare, come from the East to Ieru¦salem, seeking the king of the Iewes. And finding him in Bethleem, they offer vnto him gold, myrrhe, and frankincence. 10. Aue Maria. The most pure virgin (not obliged therto) obserueth the ceremonie of Purifi∣cation, presenteth her sonne in the Tēple. Where Simeon ioyfully receiueth him into his armes. Yet fortelleth the mother of sorowes to come.
Virgula ex armatibus mvrrhae et thurts. Mary and Joseph rest during flight from Herod 4. PATER NOSTER.
The most special tribulations and comforts of our Ladie, from her Purification to the Passion of our Lord. HErod seeking to kil our Sauiour in his infancie, Ioseph vvarned in sleepe by an Angel to flie into Aegipt vvith the child and his mother, presently parteth away the same night. In vvhich banishement for their sustenance, something the holie virgin gaineth by spinning and sowing, something Ioseph getteth by his carpen∣ters art, the rest they receiue of almes, so much as sufficeth for their state of pouer∣tie, which they professe. For hauing meate and clothes in very meane sorte, they re∣quire no more. And as vvel in Aegypt, as after and before, in this happie familie alwaies remaineth, vvith singular peace, à most holie contention. For that euerie person humbling them selues, vvil needes be much inferior to the other two. IESVS being in deede Lord of heauen and earth, yet liueth subiect to his mother, and sup∣posed father. the B. virgin nourishing and tending her owne sonne, yet honoreth him, as he is also the Sonne of God; and obeyeth Ioseph as her head and Lord. Ioseph helpeth and directeth them both in temporal affayres; yet vvith al humble and due reuerence honoreth the Sonne as Lord and king; and the mother as Ladie and Quene of men and Angels.
1. Aue Maria. Herod being dead, Ioseph returneth vvith the childe and his mother into the Land of Israel: but fearing ARchelaus his sonne and successor in Iudea, they dwel in Nazareth in Galilee. 2. Aue Maria. IESVS being tvvelue yeares old remai∣neth in Ierusalem vnknowne to his parēts. Who seeking him at night amongst their kinsfolke, and not finding him, returne the next day, and seeke him in Ierusalem. 3. Aue Maria. After three daies they find him in the Temple sitting amongst the Doctors, hea∣ring them and asking questions. To his mother he answereth, that he must be about his Fathers busines. 4. Aue Maria. The thirtith yeare of his age he taketh leaue of his mother, as no more to dwel with her. About this time Ioseph dieth. And so the mother virgin and widow dwelleth with her cosines. 5. Aue Maria. Our Lord is baptized of Iohn, fasteth fourtie daies: Then calleth disciples, and preacheth the kingdom of God; And at his mothers instance turneth water into wine at à Mariage.
6. Aue Maria. She most deuoutly heareth her sonne Diuine Sermons: often seeth his Mira∣cles: diligently obserueth the diuers affe∣ctions of men, and continually medita∣teth vpon al. 7. Aue Maria. A certaine woman, bursting out in middes of the troupe, in praise of Christ and of his mother, sayeth: Blessed is the wombe that bare thee, and the pappes that gaue thee sucke. 8. Aue Maria. Wherunto our Lord ioyneth greater praise, saying: Yea blessed are they that heare the word of God, and keepe it. As much to say: as my mother is more blessed for hearing me, then for hearing me. 9. Aue Maria. Seeing manie thousandes folow and admire her sonne, and others busie to destroy him, she remayneth stil in one state, knowing farre greater matters are yet to come. 10. Aue Maria. Whilest others receiue our Lord with triumph into Ierusalem, as their King, onlie his deare mother meditateth vpon his Passion, which he is to suffer within fewe daves after.
Tuam p animam pertransibit gladius. Mary observes Jesus on the cross 5. PATER NOSTER.
The Compassion of our Ladie: at our Lords Passion and death. VVhat à sacred ftorehouse of al vertues the B. virgin is, doth abundantly ap∣peare in her vvhole life, but most specially in the time of her sonne our Lord his Pas∣sion and death. Where aboue al other vertues, her feruent charitie (Quene of al the rest) doth most excel: which neither the obstinate rancor of the high Priests, Scri∣bes, Pharisees and other deadlie enimies, nor the most vvicked treason of Iudas, nor the extreme ingratitude of the Iewes his owne people, nor the raging furie of most bloudie executioners, nor anie other malice could anievvhit diminish, but in deede contrariwise infinitly increased the same. For how much further she seeth sinners runne in vvickednes to their euer∣lasting ruine, so much the more she thir∣steth after their repentance and saluation. And therfore seeing her owne death suffi∣ceth not to redeme mankind (for vvhom she is most vvilling to yeld her life) she spareth not her owne sonne (as our heauēly Father spareth him not, nor he him self) but most freely offereth him to suffer al that the exact iustice of God requireth for the redemption of the vvhole vvorld.
1. Aue Maria. Our Lord praying in the garden, his B. mother also praying at home seeth in spi∣rite (and after heareth by his disciples dis∣persed) that her sonne is takē, and brought bond to Annas, and to Caiphas. 2. Aue Maria. She seeth also in spirite (and in the mor∣ning heareth) that he is falsly accused, vile∣ly and most cruelly handled, beaten, moc∣ked, spit vpon, and by the Iewish councel iudged guiltie of death. 3. Aue Maria. In the morning she vnderstandeth, that he is deliuered vnto Pilate, by him sent to Herod, there derided and sent back; Then most cruelly whipped: Crowned with thor∣nes, and condemned to the Crosse. 4. Aue Maria. Then going forth (with S. Iohn and others) she meeteth her sonne al embrued with his owne bloud, crowned with thor∣nes, and carying his owne Crosse vpon his sore shoulders. 5. Aue Maria. She seeth her sweete sonne fal downe vnder his Crosse. Which then an other is compelled to carie, lest he should die in the way before he be crucified.
6. Aue Maria. She seeth her sonne, and Lord (being nailed through both hādes and both fee to the Crosse) hoissed vp on height, and from thence his most sacred bloud strea∣ming downe euen to the ground. 7. Aue Maria. Then she heareth him mekely pray for those that do blaspheme and crucisie him: Also promise paradise to the penitent theefe: And commend her selfe and his beloued disciple, ech to other. 8. Aue Maria. Againe she heareth him complaine, that he is destitute of al temporal comforth: op∣ssed vvith thirst: affirme that al is consum∣ate: and commend his spirite into the handes  his Father. 9. Aue Maria. An other great wound she seeth made n her sonnes side with à lance, from whence issueth his last bloud, and wa∣er withal. Neither doth she yet depart om the Crosse. 10. Aue Maria. She taketh the dead bodie into her ar∣es. Which when she hath à litle behol∣en, and washed with teares, it is taken om her againe, buried, shut vp, and guar∣ed that none may take it away.
Conseruat omnia verba haec conferens in corde suo. the risen Christ visits Mary in her chamber 6. PATER NOSTER.
The actes of our Ladie from Christs Resurrection to her ovvne death and Assumption. THE vvonderful Mysterie of Christs most sacred Passion being accom∣plished; some busie in this sorte, some in that sorte, as they vvere very diuersly affected; and almost al either doubting, or altogether despairing of our Lords Re∣surrection; onlie the most faithful virgin mother firmely beleeueth, and assuredly expecteth her Sonnes Resurrection the third day. Wherupon she retyring to her chamber, after that she hath awhile medi∣tated vpon the sacred vvoundes of her deare sonne and Lord, and other torments by him suffered, she turneth her cogitatiōs from that tragical act, to thinke vvhat he now doth vvhere he is. And so as vvel in the sepulche she adoreth him as God, knowing that his humaine flesh, albeit vvithout soul, yet is continually vnited to his Godhead, by vvhich it vvas assumpted: as also in Limbo, vvhere his soule by his excellent brightnes driuing away the won∣ted darknes, triumpheth ouer death, los∣seth the captiuitie of the old fathers, and by his most glorious presence maketh that place, vvhich hitherto vvas à prison, to be to them as heauen or paradise.
1. Aue Maria. The third day, our Lord rising from death appeareth first of al to his deare mother: who being neerest vnto him, both by nature and grace, best deserued that priuilege. 2. Aue Maria. She often enioyeth his conuersation til his Ascension; and then of al others is also most ioyful for his exaltation; most assuredly beleeuing and hoping in him and aboue al desiring his glorie. 3. Aue Maria. On Whitsunday al the faithful are re∣plenished with the Holie Ghost, but she most abundantly; who by howe much she was more ful of grace before, is so much more capable of increase therof. 4. Aue Maria. The rest of her life being most free from al worldly cares, and altogether attending to Gods seruice, she passeth with the deuoutest Christians. 5. Aue Maria. Whē the time drew nere that she should go to her sonne, he first voutchsafeth her the sight of al his Apostles then liuing, ex∣cept S. Thomas, who by special prouidence cometh after her death.
6. Aue Maria. The Apostles, and other Apostolical persons, attending about her, and Angels singing praises of God, and of his mo∣ther, she most sweetly yeldeth her ghost. 7. Aue Maria. The Apostles lay the holie bodie with al solemitie, in an honorable tumbe in Gethsemani. Where quires of Angels do sing three dayes together. 8. Aue Maria. After three dayes, the Angels cease singing, and Thomas the Apostle co∣meth, who requesteth most instantly his felow Apostles, that he may see and reuerence the sacred bodie. 9. Aue Maria. They willing to do him this fauour open the tumbe, but find nothing, saue only the linnen, wherin the bodie had ene wrapped, and those yelding à most weete sauour. 10. Aue Maria. Wherby these so notable eye witnes∣es do vndoubtedly iudge, that our ord, who tooke flesh of this bodie, ath raised, and alreadie glorified, and ssumpted the same into heauen.
Eta ergo ADVOCATA nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos ad nos conuerte. Mary seated in glory in heaven PATER NOSTER.
The Coronation of the glorious virgin the mother of God. SEeing the glorie of euerie Sainct in heauen is so great, as no tongue can expresse, nor the mind of man vnder∣stand (for neither eye hath seene, nor care hath beard, neither hath it ascended into the hart of man, vvhat things God hath prepared for them that loue him) how much lesse can the glorie of the mother of God (exalted aboue al the quires of Angels) be vttered or conceiued by anie mortal man? But shal we therfore be silent and say no∣thing at al therof? shal we also cease to thinke and meditate therof, because it so farre surmounteth both our sense and vnderstanding? No, in no wise can we e so excused; but so much the more we are bound to reioice, and as we can seing we can not as we would) vtter forth the praises of the mother of mer∣cie, mother of grace, mother of life, mo∣ther of glorie, mother of God, now eigning Quene of heauen, whom also l generatiōs (of the faithful in earth) do cal lessed, deuoutly serue, religiously ho∣nour, euery where preach, magnifie; and humbly beseke to obtaine for vs al things behooful for our saluation.
1. Aue Maria. She is crowned Quene of al holie Con∣fessors, widowes, and Virgins; And of the Orders of Angels, Archangels, and Prin∣cipalities. 2. Aue Maria. She is crowned Quene of al holie Reli∣gious persons, Pastors, and Bishops; And of the Angelical Potestates, Powers, and Dommations. 3. Aue Maria. She is crowned Quene of al holie Pa∣triarkes, Prophets, Martyrs and Apostles; And of the Thrones, Cherubims, and Se∣raphims: And of al created persons. Credo in Deum. BE thankful therfore (ô my soul) to the most blessed Trinitie, who for thee and for al mankind, hath not only sent the Sonne of God IESVS CHRIST, à new and heauenlie Adam, to redeme the world from the thraldome into which we fel through the old terestrial Adam: but also vvheras our old mother Eue was in à sort, the cause or occasion of our ruine, (by suggesting to Adam that sinne, which was our vniuersal destruction) hath bestowed vpon vs à new and most blessed woman, the immaculate virgin MARIE, who in like sort, is à meanes of our saluation,
by cooperating with our Sauiour, in di∣uers Mysteries of our Redemption, and by continual intercession for vs to her Sonne, much more profiting vs, by ech of these waies, then the other woman did vs harme. And to thee (ō most sacred virgin) what thankes shal I render, for thy exceding great benignitie and good∣nes towards me, and the whole world? Or with what praises shal I (a poore wrech) extol thee? whose incomparable excel∣lencie (as à shadowe may resemble à bodie, or à figure signifie à truth) was long before thy birth, represented by the brightnes of the sea starre; by the bewtie of the moone; the clearnes of the sune; the bush burning and not consuming; Aarons rodde; Gedeons wool-fleece; the looking glasse without blemish, the fountaine of the gardens; the welspting of liuing water; the garden iuuironed; the lilie of the valley; the palme tree in Cades; the rose in Ierico; the bewtiful Oliue; the high Cedar in Libanus; the Cipresse tree in Sion; the towre of Da∣uid; the throne of Salomon; the citie of God; the gate of heauen, and by manie the like: And by al the renowmed women from the beginning of the world; but by none of al these, no nor by al together, can be sufficiently expressed thy singular graces, giftes, vertues, priuilegies, and
dignities, who art al faire, neuer touched with anie spot. who alwaies remaining a virgin, hast cōceiued him in thy wom∣be, whom the heauens could not com∣prehend. Who art the singular spouse of the Father of heauen, the mother of the Sonne of God, and aboue al mere creatures, ful of the Holie Ghost, the inaestimable gemme of the celestial and terrestrial world. which we thy Catho∣like clients, euery where most assuredly beleeuing, and sincerly professing, do admire thy singular grace, and congratu∣late thy most praeeminēt glorie. To thee we repaire, crauing in al our necessities thy praerogatiue intercession, because next to thy sonne, thou art our aduoca∣te, our hope, our refuge, our comforth, our helpe, our supreme Ladie and Que∣ne, mother of al good, mother of Christ, mother of God. we therfore most hum∣bly besech thy celestial Maiestie, vout∣safe to intreate thy sonne for vs sinners, nowe and in the houre of our death, that we may be made worthie of his promi∣ses, through the same Christ our Lord thy Sonne, who with the Father and Holie Ghost liueth and reigneth one God world without end. Amen.
The Corone of our Lord. With particular pointes to be me∣ditated, in saying the same. In nomine Patris & Filij ✚ & Spiritus Sancti. Amen. depiction of the risen Christ THE B. Trinitie decreed before al worlds, that the Sonne of God should be borne of à virgin, by death on the crosse redeme mankind, and iudge the whole world.
The coming of our Sauiour into this world. 1. Pater noster. The Archangel Gabriel sent from God saluteth the B. virgin MARIE, and imparteth to her, that she shal conceiue the Sonne of God. wherunto she con∣senting, CHRIST IS INCARNAT, God made man. 2. Pater noster. The B. virgin visiting her cosin Eliza∣beth, the Infant in Elizabeths wom be is sanctified, and leapeth for ioy of our Sauiours presence. 3. Pater noster. Our SAVIOVR is borne in Bethleem, wrapped in clothes and laid in à māger. Angels declare his birth to poore shep∣hards, and sing: Glorie to God in the hieghest. 4. Pater noster. The shephards presently do visite this childe in Bethleem: and finding al as the Angel had told them, they returne glorifying God. 5. Pater noster. The eight day folowing the childe is circumcised, and his name called IESVS, that is, SAAIOVR. for he shal saue his peo∣ple from their sinnes.
6. Pater noster. Three Sages, called Gaspar Melchior and Baltasar, coming from the East adore him: ech one fotering three giftes, gold frankincense and myrrh. 7. Pater noster. Our Lord is presented in the Temple. His mother offereth a paire of turtles, and two pigeons. Simeon ioyfully taketh the childe into his armes. He and holie Anne do prophecie. 8. Pater noster. Herod seeking to kil our Sauiour in his cradle, Ioseph warned by an Angel flieth with the childe and his mother into Aegypt. 9. Pater noster. Herod killeth al the male-children, vnder two yeres old, in and nere Bethleē. They are al Martyrs. And the Diuels flie out of the Idols in Aegypt. 10. Pater noster. Herod being dead Ioseph with the child and his mother returne from Aegypt, and dwel in Nazareth of Galilee, not da∣ring to go into Iurie, for feare of Arche∣laus Herods sonne. 1. Aue Maria. The virgin mother cooperateth with the B. Trinitie, and our Sauiour, in al these Mysteries; meditating vpon the same.
Our Sauiours conuersation in this world. 1. Pater noster. Our Lord at the age of twelue yeares, remaining in Ierusalem, vnknowne to his parents, after three dayes is found in the Temple sitting amongst the Doctors. 2. Pater noster. His mother demanding why he stayed behind them, he answereth, that he must be occupied in his Fathers affayres. And so returning to Nazareth, liueth subiect to them. 3. Pater noster. In the thirtith yeare of his age, he is baptised by Iohn Baptist. The Holie Ghost descending vpon him, à voice declareth: This is my Sonne, in whom I am wel pleased. 4. Pater noster. In the desert, he fasteth fourtie dayes and fourtie nights, is tempted and van∣quisheth the Diuel: Instructing vs, as wel by example as by word, how to fight with the spiritual enimie. 5. Pater noster. Then he calleth disciples, preacheth the kingdom of heauen to be at hand, and to be obtayned paenance, and by perfect workes of iustice.
6. Pater noster. He confirmeth his doctrine by miracles, Scriptures, reasons, testimonie of good men, and by his owne so perfect life, that none can charge him with anie sinne. 7. Pater noster. He often foretelleth, that he shal be be∣trayed in Ierusalem, deliuered to the Gen∣tiles, mocked, whipped, spitt vpon, cruci∣fied, and the third day shal rise againe. 8. Pater noster. That none be scandalized with his Pas∣sion, he fortelleth of the glorie to come; And before three of his Apostles is trans∣figured, shewing them à glimse of his glorie. 9. Pater noster. He often detecteth the calumniations, of his enimies, conuinceth their errors, reproueth their sinnes, and sometimes deliuereth him selfe miraculously out of their handes. 10. Pater noster. He rideth into Ierusalem, is receiued with great triumph, and saluted king of Israel. And driueth byers and sellers out of the Temple. 2. Aue Maria. The B. virgin is partaker with her sonne in ioy and tribularion; most diligently heareth his diuine worde, and of al others most faithfully keepeth the same.
Our Sauiours passing forth of this world. 1. Pater noster. Our Sauiour eateth the Paschal lambe with his tvvelue Apostles, washeth their feete, and instituteth the B Sacrament and Sacrifice of his owne bodie and bloud. 2. Pater noster. He praieth in the garden, that the cuppe of his Passion may be taken from him; yet submitteth his wil to his Fathers wil, swea¦teth bloud, is comforted by an Angel, and betrayed by Iudas. 3. Pater noster. He is brought bound to Annas, and Caiphas; scornfully and cruelly handled, falsly accused, thrise denied by Peter, and condemned by the Iewes councel as guil∣tie of death. 4. Pater noster. In the morning he is deliuered to Pilate, by him found innocēt; yet sent to Herod, by him also iudged innocent, but mocked as à foole, and sent back to Plate. 5. Pater noster. The Iewes with great clamour require, that Barabbas be deliuered, and IESVS crucified. Pilate to appease their furie, cau∣seth our B. Sauiour to be most cruelly whipped. vvhere he receiueth 5490. stripes.
6. Pater noster. They put on him a scarlet robe, a crow∣ne of thornes, and à reede in his hand, sa∣luting him as King. Pilate so sheweth him saying: ECCE HOMO. the Iewes crie, Crucifie him, Crucifie him. 7. Pater noster. Pilate washeth his handes, protesting that he is innocent; the people crie, his bloud be vpon vs, and vpon our children, & Pilate fearing to offend Caesar iudgeth Christ to be crucified. 8. Pater noster. Taking away the scarlet robe, but lea∣uing the crowne on his head, they cause him to carie his owne crosse; he falleth vn∣det it, but lest he die in the way, they force an other to carie it. 9. Pater noster. Our Sauiour crucified betwen two thee∣ues, destitute of al temporal comforth, in extreme paine sheweth exceding patience, and infinite charitie towards al, frends and foes. 10. Pater noster. After three houres (al things being now consummate) he yeldeth the ghost. His soule presently triumpheth in limbo: in the euening his bodie is honorably buried 3. Aue Maria. His constant mother aboue al others suf∣fereth vvith him: the svvord of sorovv often pearcing her hart and afflicting her vvith the paines of death.
The glorie of our Lord after his Passion. 1. Pater noster. The third day our Lord riseth glo∣riously from death, deliuering out of limbo al the Sainctes of the old Testa∣ment; appeareth first to his mother, then to others: disposeth manie things per∣tayning to the kingdome of God. 2. Pater noster. The fourtith day he ascendeth into heauen, sitteth on the right hand of his Father, our singular and proper Aduo∣cate, by whom we haue manie inter∣mediators, and intercessors. 3. Pater noster. Vpon Whitsunday he sendeth the Holie Ghost in visible signes: By whom he gathereth, gouerneth, sanctifieth, conserueth, and glorifieth his Church continually to the end of the world. Credo in Deum. OVR Lord IESVS CHRIST, who before al worlds was ordained to be the Redeemer of mankind: Who at the time appointed was borne of the virgin MARIE, in great humilitie and
pouertie: who sustayned most great la∣bours, calling al men to penance, inui∣ting al by example and word to grace, desirous to saue al: who after infinite traualies, reproches and torments, at last suffered the most ignominious, and most bitter death vpon the Crosse: who finally is gloriously risen from death, ascended into heauen, from thence sent the Holie Ghost: who continually con∣serueth, and sanctifieth his Church in earth: The selfe same Lord and Redemer wil come againe in great powre, and Maiestie, Iudge of al, Angels and men: And wil render to euerie one (accor∣ding as they shal deserue wel or euil) euerlasting paine, or euerlasting glorie AMEN.
A briefe Rosarie of fiftene Pater nosters and Aues with one Crede: in memorie of eight ioyes and seuen sorovves of the most B. Virgin MARIE. In nomine Patris & Filij ✚ & Spiritus Sancti. Blessed be the most holie, and indiuisible Trini∣tie, novve and euer vvorld vvithout end. Amen. 1. Pater. Aue. The first ioy. The Annunciation and Conception of Christ, wherby God is made man, and the B. virgin the mother of God. 2. Pater. Aue. The second ioy. The B. Virgin visiting S. Elizabeth, the infant in Elizabeths wombe, both the mo∣thers, Zacharias, their kins folke, and neighbours do al reioyce. 3. Pater. Aue. The third ioy Our Sauiour is borne, the Angels sing the shepheards visite the Infant, the Sages adore him. 4. Pater. Aue. The fourth ioy. Presenting her sonne in the Temple, Si∣meon ioyfully taketh the childe into his armes: he and holie Anne do prophecie. 5. Pater. Aue. The first sorowe. Ioseph vvith the childe and his mother flie into Aegypt, parting avvay by night. 6. Pater. Aue. The second sorowe. Our Sauiour being tvvelue yeres old, is lost three dayes, his parents seking him vvith great griefe.
7. Pater. Aue. The third sorowe. In the thirtith yere of his age, our Lord taketh leaue of his mother, as no longer to dvvel in her familie, Ioseph also dieth. 8. Pater. Aue. The fourth sorowe. The B. Virgin heareth that her sonne is takē; cruelly handled, vvhipped, crovvned with thornes, and cōdēned to be crucified. 9. Pater. Aue. The fith sorowe. The afflicted mother meteth her sonne carying his Crosse, and seeth him fal dovvne vnder it. 10. Pater. Aue. The sixt sorowe. She seeth her sonne crucified betvven tvvo theeues, and after extreme paines, to yeld the ghost. 11. Pater. Aue. The seuenth sorowe. She taketh his bodie in her armes, And it is taken from her againe and buried. 12. Pater. Aue. The fifth ioy. Our Sauiour rising from death, first of al appeareth to his deare mother. 13. Pater. Aue. The sixt ioy. The blessed mother reioyceth aboue al others, for her sonnes Ascension, and exal∣tation in heauen. 14. Pater. Aue. The seuenth ioy. She also reioyceth most for the coming of the Holie Ghost, and is thervvith most abundantly replemshed. 15. Pater. Aue. The eight ioy. The glorious mother of God, is both in soul and bodie assumpted into heauen, and exalted aboue al the orders of Angels.
OVR Lord IESVS CHRIST, in whom there could neuer be anie sinne, And the most blessed virgin his mother, being alwayes preserued from al spot or blemish therof, suffered ex∣treme paines; and so entred in to their glorie, leauing vnto vs example to folow their steppes. How much more then are we (most miserable creatures, being loadden with sinnes, compassed about with infirmities, and subiect to al dange∣rous tentations) bound to sustaine ne∣cessarie chastisments, and sweete corre∣ctions, reioycing in hope, patient in tri∣tribulation, instant in prayer, not to be wearied in our mindes, nor faint vnder the rodde of our heauenly Fathers disci∣pline, that we may at last reigne with them, be glorified with them, and made heyres of God, felowe heyres of Christ our Sauiour, and our most blessed Ladie his mother, of aeternal ioy and glorie, which no man can take away from vs. Which he graunt vnto vs, who with his owne bloud purchased the same for vs, by the intercession of his most sweete mother, and of al his glorious Saincts. AMEN.
LITANIES GATHERED OVT OF THE CORONE OF OVR LORD. KYrie eleyson. Christe eleyson. Kyrie eleyson. Christe audi nos. Chiste exaudi nos. 1 Ab Angelo Gabriele an∣nunciate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 2 Baptistam tuum in vtero sanctificans, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 3 Ex virgine nate, & ab An∣gelis agnite, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 4 A Pastoribus in praesepio visitate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 5 Circuncise, & nomine IESV appellate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 6 A Magis (Gentium primi∣tijs) adorate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 7 Presentate, & in Simeonis vlnas suscepte, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 8 In Aegypto cum parenti∣bus exulans, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 9 Simulachra Aegyptiorum destruens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 10 Archelaum fugiens, Na∣zareth inhabitans. CHRISTE Miserere nobis.
Virgo benedicta his omnibus cooperata, or a pro nobis. 1 Triduo amisse, & inter Doctores inuente, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 2 In Patris negotijs semper occupate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 3 A Ioanne in Iordane bapti∣zate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 4 In deser to ieiunans, & ten∣tatorem vincens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 5 Exemplo & verbo legem Dei docens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 6 Miraculorum & sermon is virtute potens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 7 De Passione tua, & Resur∣rectione praemonens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 8 In monte coram Apostolis transfigurate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 9 Ab inimicorum fraude & furore te liberans, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 10 Ierosolymam cum trium∣pho ingrediens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. Virgo sacratissima actionum Fi∣lij tui particeps, ora pro nobi. 1 Sacramentorum & Sacrifi∣cij Institutor, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 2 Patris voluntati tuam sub∣mittens, & sanguinem sudans. CHRISTE Miserere nobis.
3 A concilio Iudeorum fal∣sò condemnate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 4 Pilato tradite, & ab He∣rode irrise, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 5 Barabbe postposite, & di∣rissime flagellate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 6 Spinis coronate, coccino indute, & illuse, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 7 Pilati sententia ad mortē Crucis damnate, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 8 Crucem tuam baiulans, & sub illa corruens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 9 Cruci affixe, & omni so∣latio destitute, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 10 Sponte tua pro vita mūdi moriens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. Virgo afflictissima, plus omnibus Filio tuo compassa, ora pro nobis 1 Tertia die a morte glo∣riose resurgens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 2 In coelum Ascendens, & ad dexterā Patris sedēs, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. 3 Spiritu Sancto de caelis misso Ecclesiam tuam regens, CHRISTE Miserere nobis. Virgo gloriosa anima & corpore in coelos assump ta, or a pro nobis. ℣. Oportuit pati Christum. ℟. Et ita intrare in gloriam suam.
Oremus. CHriste omnipotens, qui ab aeterno Filius Dei existens, humanum ge∣nus in tempore Nascendo laetificasti; Pa∣tiendo & Moriendo a peccati captiui∣tate redemisti; Resurgendo ab inferis liberasti; Ascendendo in caelos adduxisti; praesta quaesumus: vt qui summis hisce beneficijs laeti gaudemus; venientem quoque te Iudicem securi videamus, & gloriosum Remuneratorem habeamus. Qui viuis & regnas, cum Deo Pa∣tre, in vnitate Spiritus Sancti Deus. Per omnia sae∣cula saeculorum. AMEN.
LITANIES GATHERED OVT OF THE CORONE OF OVR LADIE. KYrie eleyson. Christe eleyson. Kyrie eleyson. Pater de caelis Deus, tua te orante prae∣electa virgine, Miserere nobis. 1 Ad serpentem conterendum foemina promissa, Ora pro nobis. 2 Mater viuentium in Eua no∣minata, Ora pro nobis. 3 Per faeminas supra naturam fertiles figurata, Ora pro nobis. 4 Per res multas mirabiles prae∣significata, Ora pro nobis. 5 Per omnes clarissimas mulie∣res praenotata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Oraculis Propheticis praenū∣ciata, Ora pro nobis. 7 Singularis Dei Sponsa à Sa∣lomone descripta, Ora pro nobis. 8 A Sybillis (diuino spiritu af∣flatis) decantata, Ora pro nobis. 9 Ioachimo & Annae diuinitùs data filia, Ora pro nobis. 10 Singulari priuilegio à pecca∣tis praeseruata, Ora pro nobis.
Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, tua te orante pia Matre virgine, Miserere nobis. 1 Virgo virginum MARIA dicta, Ora pro nobis. 2 Gratiam vt nunquam pecca∣res consecuta, Ora pro nobis. 3 Triennis in templo praesen∣tata, Ora pro nobis. 4 Diuinis & pijs operibus sem∣per intenta, Ora pro nobis. 5 Virtutibus omnibus plenissi∣mè exornata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Religiosae virginitatis cultrix prima, Ora pro nobis. 7 Perfectum vitae statum plenè adepta, Ora pro nobis. 8 Filij Deiex virgine nascituri praescia, Ora pro nobis. 9 Futurae Dei Matri ancillandi studiosa, Ora pro nobis. 10 Iosepho nupta, virgo semper permansura, Ora pro nobis. Spiritus, Sancte Deus, tua te ornate sin∣gulari sponsa, Miserere nobis. 1 Ab Angelo salutata gratia plena, Ora pro nobis. 2 Quod Deum conciperes ab Angelo edocta, Ora pro nobis.
3 In Matrem electa ancilla Dei professa, Ora pro nobis. 4 Dato consensu statim Mater Dei facta, Ora pro nobis. 5 In cuius voce exultat in vtero Baptisa, Ora pro nobis. 6 De tua prole, anxio viro, tu quoque anxia, Ora pro nobis. 7 De Christo nato gaudens Ma∣ter alma, Ora pro nobis. 8 De IESV circunciso Mater afflicta, Ora pro nobis. 9 Adorantibus Filium Magis Mater laeta, Ora pro nobis. 10 Filiū presentans de doloribus praemonita, Ora pro nobis. Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus tua te oran∣te excellentissima persona creata, Miserere nobis. 1 Post exilium in Aegypto Ga∣lilaeae incola, Ora pro nobis. 2 De Filio amisso Mater dolo∣rosa, Ora pro nobis. 3 De illo inuento Mater conso∣lata, Ora pro nobis. 4 Simul existens Mater, Virgo, Vidua, Ora pro nobis. 5 Aquam in vinum vertendi Filio causa, Ora pro nobis.
6 Factorum & verborum Filij obseruantissima, Ora pro nobis. 7 Propter insignissimum Filium Mater laudata, Ora pro nobis. 8 Quia Deum audisti, quā quia genuisti, magis beata, Ora pro nobis. 9 In aduersis & secundis aequa∣bilissima, Ora pro nobis. 10 Filio Rege salutato, Passioni attenta, Ora pro nobis. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, tua te oxante Matre tecum in Cruce patiente, Miserere nobis. 1 Ob Filium inimicis traditum Mater maestissima, Ora pro nobis. 2 Ob Filium vilissimè tractatū Mater tristissima. Ora pro nobis. 3 Ob Filium flagellatum, & spi∣nis coronatum, Mater af∣flictissima, Ora pro nobis. 4 Filio crucem portanti pia Ma∣ter obuia, Ora pro nobis. 5 Filium sub Cruce corruentē Mater contemplata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Filio crucifixo, Mater corde transfixa, Ora pro nobis. 7 Mater per Filium discipulo commendata, Ora pro nobis.
8 Mater, moriente Filio, dolores mortis passa, Ora pro nobis. 9 Mater Filij latus videns ape∣riri lancea, Ora pro nobis. 10 Mater exangue Filij corpus in vlnas amplexa, Ora pro nobis. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, tua te orante Matre gloriosa, Miserere nobis, 1 A Resurgente Filio Mater prima visitata, Ora pro nobis. 2 Ascendente Filio plus omni∣bus gauisa, Ora pro nobis. 3 Spiritus Sancti gratia super omnes repletissima, Ora pro nobis. 4 Mundi curis libera diuinis in∣tentissima, Ora pro nobis. 5 Apostolorū concursu moriens honorata, Ora pro nobis. 6 Super omnes Angelos scandēs Filio proxima, Ora pro nobis. 7 Sepulta Gethsemani coelesti cum Psalmodia, Ora pro nobis. 8 Vt Thomas veneretur, in tu∣mulo quaesita, Ora pro nobis. 9 Apostolis quaerentibus nulli∣bi inuenta, Ora pro nobis. 10 Corporis quoque gloria in coelis potita, Ora pro nobis.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, ipsa te orante caelorum Regina, Miserere nobis. 1 Angelorum Archangelorum, & Principatuum Regina, Ora pro nobis. 2 Potestatum, Virtutum, & Do∣minationum Regina, Ora pro nobis. 3 Thronorū, Cherubim & Se∣raphim omnium{que} Sancto∣rum Regina, Ora pro nobis. ℣. In omni tribulatione & angustia nostra: ℟. Succurrat nobis pijssima Virgo Maria. Oremus. INterueniat pro nobis quaesumus Do∣mine IESV Christe, nunc & in hora¦mortis nostrae apud tuam clementiam B. Virgo Maria Mater tua, Domina no∣stra, cuius sacratissimam animam, in tua Passione, doloris gladius pertransiuit. Et∣tu ô Domina nostra, coelorum Regina & Imperatrix gloriosissima, in tuam be∣nedictam fidem atque singularem tute∣lam, & in sinum misericordiae tuae nos¦suscipe. Tibi hodie, & quotidie, & in hora exitus nostri, animas nostras, cor¦pora nostra, fortunas nostras, totam vi∣tam
nostram & vitae finem commenda∣mus: vt per tuam sanctissimam interces∣sionem, & per tua merita, omnia nostra dirigantur & disponantur, cogitationes, verba, & opera, secundum tuam, tuique Filij voluntatem. Per eundem Dominū nostrum IESVM Christū Filium tuum: Qui cum Patre, & Spiritu Sancto viuit & regnat Deus, in saecula saeculorum. AMEN. The doleful state of our B. Ladie, vnder the Crosse of her Sonne. STabat mater dolorosa, Iuxta Crucem lachrymosa, Dum pendebat Filius. Cuius animam gementem Contristantem & dolentem, Pertransiuit gladius. O quam tristis & afflicta, Fuit illa benedicta Mater vnigeniti! Quae maerebat & dolebat Et tremebat, cum videbat, Nati poenas inclyti. Quis est homo qui non fleret, Christi Matrem si videret, In tanto supplicio?
Quis non posset contristari, Piam Matrem contemplari, Dolentem cum Filio! Pro peccatis suae gentis, Vidit IESVM in tormentis, Et flagellis subditum. Vidit suum dulcem natum Morientem, desolatum, Dum emisit spiritum. Eia Mater fons amoris, Me sentire vim doloris Fac, vt tecum lugeam. Fac vt ardeat cor meum In amando Christum Deum, Vt sibi complaceam. Sancta mater istud agas, Crucifixi fige plagas Cordi meo valide. Tui Nati vulnerati, Tam dignati pro me pati, Poenas mecum diuide. Fac me vere tecum flere, Crucifixo condolere, Donec ego vixero. Iuxta Crucem tecum stare, Te libenter sociare In planctu desidero. Virgo virginum plaeclara, Mihi iam non sis amara,
Fac me tecum plangere. Fac vt portem Christi mortem, Passionis eius sortem, Et plagas recolere. Fac me plagis vulnerari, Cruce hac inebriari, Ob amorem Filij. Inflammatus & accensus, Per te virgo sim defensus, In die Iudicij. Fac me Cruce custodiri, Morte Christi praemuniri, Confoueri gratia. Quando corpus morietur, Fac vt animae donetur Paradisi gloria. Amen. ℣. Tuam ipsius animam pertransiuit gladius. ℟. Vt reuelentur ex multis cordibus cogitationes. Oremus. INterueniat pro nobis quesumus Domi∣ne IESV Christe, nunc & in hora mortis nostre, apud tuam clementiam beata virgo Maria mater tua, cuius sacratissimam ani∣mam in hora tue Passionis, doloris gladius pettranfiuit: per te IESV Christe Saluator mundi: Qui cum Patre & Spiritu Sancto viuis & regnas in saecula saeculorum. AMEN.
THE APPROBATION. Libellum himc, à viro Anglo, docto & pio perlegendum rauimus; eiusque iudicio probatum, impri∣mendum duximus. 25. Ianuarij. 1599. Matthias Archiepūs Mechliniensis.
