18270 99848225 13305
¶A Discouerie of Edmund Campion, and his Confe∣derates, their most horrible and traite∣rous practises, against her Maiesties most royall person, and the Realme. Wherein may be seene, how thorowe the whole course of their Araignement: they were notably conuicted of euery cause. VVhereto is added, the Execution of Edmund Campion, Raphe Sherwin, and Alexander Brian, executed at Ti∣borne the 1. of December. Published by A. M. sometime the Popes Scholler, allowed in the Seminarie at Roome amongst them: a Discourse needefull to be read of euery man, to beware how they deale with such secret seducers. Seene, and allowed. Imprinted at London for Edwarde VVhite, dwelling at the little North doore of Paules, at the signe of the Gunne, the 29. of Ianua. 1582.
To the right Ho∣nourable Sir Thomas Bromeley Knight, Lord Chan∣celler of England: William, Lord Burleigh, and Lorde Treasorer: Robert, Earle of Leicester, Tho∣mas, Lorde Chamberlaine, and Fraunces, Earle of Bedforde, with the rest of her Maiesties moste Honourable Councell: con∣tinuaunce of health, in∣crease of Honour, and all heauenlie wise∣dome. IT hath beene al∣wayes seen (right Honorable) that the Peaceableste Prince hath had the priuiest enimies, the moste ciuill gouernment, some vnci∣uill aduersaries: whose tedious natures, could not liue within the compasse of verte and mo∣destie, and therefore they were
at continuall warre with them, who established and maintay∣ned a thing of such excellencie within their Dominiōs. I need not trauaile for circūstances, to approoue what I haue said: for that it hath beene manifested heere in our Realme of Eng∣land. Her Maiestie, vnder whom we haue been so godlie, gratiouslie & famouslie gouer∣ned, her selfe beeing a spectacle to the whole world, for vertue and modesty of life: how great∣lie she is defamed, contemned, and despised therefore, of those whom iniquitie and error hath peruerslie blinded, I leaue to your Honorable iudgements, my humilitie & vnfained loy∣altie remembred. But fearing to intangle my self in any such matters, as may either seeme
tedious to your Honours, or troublesome to any modest minde: I betake my selfe to such a simple course of breui∣tie, as may discouer my true in∣tent, and the duetiful reuerence I owe to so Honourable perso∣nages. It is not vnknowen to your Honours, how not long since I witnessed my faithfull seruice to her Maiestie, to the disproo∣uing of such, as were bothe her professed and sworne aduersa∣ries: at which tyme, how nota∣blie they were approoued guil∣tie of euerie obiection, bothe by their owne writinges, suf∣ficiēt euidence, & vnreprooue∣able witnesses: it were needlesse heere to rehearse, for that the matter is yet apparant. Since that time (right Ho∣nourable)
there hath beene cast abroade, by the secrete fauou∣rers and reends, of these so suf∣ficiently cōuicted: such reports, Lybels, & trayterous speeches in the behalfe of the aforena∣med, bothe against me, and the other of the witnesses: as many haue been inforced to muse & meruale, they haue been dely∣ered soorth after such spight∣full and vniust manner. Wherefore, at the earnest intreatie of diuers, godlie and well disposed men, as also to discharge my selfe of the ma∣nifest vntethes, (to such as haue heard and seen them pub∣lished against me:) vnder your Honours fauour I hau beene so bolde, to discouer these Trai∣tours, and their trtcherous practises, that it maye be seene
and knowen, howe falselie and vntruelie they haue accused me, and that they maye well vnderstand, howe I haue beene in those places, where I ha heard and seene more then I will heere report, to the con∣founding o them, and  such as they are, though in their Libels, they giue foorth other∣wise of me. My request is therefore to your Honours, vnder whose fauours I cōfesse my selfe bothe safelie and sufficientlie defen∣ded: that this my good in∣tent maye attaine your Ho∣nourable liking, which will crosse all the , wherewith I haue beene en∣daungered and discouraged by many.
Thus remaining the most af∣fectionate in duetiful seruice to her Maiestie, and an humble and obedient seruaunt to your Honours: I cease at this time, beseeching God long to pre∣serue her Maiestie, and your Honours in con∣tinuall happinesse. Your Honours in all humility and due∣tie. A. Munday.
To the Courteous and freendly Reader. HOw precious a thing (courte∣ous Reader) faithfulnesse to our Prince and Countrey is, cannot bee so much spo∣ken of, as it dooth worthily deserue: for that as CiceroCicero. defineth, it is the onely foun∣dation of Iustice, and with∣out which, Prudence is but Deceitfulnesse, Temperaūce but Luxuriousnes, Forti∣tude meere Cowardise, and Iustice her selfe, plaine Cru∣elnes. The Heathen and o∣ther, fayling in this so com∣mendable
vertue, would e∣steeme themselues vnwor∣thie to vse the company of men: how much more then ought we Christians, to re∣uerence and honour such an especiall orament? The Romanes would take a Hog,A notable example of the Ro∣manes. and breake it to pee∣ces in a Morter: wishing theyr owne bones might so be broken, if they did prooue false of theyr faith. The Medians and the A∣rabians were wnt to pri their fingers,Medians and the Arabians. and eche of them should  thereof sig∣nitying , that theyr blood should be spilte th kept not their aithe. Among the Scithians,Scithians. if any were sound to
their aithe: they were by the lawe presentlye adiud∣ged to death. Cicero writing to Tre∣batius,Cicero▪ epist. 12. li. 7 Epist. famil. reporteth a notable custome among people, how they would take Iupiters Stone in theyr handes, vttering these woordes: Euen as I cast this Stone from me, so et Iupiter cast me out of the so∣cietie and companye of all men, if willingly I breake my faithe. The AegiptiansAegiptians. could neuer abide suche persons, as were  their faith: and therefore they that so offended, no redemption might seeme to saue their liues.
Gaudentius Merula re∣porteth,Gaudenti∣us Merula, de Memo∣rabilibus. li. 3. Chap. 3. that in Bithinia there is a Riuer called Ale∣os, and of some Olochas: of which if any one taste, that hath broken his faithe to his Prince and Coūtrey: his entrayles are presently set on fyre within him, and so he endeth his life merue∣lous miserably. I would such a Riuer were in all Citties in the world: for then lesse Trea∣son and impietie would be practised among men, a∣gainst their Prince and naturall Countrey. You see of late how it hath happened by our owne Countreymen, borne and bred heere among vs, how
they neither regarding their duetie to God, or faithfull looue they ought to beare theyr Princesse and Coun∣trey: wilfully yeelded them∣selues to the enemy of the whole world, with him to practise the destruction of their lawfull Soueraigne and her dominion: which beeing manifestly prooued to theyr faces, is neuerthe∣lesse misreported by some of their secret fauourers. Wherefore, that thou maist beware, how thou giuest credit to any of them all, whose wicked mindes kick and spurne against the trueth: read this Discourse, and thou shalt euidently see into the depthe of their se∣cret
and trayterous dea∣lings. And if thou finde in some places, such wordes as mo∣destie can hardly suffer: be∣stowe such reuerence in the reading, as thou maiste be warned by them, to remaine euer a loyall and faith∣full subiect. Thine to vse, A. Munday.
These faults good Reader, where thou shalt finde them esca∣ped in the Booke, I desire thee freendly to correct. In the first Page of B. among the names, thou shalt finde Iames Bosgraue by misaduen∣ture left out: I desire thée to beare with the Printers fault, and to allowe the name there. In the 11. page of C. 3. line, for, ought to be committed, reade, ought not to be committed. In the 15. page of C. 8 line, for, aforenaned, read, aforenamed. In the 16. page of C. 9. line, for, your wayne, reade, you twaine. In the 5. page of F. 16. line, for, Edward Bishton, reade, Ed∣ward Rishton, as also in the Margent. All other faultes whatsoeuer, es∣caped vnwittingly, and not wil∣fully: I desire thée fréendly, to a∣mend as they should be.
A Discouerie of Edmund Campion, and his Complices, their most trai∣terous practises, against her Maiestie, and the Realme. Edmund Campion, Raphe Sher∣win, Lucas Kerbie, Edwarde Rishton, Thomas Coteham, Henrie Orton, and Robert Iohnson, all these aforenamed persons, were brought on Mon∣day, the 20. of Nouember to the high Barre at VVestminster: where they were seuerallie, and all together, endited vpon high Treason, the sum whereof, fol∣loweth in breefe as thus. THAT these persons, con∣trarie bothe to looue and dutie, forsooke their natiue Countrie, to liue beyond the
Seas, vnder the Popes obedi∣ence, as at Roome, Rheimes, and diuers other places: where, (the Pope hauing with other Prin∣ces practised, the death and de∣priuation of our moste grati∣ous Princesse, and vtter subuer∣tion of her seat and kingdom, to his deuillish and abhomina∣ble Religion) these men, ha∣uing vowed their alleageaunce to the Pope, to obey him in all causes whatsoeuer, being there, gaue their consent, yea vtter∣most furtherance they might, to ayde him in this moste trai∣terous determination. And for this intent and pur∣pose, they were sent ouer, to se∣duce the hearts of her Maiesties loouing Subiects, and to con∣spire and practise her Graces
death, as much as in them lay, against a great day, set and ap∣pointed, when the generall ha∣uock should be made, those on∣ly reserued that ioyned with them. This layde to their charge, they boldely and im∣pudently denyed: wherevpon a lewrie was impaneled, their owne confessions, their owne writings, and credible witnes∣ses, Viua voce, produced to their faces, approouing them guiltie of the former allegations, as heereafter followeth.
After the Endight∣ment was read vn∣to them, and theyr aunswere, that it was beyond theyr power to prooue them faultie in any such matters, so stiflie they stoode in their apparant impuden∣cie: first was mooued to them, sundrie Treasons past, attemp∣ted against her Maiestie, by those of theyr sect and disposition, yet notwithstanding the vttermost of theyr mallice and crueltie: howe mightilie God had defended his chosen Elizabeth, returning their dealinges to theyr owne destruc∣tion. Among sundrie these Treaso∣nable practises,The rebel∣lion in the North, one∣ly through the Popes meanes. which the Pope, the aunciēt aduersarie to her Ma∣iestie: hath at diuers tymes set a broche, the rebellion in the North may remaine as a witnesse, of his exceeding mallice & spight against
her Grace and gouernement. Whereto let vs ad, the Bull sent ouer by Iohn Felton,The sm of the Popes Bul, which our Eng∣lishe men beyonde the Seas, holde as their autho∣ritie, to re∣bell against her Maie∣stie. which Trai∣terouslie he placed on the Bishop of Londons gate: in which Bull, the Pope vtterlie excommunica∣ted her Maiestie, shée was an He∣retique, he had dispossest her of her Crowne and Dominion, shée was not the lawfull Quéene of this Realme, and her Subiectes were not bounde to obeye any of her Lawes or Decrées: but they were all frée, and perfectlie dis∣charged of theyr allegeaunce to her, so that they might lawfullie, when tyme serued so conuenient for them, bothe styrre rebellion against her, and also enter into Armes against her Maiestie. The Popes wyll in this, hath béen put in execution, as through the yll demeanour of diuers per∣sons to him affected, it was moo∣ued in the North: where, main∣taining themselues on the auctho∣ritie
of the Pope, and his traite∣rous Bull, secretly dispersed a∣broad, they entred into a plaine and manifest rebellion.Doctor Saunders his rebellion in Ireland, through whom the people were seduced to fight a∣gainst theyr lawfull Princesse. The like was put in practise in Ireland, through Doctor Saunders, and o∣ther Traitours, who there ioyned themselues together, vnder the Popes standard, to bring to pass their secret appointment in this Realme. Through their perswa∣sions and dealings, the people were mooued in the Popes name, to fight against their lawfull Princesse vnder his Banner: and to rebell against her, so notori∣ously as they might. The encou∣ragement to this great disobedy∣ence, they receyued through Doctor Saunders, a Fugitiue and ranck Traitour to his Prince and Contrey: as also through diuers Iesuits, bothe English and Irish, whose hippocriticall shewe of holines, & deuillish perswasions on the behalse of the Pope, theyr
Maister and head: entised a mul∣titude of the people there, to chaunge their profession in Reli∣gion, and to yeeld them selues to the Popes authoritie, whereby they should renounce the moste certaine and iust title of her Ma∣iestie, and when forraine forces should be assembled there, they to ioyne with them in their intent, and so traiterously rebell against their lawfull Soueraigne. All these practises tooke their origy∣nall from the Pope, as well by sending his secret Messengers, as also by his trayterous Bull:This Bull remayneth in his for∣mer force, by this Pope, onely a tol∣leration for the sraitnes to the Sub∣iecte therein amended. which béeing sent by Pius Quin∣tus, is neuer thelesse confirmed (in the former authoritie) by this Pope Gregorie, xiij. and remay∣neth in hope to take effect at some time or other, for which he dooth watche opportunitie as conueni∣ently as he may. But God, the iust auenger of all causes, as he hath hitherto
preserued her Maiestie, and this lyttle Iland, from all theyr mali∣cious attempts and practises, and hath deseruedlie thrown the yoke of theyr shame, on theyr owne neckes: so wyll he, no doubt, con∣tinew his fatherlie care, that his Chyldren shall be preserued, and theyr aduersaries confounded. But sayeth Maister Campion:Maister Cāpion de∣streth not to heare, howe their Trea∣sons tooke their origi∣nall, & howe from tyme to time they haue beene enterprised and confoū∣ded: where∣fore to blind the peoples yes, he ma∣keth this counterfeyt aunswere. what is this to vs héere present? what appertaineth this to our en∣dytement? we are héere bothe se∣uerallie and altogeather endyted on high Treasō, and for that that is obiected against vs, we must aunswere. Let not other mennes offences be layde to our charge, that we should aunswer for other mennes faultes committed long since: some of vs were then but Nouises héere in y• Uniuersities, and were altogether ignoraunt of these matters. What haue we to doo with any thing that they dyd? they that were offendours,
let them aunswere to what you can lay against them. For vs that be héere at this in∣stant, you must eyther saye: thou Campion dyddest this thing, or thou (naming some of the other) committedst this offence, and therevpon bring your proofes and witnesses, otherwise you shal ne∣uer be able to touch vs. As for these assertions, for the strength they haue against vs, I wyll not estéeme it woorth a peny woorth of Pippins: and therfore to your en∣dytement. This aunswer, so smoothly de∣liuered, and with such coy lookes, and protestation of action iested: to all the standers by gaue perfect notice of the man, bothe of his na∣ture and disposition, as also of his prompte and ingenious capacity, to shaddowe an absolute trueth, with a showe of great wisedome and learning. For this he knew right well, that before he came to
that place, he had wn a meruay∣lous goodly reporte, to be such a man,In the Li∣bell against mee, was made this report of Campion, to be a man of so rare learning & excellēcy. &c. as his lyke was not to be found, eyther for lyfe, learning, or any qualitie that might beautifie a man, so that by his fauourers & fréendes it was blowen abroade: that we had neither Doctors nor other, that were woorthy to enter disputation with him, he was so farre aboue them all, that they might not deale with him. Nowe béeing brought vnto a publique triall, it stoode him vpon to argue somewhat of the prayse that had béene giuen him: where∣fore, in verie quaint and familiar eloquent gloses, he stoode vppon quirkes and fine deuise of spéeche, thinking, as he had deluded many before, so at that present, he might blinde the eyes of Iustice, and acquite him selfe of his horrible treasons. But as trueth sheweth most braue, when shée goeth na∣ked and bare, and deceyt finest,
when he is cunninglie florished: euen so, the poore habit of the one, discouered the prowde heart of the other, and confounded his boldnesse with her sacred bryght∣nesse: giuing all men to vnder∣stand, that Veritas vincit omnia. And because Maister Campion would haue made such a cunning conueyaunce of the matter, as though it neither might or coulde attaint him or any of them: it was giuen him to vnderstande, that they would not alone touche him in the sequell of the former causes, but them all, and he that supposed him selfe the cléerest. Wherevpon, Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristowe,Doctour Saunders and Doctor Bristowes bookes, were there read vnto them, wherein, most tray∣terouslie they defen∣ded the re∣bellion a∣gainst her Maiestie. theyr tray∣terous writings in defence of the Popes Bull exhibited against her Maiestie, was read vnto them, howe they bothe allowed it, and also the Rebellion in the North. Afterwarde, it was manifestlie prooued to their faces, that Bri∣stowes
booke in allowaunce ther∣of, named his Motiues, was espe∣ciallie commaunded to be vsed a∣mongst them both at Roome, and at Rheimes, euerie one béeing ex∣preslie charged not to be without one of these Bookes. This with open mouthes, they altogether denyed, some that they had neuer seene it, and some that they neuer heard of any such com∣maundement:They de∣nyed what one of theyr owne fel∣lowes had confessed▪ and subscri∣bed to, and what euery one of the witnesses knew to be moste cer∣taine. when as Iohn Hart, one of their owne fellowes, had auouched it, and thereunto subscribed. Besides, my selfe when I came to Rheimes, sawe them as com∣mon amongst them, as the little Catechisme héere amonge Chil∣dren, the inequalitie of the num∣ber considered. Againe, at Roome they were as common likewise, in the Se∣minarie, and among the English∣men in the Citty, for my selfe had it, and one of Doctor Allens Cate∣chismies
deliuered me, with great charge to imbrace it as my chéefe instruction. My Companion that went with me, he had one like∣wise: the rest of the witnesses, they had séene how common they were, and in what reuerence and authority they estéemed them: yet these men would with shamelesse faces deny it, yea, and if they might haue béene so credited, would haue sworne against it. This manifest reproofe, they would not graunt vnto: but Mai∣ster Campion taketh vpon him to wrest it according to his hu∣mor, by answering that the booke was not so ill as they tooke it for, nor deserued any such iudgement of preiudice. Now he thought he could not be taken tardie, but supposed his argument to passe vnreprooue∣able. For that in the new imprinting of this Booke, such matters as did
most sharply touch them,Maister Campion aunswered this poynt subtilly: be∣cause in the last edition of the booke, the cheefe matters a∣gainst them selues were abridged. were a∣bridged, thinking none of the for∣mer bookes should come to lyght: but héerin Maister Campiō ouer∣shot himself, for so slie an aunswer could not couer so foule a blemish. When they had notably conuicted them of these matters, which with obstinacie they styll denied: they came to the intent of their secrete comming ouer into this Realme, which was for y• death of her Ma∣iesty, and ouerthrow of the whole Realm, which should be by dome∣sticall rebellion, & forraine hostili∣ty, y• sum wherof, in bréefe is thus. This little Iland, God hauing so boūtifullie bestowed his blessings vpon it, that except it prooue false within it selfe, no treason whatso∣euer, can preuaile against it, & the Pope béeing héerof very well per∣suaded, by reason y• all his attēpts haue prooued of no effect: he hath foūd out a meane, wherby he assu∣reth himself to spéede of his desire.
Secrete rebellion must be styrred héere at home among our selues,The gene∣rall deter∣mination, howe to bring to passe theyrecret intent in this Realme. y• harts of the people must be obdu∣rated against God & their Prince: so y• when a foraine power shall on a suddaine inuade this Realm, the Subiectes thus seduced, must ioyne with these in Armes, and so shall the Pope attaine the sum of his wish. But now let vs examin eche matter with our selues, & sée into the bowels of this traiterous action: yea, let vs before we passe any farder, resolue our selues how this secrete Sedition shoulde be brought to passe. The people must be first recōciled from their religi∣on, to imbrace the lawes & decrees of y• Pope, then, they must be per∣swaded to forsake their duety and allegeance to her Maiesty, because she is excommunicated out of the Popes Church, and he hath fréede them of any obedience they should vse to her: so that they may law∣fully resist against her, and take weapōs of defence in this behalfe.
But now, what are they that must take vpon them, to win the hearts of the people in this sorte? they are no straungers, for if the Pope should sende them on this businesse, he might hap to faile, as he hath doone before: for, the sim∣ple and vnlearned, ignorant in their language, doubtfull of their intent, and beside hard to be wun by those they know not, would rather appeach them openly, then agrée with them in this priuilie. And if so be they might light vpō some, easie to be intreated, be∣cause their Faithe is not stayed: they might chaunce vpon some a∣gaine, whose faithfull hearts to their Soueraigne, would embol∣den them rather to die vpon such a Traitour, then once they would heare a motion, to offer them dis∣obedience. No, no, the Pope was well as∣sured, that these affayres would not be so slightly dispatched, and
therfore such a doubtfull matter, required farre more dilligent Messengers.The onely cause why the Pope hath kept his two Semina∣ries at Roome and at Rheimes so long: for that none might better mooue secret rbellion in England, then they. He hath not kept his two Seminaries, the one at Rheimes in Fraunce, the other at Roome, al this while for nothing, he hath not looued them, cherished them, and so fatherlye prouided for them, but that he had some farther intent in his dealings: these are they must doo the déede, this is the ready stringe to his bowe, and through them he ho∣peth to spéede surely. These béeing our owne Coun∣treymen, sworne to him in all causes whatsoeuer, well schooled and instructed in these affaires: they can with more dexteritie or∣der these matters, because they knowe their Hoste before they come ouer, they can disguise them selues for béeing knowne, & to be bréefe, are more priuie to our na∣ture then any straunger can be, therefore this is the onely meane.
To this ende and purpose are our Englishe men there mayn∣tayned,A sure way, to make all Englishmē they can get out of Eng∣land, to ioye with them in this traiterou intent. For none but such as will be Preests, must staye there. there receyue they theyr Préesthoode, and then they are apt to serue the turne. As for such as shall come thether, not minding to be Préestes: there is no place for them, there are excuses suffi∣cient, so that he must be a Préest, or else depart thence. And good reason haue they for this, for when they enter into Préesthood, they are sworne dueti∣full and faithfull to the Pope, to obey him in all causes what soe∣uer, and to doo what soeuer theyr Superiours shall cōmaund them: nowe if any one should remayne among them, not entring into this oath, their secrete practises might be discouered, and beside, that man vnsworne, to be sent a∣bout these matters, might chuse whether hee woulde fulfill his charge or no.
As for those that be Préestes, and are sworne to this obedi∣ence: they must, what euer happen to them, doo theyr vt∣termoste, or else they fall into the Popes cursse, and are ex∣communicated, besyde, theyr sinnes (breaking theyr promise with him,Their per∣swasion on the Popes behalfe, to vrge our Englishmē to fulfill the Popes minde, what euer comes of them. who is Christes Uicare on earth) shall neuer be forgiuen them (say they) neither in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come. With such threatnings, lyes of myracles of theyr Church, and styncking Reliques they shewe: they make our Englishe men bewitched vnto them, so that they stande in as much aw to offende him, as they doo God, which is in Heauen. For thorow his Indulgences graūted to their Agnus Des, their Beades▪ Crosses, and Medalles: they as verilie thinke that they redéeme so many soules out of Purgatory,
as the Pope dooth set vpon them at his blessing them, euen as ve∣rily doo they credit it, as we hope to goe to heauen. And for this intent,A thing to be looked vnto, for thorow their secret freends, they haue heere, a number are brought to ioyn in this action. they haue their perswaders héere, who, if they know any young Gentle∣man or other, that is willing to trauaile: they will bothe proffer him such sufficiencie of money, as shall bring him to their Semina∣rie at Rheimes, beside Letters for his entertainement there, shall be giuen him, that when he com∣meth thither, he shall not onely be welcommed gratefully, but al∣so estéemed equall with any of the other. Then when they haue studyed there a while, that they are brought within the compasse of their determination: they shall be sent to Roome, to receiue their Préesthood, if so be their mindes serue them to trauayle so farre, otherwise they receiue it at
Rheimes, and this is the continu∣all dealings betwéene the two Seminaries, to be sure of store for maintenance of their matter. These men thus made Préests,Preestes yeerly ap∣pointed, and sent for England. are appointed yearely by their Superiours, so many of them as shall be thought conuenient, to be sent into England, to make pre∣paration for the Popes former intent. They haue their charge deliuered them, how warie and circumspect, how faithfull and dil∣ligent they must be, in execution of so great a cause: they are par∣doned for so many dayes as they cannot say Masse, by reason of the daunger héere in England, and therefore they may let theyr Crownes alone vnshauen, where if they stayed there, they must be shauen duely euery wéeke. But, if when they are héere, in such a mans house where they may say Masse: they doo not dayly doo it, then they sinne mortally, and for
want of some other Préest to ab∣solue him, he writes downe all such sinnes as he dayly commit∣teth, till he may attaine vnto con∣fession. But neuerthelesse, him∣selfe hath authoritie to reconcile, confesse and absolue, so many of her Maiesties Subiects as he can win from their obedience. Then with them they bring Agnus Deis,The Popes Merchan∣dise, that his Commissi∣oners bring with them into Eng∣land. hallowed Grana, and Beades, sanctified Images, holy Gyrdles come from S. Peeters Chayre, Crosses and Medalles, and a number of such paltryes. The Agnus Dei, is included within a case made fit for the pur∣pose, and the vertue of it is, that the Deuill dare not come néere him, so long as he hath it about him, nor any sprights, or euill motions may attempt to fraye him: for that say they (most tray∣terously and blasphemously) he hath the very Lambe of God a∣bout him, which is the stincking
Agnus Dei, made of War, chris∣ma, spittle, salte, Oyle, and such trumperies, whereof I haue séene aboundance made in the Popes Pallace, and they be nothing worthe, till he haue sayd a fewe Enchaunting woords ouer them, where they stād great Chests ful, Sackes and Baskets. Yet they allow no holynesse to the Chest, Basket or Sack, which receiueth as much blessing as they. It were too tedious to discourse héere, the manner and order of all these ables: wherefore I referre you to a booke, which by the grace of God shall come foorth shortly, intituled, The English Romaine life. Wherein, our Englishmen, and theyr order of life, shall be truely and not malliciously re∣ported: with so many of theyr Popish knaueries discouered, as I know will mooue some bothe to laugh and lament.
To laugh, in that their dealinges are so ridiculous and foolishe: and to lament, in that they wyll be gouerned by so vaine imaginati∣ons. When they are thus arriued in Englande,Their own confession, howe they behaue them selues, when they come into England. they dispearce them selues into such places, where they thinke them selues to be su∣rest: some in one place, some in an other. And disguising them selues lyke Gentlemen, Seruingmen, or what Apparell they maye fynde méetest for them: they haue accesse to many and sundrie places, where hauing recon∣ciled some, theyr fréendes must lykewise be of the same stampe, and so, what from Father to Sonne, Husband and Wife, Kins∣men and acquaintance, a number are seduced & brought into theyr detestable dealinges. For, after they haue gotten any lyttle grounde within them to
builde vppon, then doo they laye vnto them, what a generall blood∣dy daye is toward England, that the Pope & other forraine Prin∣ces haue fullye determined to o∣uer runne the Realme: then bet∣ter it wer for you (say they) to yéelde your selues willingly, then to sée so horrible a slaughter, bothe of your Princesse, and all that dare presume to take her parte. Your selues, yea, and your freends shall abyde the same harde iudge∣ment, except you ioyne with vs in this action. Thus through ter∣rifying, and a thousande Traite∣rous fetches they haue: one fréend bringeth an other, and one Kins∣man an other: so that, as they them selues wyll make theyr boast, in shorte tyme they doubte not to haue the moste parte of all Englād, yea, and farder they pre∣sume, that her Maiestie thinking her selfe in most safetie, shall then be soonest of all deceyued.
These are the men that make them selues so sound and substan∣tiall,Maister Campion coulloreth their com∣ing ouer, ifming it was for the sauegard of soules. that they are as true Sub∣iectes to her Maiestie, as the best of vs. Yea, sayth Maister Cam∣pion, neuer shall you prooue this, that we came ouer, eyther for this intent or purpose: but onelie for the sauing of soules, which méere loo and conscience compelled vs to doo, for that we dyd pittie the miserable estate of our Countrey. But where are your prooues, (sayeth hee) these are but quirkes by the way, our lyues I perceyue standeth vppon pointes of Retho∣rique, you haue showen vs the Antecedent, nowe let vs haue the Ergo. With this continuall course of holdnesse and impudencie, Mai∣ster Campion and his fellowes would graunt nothing, but stiflie denied euerie cause: and Maister Campion, he tooke it for a custom, to wrest euerie thing as pleased
him, saying: That y• Iewrie were not men learned,When he had no other shift, he fell into these woords. & therefore cau∣ses of conscience ought to be com∣mitted to them, neither was that barre appointed to define on cau∣ses of conscience: wherefore, all that you doo (sayeth he) is but to bring vs into odium with y• Iew∣rie. After this order he deluded y• people, appealing styll on the de∣uoutnesse of his cōscience: because he sawe the matter brought to the verie pushe, that would general∣lie conuicte them all, for the wit∣nesses were produced and sworne Hartes confession, and their owne writinges before them, so that they would remooue them from theyr ordinarie illusions. George Elliot, one of the ordi∣narie Yeomen of her Maiesties Chāber, vpon his oath gaue foorth in euidence, as followeth. That hee, lyuing héere in Englande, among certayne of that Scte, fell in acquayntaunce with one
Payne a Préest: who gaue him to vnderstand, of a horrible Treason intended against her Maiestie and the State, which he dyd expect shortly to happen, the order, howe and after what manner, in bréefe is thus. That there should be le∣ueyed a certaine company of Ar∣med men, which on a suddayne should enterprise a moste mon∣strous attempt: a certaine cōpany of these armed men, should be pre∣pared against her Maiesty, as ma∣ny against my L. of L. as many a∣gainst my L. T. as many against S. F. W. and diuers other, whose names he dooth not well remem∣ber. The deathes of these Noble Personages shoulde be presentlie fulfilled, and her Maiestie vsed in such sorte, as modestie nor duetie wyll suffer mée to rehearse: but this shoulde be the generall crie euerie where, Quéene Marie▪Mning the Queene of Scot. Quéene Marie. It was also ap∣pointed and agréede vpon, who
should haue this man of Honours roome, and who should haue that Office: euerie thing was deter∣mined, there wanted nothing but the comming ouer, of such Préests and other, as were long looked for. Upon this report, this aforena∣ned George Elliot, tooke occasion to question with this Payne, how they could finde in their hearts to attempt an act of so great and hor∣rible crueltie, considering howe highe an offence it shoulde be to God, beside, great daunger might aryse thereby.A most trai∣teros and villainous aunswere: of euerie true Sub∣iect, to be read with reerence of the person. Whereto Payne made aunswere, that the kylling her Maiestie was no offence to God, nor the vttermost crueltie they coulde vse to her, or any that tooke her parte: but that they might as lawfully doo it, as to a brute Beast, and him selfe would be one of the formost in the execu∣ting this vilainous and most trai∣terous action.
By this you may perceiue, that the death of her Maiestie,No ote of theyr good will wan∣ted, if God did not as he dayly dooth, pre∣uent their purposes. and ouerthrowe of this Realme, was thorowlye agréede vpon, and fully determined: there wanted nothing but opportu∣nity, for Préestes bothe then and since, came ouer continu∣ally, to farther it, so much as in them laye. Now that you may be perfectly resolued, that this was a gene∣rall determination of our Eng∣lishmen, dispersed beyond the Seas, that this bloody slaughter and great day, as they called it themselues, was especially proui∣ded for, and that bothe Campion, and the rest of his Complices▪ came all onely ouer for this in∣tent: marke this which I shall now deliuer vnto you, wherein you shall perceiue the full issue of the matter. At what time, I my selfe went ouer, accompanyed with
one Thomas Nowell, whom I left at Roome, vowed to be a Préeste, and to remayne there among them: when we came to Amiens in Fraunce, wee ounde an olde English Préest, lying there, named Maister Woodwarde, of whom I could reporte, more then I will doo at this present, because I will declare things more at large in my other Booke. This Préest,This Preest was the first, that euer I heard to name the treason. hauing my fel∣lowe and me alone in his Cham∣ber, began to open to vs the imminent daunger towardes our Countrey of England: which he feared would bee vtterlye wasted and spoyled ere long, yea, her Maiestie, and all that durst take vpon them to defend her. For (quoth he) the Popes holynesse oweth them a pay∣ment, which ere long they shall féele, and that surelie.
And trust me (quoth he) this is the happiest déede that euer you did in all your life, to come from thence, leauing them to the terri∣ble iudgement which is towards them, and I would your parents and fréends were héere with you, not to endure that gréeuous ex∣tremitie. As for your twaine, the best counsell that I can giue you, is to enter into Préesthood, and so you may be able to benefit your Countrey an other day: because it is to be doubted, that there will be great want of men of the Church there. If you can conforme your selues to enter into this holy and blessed kinde of life: I will direct you not farre hence, to a place called Rheimes,In my o∣ther Booke, you shall vnderstand more. where you shall be en∣tertained, among a goodly num∣ber of our owne Countreymen, who liue there onely for this pur∣pose. We made promise to doo as he
had willed vs, but we deceiued his expectation: as because the matter is not incident to this place, I leaue to be discouered in my other Booke. At Paris we heard the verye same matter of daunger to be to∣ward England and her Maiestie: the Englishmen there,The Eng∣lishmen at Paris, rehearsed the same matter that the Preest had doone. discoursed it, euen as we had heard by the Préest at Amiens. At Lions, we vnderstood héer∣of againe, reported by one of them now condemned, named Henrie Orton,Henrie Orton, lying in the house of one Maister Deacon, gae foorth notice of the former matter. Gent. he sayd that her Maiestie was no lawfull Quéene, but an vsurper, and that as Iezabell was serued: euen so should she ere long be vsed, when the chéefe matter went forwarde in England. And to his compani∣on he sayde, that he vnderstood there were Préests appointed for England, and because he sawe that I gaue out some crosse woords, of misliking that he had
sayd: he set his Boye to picke quarrels with me, to the end, that if I would haue quarrelled a∣gaine, he might haue doone me some mischéefe by the way, for he liked euery bodyes company bet∣ter thine mine. Yet when I iustified this to his face at the Barre: he would not know me, but desired my Lorde to examine me where I knewe him. Then vpon my ope∣ning of time, place, and other to∣kens, he began to deny all, that it was in no point true which I had sayd. When I came to Roome,The cōmon and generall speeches in the Semi∣narie at Roome.  with all that wee heard by the way. I was allowed the Popes Scholler, and liued there in the Seminarie a∣mong them: if I should reporte all that I heard, it were more then modestie would suffer, wherefore I am constrayned to let it passe. But they that haue béene here conuicted, if they would confesse and agrée to the
trueth: themselues would say, that I reporte nothing but theyr owne woordes: because some of them spake them, other some were present by when they were spoken, greatly triumphing and reioycing: and not one of them, but are very well acquainted with them, and a number of such like Trayterous spéeches. At what time God strke me with sicknesse there, and they as was their dayly wunt, would come to visit me, some of them lying in the Chamber with me: they would syt downe on my Beds syde, and other some on Stooles by, when as they would enter into such horrible spéeches against theyr Prince and Coun∣trey: as at euery remembraunce, my heart dooth bléede to thinke vpon them. Quoth one of them▪ there is a Rod in prouiding, that shall rouse that presumptuous Iezabell
(meaning our moste Gratious Princesse) out of her vsurped au∣thoritie,Their only delight to  and ayle against her Maiestie, and her ho∣norable Counsell, to whom they giue such names, as modestie will not suffer me to reporte. which she hath so long time held, to our no little gréefe, and then looke how Iezabell was serued: euen so shall she be, yea, wurse if wurse may be: oh moste traiterous woords, yet there pas∣sing euery mans mouthe with great laughter and ioy. Quoth an other to me, you may be happy, if God take you out of this world héere: then shall you neuer sée the bloody ruine of your owne Countrye, which will be shortlye, and sooner then some of them lookes for: where∣fore, if you haue any fréendes in England, which you doubt to be fallen from the faithe, and take parte in that abhominable Reli∣gion: send to them so soone as you can, that they may goe to some of our Préests, there labouring a∣bout the chéefe cause, to be recon∣ciled by them, and so to conforme
their liues a new. And then they will deliuer them certayne Grana Benedicta,Tokens appointed to passe a∣mong them, when this great day shall come, which they hope for. that is appointed by the Popes holinesse for them, or els the watch word Iesus Maria: for bée∣ing founde without these two, they will be destroyed, as all the rest shall be, that are not so pro∣uided. Now they meane to deale surelie, because they haue sundry wayes attempted, yet still haue béene deceiued, and therefore they haue appoynted a great daye, when as the generall hauocke shall be made thorowe all Eng∣land. Robert Parsons, commonly called among them Father Par∣sons Iesuit, at what time Pater Alfonsus, Rector of the Semina∣rie, was so strooken with sick∣nesse, that he could not be con∣uersaunt among the Schollers as was his wunt, but inclined to such meanes, as might soonest
restore his health:After what manner▪ Father Parson vsed to schoole and instruct the Schol∣lers (while he was in office. this aforesayd Robert Parsons, by consent of their Generall, was appoynted our Rector, till father Alfonsus was well againe. In the time of this his office, it was his often vse to haue vs all assembled together, and then he would come and sit downe in a Chayre in the middest: when he would open vnto vs, in what miserable and lamentable e∣state our Countrie of England stood, which (quoth he) I be∣mone with a bleeding heart, and would to God my death might restore it according as it should be. You sée what a bloody and ty∣runicall Princesse hath gotten the Swoorde in hande,They re∣mmber not their owne gouernemēt that call this so  and cru∣ll, for they say, that then they  nothing but good deedes. where∣with shee sriketh in such vn∣merciull sorte: that if any of our Péestes hee taken, which are sent to win our déers Coun∣treymen, from her abhomina∣ble
and hereticall religion: they are presently martired, and in∣treated more like Dogges then Christians. Yet let not your faythes fayle for all theyr torments, but be you constant and vnremooue∣able, for the day will come, when shee her selfe shall taste of the same sauce: and then blood shall be payde with blood, and all that is now wrong, shall (to your owne mindes) bee made right. In the meane while,Meaning the Queene of Scots, whom the Pope hath vowed to restore a∣gaine. pray for that gracious and thrise blessed Quéene, who though she be now held downe by that Iezabels op∣pression: shall ere long vn∣doubtedly be the glad Mother of our ioye, and though shee bee kept from that which is her right: she shall haue it, when the proudest of them, shall be of two weake power to defend them selues.
It is not for me to rehearse the woordes,The ouer∣throwe of Englande, was daylie lked of. that he hath vsed, to en∣courage them in their obedience to the Pope, and beside, what he hath sayde to me, when as I came to confession to him: but this I giue you to vnderstande, that the chéefe cause was neuer forgotten, the great daye was kepte in re∣membraunce, and supposed long ere this to haue taken effecte, if thinges had fallen out to their ex∣pectation. I omit héere to rippe vp,The Schol¦lers them selues, would en∣terprise the death of her Maiestie, & the Lords of her Coū∣cell. the in∣numerable trayterous spéeches v∣sed among the Schollers them∣selues, whereto they are imbol∣dened by these and such lyke per∣swaders, whereof the Pope hath good store. What trayterous causes they dare take vppon them, to fulfyll themselues by their owne hands, vpon her Maiesties moste royall person, as also the Lordes of her honourable Councell. But be∣cause
they shall not report, that in concealing theyr spéeches (which for the odious and abhominable tearmes I ought to doo) I am not therefore able to charge them with any: I wyll (my humilitie and duety to her Maiestie, and the honorable Personages cōsidered) reueale ye woords of one or two of them, which although it be most horrible and trayterous, yet is it the simplest that I heard vsed a∣mong them. It chaunced,By this, which is the simplest of all theyr trayterous intentes: iudge howe horrible the other be. that one daye I walked with two or thrée of the Schollers, to a place without Roome, called Petro Montorium, where (as they say) Saint Peeter was martyred: and by the way as we went, we fell in our accusto∣med talke, about the procéeding of matters in Englande. Among which talke, they entred into ap∣pointment & determination with them selues, if all other thinges fayled, as they had good hope they
woulde not: what eche of them woulde doo, to accomplishe the Popes long desire. Quoth one of them, whyle two or thrée persons be a liue, we may stande in doubte of our matter in England. Who be they (quoth I) héere I must craue pardon, for that I maye not with modestie, name these men of Honour, according as they dyd and doo: but these they were, my L. K. then lyuing, my L. T. whome they called plaine C. and S. F. W. Oh (quoth he) had I the hearts of these in my Purse, and theyr headdes in the Popes holynesse handes: I would not doubt but ere long, wée should all merilie iourney homewarde. Nay trust me (quoth an other of them) if you woulde so faine haue theyr thrée harts and heads here: then let me ad to the fowrth, and thē take the whole messe together. I should
call her Quéene of Englād (quoth hée) but I wyll not.Reade with reue∣rence and regarde. for that I knowe shée is but an Usurper, and kéepeth that good Queene of Scottes from her lawfull Seate: for whome our holie Father hath so well prouided, as wee are cre∣diblie infourmed, that shée shall be sette vp againe ere long, or it shall coste the best blood in Eng∣land. Howe saye you to her? had we but her head éere, we would not doubte but in short tyme to bring the prowdest of the other, whe∣ther they would or no. My fréendes (quoth the thyrd) this is the least matter of a hun∣dred, and I durst wadge my lyfe, to bring it to passe of my selfe. You knowe that our fréendes in Englande wyll not sée vs to want any money: if then I haue money good store, let me alone to bring this matter arteficiallie to passe.
I would (quoth hee) make my selfe verie gorgeous and sumptu∣ous apparell,Beholde heere the  these Traytours haue, a∣ginst theyr  Countrey. and kéepe two or thrée men to wayte on mee as I walke thorowe the stréetes: then would I goe to the Court eueri daye, for that I haue some good ac∣quaintaunce there, beside, béeing so braue and gallaunt, I should be a companion for euery one, so that in theyr companies I might goe into euery place of the Court, and be in the presence of the Quéene euerie day. Then woulde I fayne to giue some gifte vnto her, and so on a suddaine giue her such a gifte, as should dispatche her for euer styr∣ring more. Oh villainous woordes, able to make a lintie heart to gush foorth aboundaunce of teares, to thinke that such a mercifull Princesse, should haue so mercilesse an eni∣mie, especiallie, that any Subiecte should but imagine such a mon∣strous
crueltie. Then (quoth I vnto him) admitte God dyd suffer you to doo such an horrible déede, what thinke you would become of you? you could not escape a∣way, but you must perforce suffer the awarde of Lawe. Tushe (quoth he) what care I for the vttermoste crueltie they would vse to me: I that could ac∣complishe such a famous thing, would neuer respect Rack, Rope, nor any torment.He respec∣teh ore the abhomi∣nable trum∣peris of the Pope, then eyther the safegarde of his soule, or wealth of his Prin∣cesse and Countrey. For this I knowe, that the Popes holynesse, would, in the remembraunce of me, both giue foorth Indulgences, and a notable benediction: which should be called after my name, as the benediction for the Quéene of Scottes is, and those that were gi∣uen for Stukely, the Bishoppe of Corke, Doctour Allen, and diuers other. Then when any shall haue of my Grana, Crosses, Medalles, and Beades, they wyll say: these were blessed for such a one, that
dyd bring to passe in Englande, what coulde not be done in many yéeres before, & then my Beades shall be prayed vpon more then any other. Beside, my Indulgences should be Plenaria for euer, I shoulde haue remission of all my sinnes, Masses continually sayd for me, & all my Coūtrey and fréends haue lybertie of theyr conscience: then what is hee that woulde not ad∣uenture the extreamest hazard of his lyfe, to gayne sch a heauenly and blessed reward? I perceyue (quoth he to mee) you haue but a slender staye of your Faith, that would feare to doo such a good déede for your Coū∣trey: where through, your same would be registred for euer▪ bothe in our Martirilogium,It is not possible for vs to ima∣gine so yll, as they doo daily report. as diuers of our Countrey are, and also through the whole world. A great deale more talke they had, so trayterous and horrible:
that no godlie and vertuous min∣ded, can suffer to heare it. So when wée came to the Se∣minarie againe, because I had béene there but a whyle, the same partie brought me theyr Martiri∣logium: wherein hee read to me the execution of the two Nor∣tons, the death of Doctour Storie, and the Martyrdome of Iohn Felton, and other, altogeather Imprinted in a great Booke of theyr Sayntes and Mar∣tyrs. The least report of these tray∣tours, which they had there Ca∣nonized for Martyres of theyr Churche, contayned  or eyght shéetes in Folio, of a verie small Letter: but in no poynt true, because I knewe my selfe the contrarie, for that before I went ouer, I sawe the execution of them all.
There were diuers other of their Martirs, the discourses of their liues and deathes reserued there to be imprinted in the same Booke: as of Barlowe, Madder, Wilkinson, the Iaylor of Yorke, Sherwood and Nelson, sometime Sexton of the English Church in Roome, all these executed at Ti∣borne for high Treason, and there estéemed for their Martires. William Filbie, at the Barre would chalēge me, that there was no such Booke there: when I am sure, not one of the other will at∣tempt to deny it, if they should, they be héere in the Cittie that are able to disprooue them. A number of such like trayte∣rous spéeches and practises, which on my owne knowledge I am able to report, but to auoyde tedi∣ousnes, as also not to offend any chaste and discréete minde, I let them passe in silence, desiring par∣don for that which I haue alrea∣die
set downe. And now you may perceyue, what affection these fellowes, afforde theyr lawfull Quéene and Countrey: well is he that can imagine most against her Maiestie, and highlie is he estée∣med that beareth the most trayte∣rous hart to her. Yet Maister Campion,Maister Campion nor his fel∣lo, wyll graunt to any thing: but raye & vse bolde speeches, whereby their guiltie▪ consciences were disco∣uered. and the rest of his fellowes, they pleade ignorance in all these causes, they bolster vp one another with large protestations, rayling woordes, and subtyll surmises: affyrming that they were not sent hyther for any such intent, which is as vn∣true, as we knowe it for trueth, that the Lord God lyueth in Hea∣uen. For this I am able to saye my selfe▪ that both then and at diuers other tymes, it was whispered among them in the Seminarie: that shortlie there shoulde bée Préestes appointed for England, to winne the people against the
appoynted tyme, when as a great Armie shoulde be ready to ioyne with them: and Maister Cam∣pion, who was then at Praga in Bohemia, hee was spoken off amongst them all, to be a rare and singuler fellowe, and there∣fore generallie was taken for a méete man, to bée sent about such a Message, so that they iudged that he should be sent for, to be a cheefe man in this mat∣ter. Well (sayth Maister Campi∣on) it maye be they had such an oppinion of me,Maister Campion couereth their  inēs, vnder the sauing of Soules. which in my selfe I finde not to be deserued, and it maye be that I was appoin∣ted to be sent into Englande, ac∣cording as those other Préestes were, for the sauing of Soules, and benefite of my Countreye: must it followe then, that wée are sent to practise the death of the Quéene, and to séeke the ruine
of our Countrey? Alas, this is a harde case, and I desyre you of the Iewrie, to marke it, for these are but shad∣owes without any substaunce. This you are to note, that we which enter into that blessed so∣cietie of the Iesuites:A holy kinde of life▪ were it not for the B. we doo, as it were, forsake the worlde, vow∣ing our selues to chastitie, and sinceritie of conscience, to obeye our Superiours, and to be ready to goe whether they shall appoint vs. If they send vs to the Indiaes, or to any such places, where the people haue not the true Ca∣tholique Faith: we are bound by duetie in Conscience, to goe whether they appoint vs. And shall it then be sayde, that wée come for the destruction of the Prince and Countreye, where wee settle our selues? Alas, that were a harde case,
for Christian charitie wylleth vs to comfort one an other,Note heere the perfect Image of hypocrisie. and if we can, to gette the Shéepe into the Folde, which hath long runne a straye. And when we heare con∣fession, we doo not perswade them to any disobedience, for that is a∣gainst the nature of Confession: God forbyd that wée should once thinke any such thing. Beholde the subtyll shifts, that he found out still to flie vnto, yea, though the manifest disproofe laye before them, yet would he finde some cauill or other: for not onely the euidence of their generall de∣termination beyonde the Seas, was showen them, but also the trayterous Articles were there read vnto them, which Iohn Hart had coppyed out for Doctour Allen (concerning the procéeding of these trayterous causes, and for which hee went purposelie to Roome to confer with the Pope about) and subscribed vnto, that
they were certayne and true: as also theyr owne confessions and writings were layde open before them, approouing them nota∣blie guiltie of the matters afore∣sayde. Charles Sled, who sometyme serued Maister Doctour Moor∣ton in Roome, in whose house there was many matters deter∣myned, bothe by Doctor Allen when hee came to Roome, and diuers other Doctours lyuinge there in the Cittie, as also di∣uers of the Seminarie: he lyke∣wise vnderstoode of the prouision for the great daye, that it was generallie spoken of among the Englishe men, and to be more rertayne, he kepte a Iournall or Booke of theyr daylie dea∣linges, noting the daye, tyme, place, and personnes, present at theyr secrete conferences, and verie much matter hath he iusti∣fied against them.
One Maister Cradocke a Mer∣chaunt, when hée was in Roome, hée vnderstoode the aforesayde determination, and howe that Doctour Shelley, the Englishe Priour, who is a Knight of the Rhodes, for that hée somewhat spake against such crueltie, to bée vsed to his Natiue Coun∣trey: was somewhat misly∣ked of him selfe, and had al∣moste béene turned out of his of∣fice. And this aforesayde Maister Cradocke, béeing in Prisonne there, for the space of twentie Monethes and more: it was sayde to him, that he might ac∣coumpt him selfe blessed of God, that hee was there, because hee shoulde not sée the grée∣uous ruine of his natiue Coun∣trey. He that hath but halfe an eye,Consider  they concord and agree together. maye sée howe these matters concorde and agrée togeather, and
noting euerie thing as it lyeth, may plainly sée their horrible and trayterous deuises. And farder,A Booke which they vse as theyr instruction howe to aunswere to euerie que∣stion So∣phistically. there was a lyttle Booke in Latine, which they them selues brought ouer with them, it was there openly read vnto them: wherein was cer∣tayne rules and orders prescri∣bed, howe they should behaue them selues héere in Englande, and howe if they were demaun∣ded of any thing, they shoulde make aunswere indyrectlie: or to take the woorde it selfe, ac∣cording as it is mentioned in the Booke, they must aun∣swere Sophisticae, whereby is meant as thus. If they be examined, as con∣cerning theyr allegeaunce to her
Maiestie: they wyll make theyr aunswere after this manner. Shée is our lawfull Soueraigne Lady and Quéene, and we doo o∣bey her. But then obiect vnto them: wil you obeye her, notwithstanding the Popes excommunication, or any thing that he commaundeth to the contrarie. Then will they aunswere: we desire you not to charge our con∣sciences,To doo their dutie to a waigh∣te burden to their con∣siēces, and therefore they abyde in theyr ob∣sancie and blindnesse. and that you would not enter so déepe into our conscien∣ces, we trust the Pope will not commaund vs any thing against her: and a hundred such like sleeue∣lesse aunsweres they make, ne∣uer agréeing to any certayntie, but holding the Pope in more re∣uerence then they doo her Maie∣stie. For this consideration they carie with them, that if by theyr showe of humilitie, and deuised order of craftye aunsweringe,
they might mooue our Maiestra∣tes to haue a good oppinion of thē, and not to deale so strictly, as lawe and their deseruing dooth worthily merit: then they might with lesse suspect goe about their holy Fathers busines, in that their Sophisticall aunswers, co∣uered so foule an abuse. And then so many as comes af∣ter them, purposely sent about the same affaires, séeing their passage made before them, and béeing Schooled after the same manner: they might withdrawe the harts of a number her Maiesties Sub∣iectes, by such meanes as is before largely expressed, so that destruc∣tion should come vpon vs, before we had discouered their treatche∣rous dealings. But God be thanked, as all their deuises haue had their de∣serued successe, this Sophisticall order hath sped a like with them for company: and this let them
fully assure themselues, that what meanes soeuer they seeke against their Princesse and Countrey, God will rewarde them after their owne dealings. To Campion himselfe,Campion his owne answer, as concerning his allege∣aunce to her Maiestie. the for∣mer questions were put foorth at the Barre: and this aunswer he made vnto them. She is my lawfull Soueraigne Lady and Quéene, and I doo o∣bey her. But when he was demaunded, although the Pope did expreslye commaund him the contrary: if he would neuerthelesse faithfully obey her. Oh then they must not so déep∣ly enter into his conscience, that Barre was not a Barre to de∣fine on causes of conscience: that question touched his conscience, wherefore he flatly sayd he might not aunswer it. No, no, he knew full well, that the trayterous af∣fayres he came about, would not
allowe him such a direct aunswer as they looked for, & gladly would haue had, that of a Saule, they might haue made him a Paule. Wherfore his secret and guileful behauiour, made perfect appa∣raunce of his wicked intent: which hee shaddowed vnder the counterfeit cloke of sauing soules, and reconciling his Countreymē to the Catholique faith. Héer it cannot be greatly amisse to rehearse vnto you the cause,The cause why this Pope hath tollerated the former Bull of Pius Quin∣tus why this Pope hath tollerated the former Bull, séeing this So∣phisticall kinde of aunswering grew chéefely therby. Whē any of these secret messengers, should be sēt about their holy fathers deter∣mination, héere in England, to re∣cōcile, shriue & win her Maiesties Subiects to their deuillish intent: if such misaduenture should hap∣pen to thē, ye their secret dealings came to the eares of Iustice, then they fel into the daunger of lawe,
wherefore, to shaddow their sub∣tiltie, and to prosecute the effect of their message, the Pope thought good to harten them by this So∣phisticall addition. For well we know, and them∣selues likewise are not ignorant thereof, that béeing examined, if they should denye the Quéenes Maiestie, to be their Supreme Princesse and Gouernesse, in all causes: then they fell into con∣demnation by her lawes. Againe, if they denyed the au∣thoritie of the Pope, as of force they must needes doo, if they will estéeme themselues good subiects, and manifest a duetifull and o∣bedient hart to her Maiestie: then they breake their vowe made to the Pope, and so fall into his cursse and condemnation like∣wise, so that this is certainely ap∣pointed them, to cleaue faithfully to the one, and vtterly to forsake the other.
Yet that they might haue as much fauoure and fréendship, as the furtheraunce of such a cause required: this hard clause (béeing well scanned of diuers our Eng∣lish Doctors and other,Our Eng∣lish Doctors conferring with the Cardinalles found out the meane for this tolleration. bothe at Roome and at Rheimes, was through earnest sute, deliuered to diuers of the Cardinalles, who laying theyr heads together, and thorowly searching the bottome of euery doubt: a tolleration for that strict point was found out, which was ordayned as you haue hearde before. Then in all the haste the Pope was giuen to vnderstande there∣of, who respecting what might be for his benefit, and what might turne to his discommodi∣tie: authorised them this for∣mer tolleration, which God be thanked, carryed as slender strength as the rest of his practi∣ses hath doone. Yet all this béeing knowne
to vs, Maister Campion and his fellowes will graunt no know∣ledge: but pleadeth still theyr de∣uoute consciences. An other of their owne Bookes was there read vnto them,An∣other Booke how to handle all manner of persons to win them to their intent. wher∣in was other orders prescribed them, how they should handle a Noble man, how a Gentleman, and how a poore man: which bée∣ing openly read before them, gaue all there present to vn∣derstande, howe assuredly they had appointed the course for their Treason. A number of inuincible proofes passing against them, they came at laste to the point of their com∣ming ouer: how suddainely, how hastily, and all through a generall appoyntement. Maister Campion,Maister Campion sent for frō Praga to goe with other Preestes appointed for Eng∣land. hee had stayed a longe time at Praga in Bohemia, and on a sudden he was hastily sent for to Roome:
by his owne confession hee knewe not wherefore, but the message was in suche haste, that he must come thether with all spéede. When he came to Roome, he stayed there but fiue dayes: in which time, receyuing the summe of their charge, from the Pope, as is their vsuall wunte, and their Father Generall deliuering them what hee hath in office: hee was dispatched from thence with other Préestes, who had their Viaticum from the Popes Treasurie, and were all e∣specyally appoynted for Eng∣land. These Préestes were sent (as all other are) about the chéefe cause,The Preestes are there on∣ly maintai∣ned for this pur∣pose, and none come from thence, but about this caue, which proo∣ueth them all together guiltie. for that none come from thence but onely for that purpose: the estate of the cause before expressed,
it is too maniest, that Campion and his fellowes are guiltie of the matters obiected againste them. For this you are to remem∣ber, that none must staye there without they will be Préestes, when they receiue their Préeste∣hood, they enter into theyr oath, which oath contayneth the sum of the Treason: so that all which come from thence (hauing ta∣ken that oath) come about the execution of the Treason, in that▪ none but they that are es∣pecially sent, can haue theyr Viaticum of the Pope, and then he sending them, the case is too euident. Let not a light iudgement passe ouer a matter of so great respect, let the Popes intent of kéeping them there be considered, the great mallice and spight that he beareth her Maiestie and the Realme, and then theyr oath to
execute his commaundementes, all these layde together, discoue∣reth the depthe of theyr tretche∣rie. But what aunswereth Maister Campion to this?Maister Campion graunteth, he came as the other Preests did to reconcyle and shriue: but he wyll not allowe that he came for any trea∣son. he confesseth that he was quietlie setled at Pra∣ga, and lyttle expected any such hastie sending for, besyde, that hée went to Roome, with great spéede, tarrying there no longer then fiue dayes, as is before ex∣pressed, and that hée receyued his Viaticum of the Pope, when as hée was dispatched thence with other Préestes, purposelie ap∣pointed for England, and that hée came no otherwise then they dyd, nor for any other intent, then for the benefite of Soules, as he styll termed it: but he would not graunt that he came for any trea∣son. So that to seduce her Maiesties Subiectes, to perswade them from theyr duetie and obedience,
and to ioye them selues in such sorte, as theyr Princesse and Countreye muste be destroyed thereby: this is no Treason in his oppinion, Maister Cam∣pion and his fellowes pleaded ig∣noraunce styll, they sawe and would not sée, they were so crafti∣lie schooled. Iames Bosgraue,Iames Bosgraue, his hastie comming from Vilna, when he heard that Preestes were ap∣pointed for England. he was at Vil∣na in Polonia, and as he con∣fessed him selfe, he vnderstoode that there was Préestes appoin∣ted for Englande: vpon which report he came away from thence in verie great haste. And in his passage, he mentio∣ned to one in the Shippe, who was sworne, and confessed the same before certayne Iustices, that there was such matters to∣ward in Englande, as hath béene before expressed: and therevpon he sought to haue wunne him, if his purpose could haue taken ef∣fect.
Maister Campion séeing this begunne somewhat to touche the quicke, and that in trueth it discouered the dealinges of them all: he taketh vppon him to aun∣swere on his behalfe, for that they all reposed them selues on him. He sayth,Maister Campion frequenteth his accusto∣med order of subtyll answering. that if Bosgraue did heare such newes, that there were Préests appointed for Eng∣lande: why shoulde they take holde on so small a cause? Fly∣ing reportes are not to bée cre∣dited, for albeit he heard such newes, howe knewe he, if they were certain or no? Againe (quoth hée) the man hath béene longe out of Englande, and hee dooth not speake the Englishe perfectlie: it maye bee then, that some woorde maye escape him vna∣wares, whiche you are not to buylde vppon, consy∣dering
the defecte of the man, for he maye peraduenture speake he knoweth not what. And where you say, that such a one hath auouched before certaine Iustices, that he vsed such and such woordes to him: where is the man, we are not to credite a written Paper, what knowe we if it be true or no? let vs heare him selfe say so, and then we wyll beléeue it. Se what a number of shyftes he had continuallie,Traytours wyll neuer beleeue any trueth, espe∣ciallie, if it touch them selues. to waste the the tyme, and all to no purpose: the mans owne confession was there, whereto him selfe had subscribed, and fowre or fiue Iu∣stices sette theyr handes to it, for the certayntie thereof, yet this was not sufficient to aunswere them. Robert Iohnson, he was lyke∣wise at Auinion in Fraunce,Robert Iohnson, his com∣ming from from whence hee came also in verie great haste, vppon the report he
had heard,Auinion in Fraunce. of Préestes that were appointed for England. Nowe there is an other thing to be considered, that these men, setled where they were, by theyr owne confession they muste not departe from thence, without they be appointed by theyr Su∣periours: then it is easie to be aunswered, that they came by theyr Superiours appoynt∣ment at this present, and as the generall determination was, so they came all, for one cause and intent. Edwarde Bishton, hée béeing héere in Englande,Edwarde Bishtons Letter, to Richardson one of the condemned. wrote a Let∣ter to Richardson a Préest, and who is lykewise condempned a∣mongste them: which Letter was there openlye read to his face. How there were foure Gold∣smithes of his occupation latelie come ouer, who in déede were
Préestes, and howe all thinges went successiuelie foreward. And Maister Campion, béeing in the Tower,Maister Campions Letter to Master Pownde in the Tower. wrote a Letter to Maister Pownde there lyke∣wise, wherein he gaue him to vnderstande, that he was verie sorie, that through his frayltie he had bewrayed those, at whose houses he had béene so, fréendlie entertayned: wherefore he as∣ked God hartilie forgiuenesse, and them all whome he had so highlie offended. But (sayeth he) as for the chéefe matter,Maister Campion was reso∣lut in the cheefe mat∣ter. that is as yet vn∣reuealed: and come Racke, come Rope, neuer shall that be disco∣uered. A number of matters more were brought against them, which to rehearse, woulde re∣quire a farre more large di∣scourse: but to be breese, in the ende this was the full and
certayne issue. That these men, when they were beyonde the Seas, the ge∣nerall agréement and determina∣tiō amongst them: was to worke the death of our moste gratious Princesse, to destroye her Do∣minion, and to erecte suche as pleased them, when this a∣foresayde great daye should take effect. And that theyr comming ouer, was to seduce her loouing Sub∣iectes, to winne their obedient heartes from her: so that they should be in a readinesse to ioyne with a forraine power, and so they shoulde lykewise be destroy∣ers of theyr Princesse and Coun∣trey. And that in the meane whyle, they them selues sought to accomplishe her Maiesties death, so muche as in them laye. This was manifestly prooued, by verie large and ample eui∣dence,
credible witnesses, and their owne confessions and wri∣tinges: whereon the Iewrie ha∣uing wisely and discréetlie ponde∣red, and searched and séen into the depth of euerie cause, woorthilie and deseruedlie gaue them vp all guiltie, of the Treasons whereof they were endighted and arraig∣ned. Which béeing done, after a god∣lie and comfortable exhortation, perswading them patientlie to suffer, & abide the death for them appointed, and to be hartilie sorie for their gréeuous and hainous of∣fences: the sentence of death was pronounced on them. That they should depart to the places from whence they came, and from thence to be drawne on Hurdles to the place of execution, where they should be hanged tyll they were halfe dead, then to be cutte downe, their priuie mem∣bers to be cutte off, and theyr
entrayles taken foorth, and to be burned in the fire before their eyes: then theyr heads to be cut off, their bodies parted into foure quarters, to be disposed at her Maiesties pleasure, and the Lord God to receiue theyr soules to his mercie. Afterwarde they were conuay∣ed from thence with Boates, to a place of landing for them appoin∣ted, from whence they were con∣ducted to the Tower of London, diuers of them giuing foorth sun∣dry wicked and dishonest spée∣ches: as Thomas Cotehan, séeing so many people to beholde them, desired that fyre and Brimstone might fall from Heauen, to de∣stroy bothe the Citty, and all that were in it: with diuers other wic∣ked woords, which for modesties sake I omit héere to rehearse, desi∣ring God in mercy to remember them all, and to forgiue their soules, their bodyes misdéedes.
ON the next day, béeing Tues∣day, and the xxi. of Nouember, there was brought to the sayde high Barre these persons follow∣ing. Iohn Hart, Thomas Foord, William Filbie, Lawrance Ri∣chardson, Iohn Shert, Alexander Brian, and Iohn Collington. Alexander Brian,A very holy thing, but very meete for his de∣tien, he had shauen his Crowne himselfe, and made him a Crosse of a péece of a trent∣cher, which he held in his hand openly and prayed to: which whē he was rebuked for, he boldly and stoutely made aunswer. That his Crowne was of his owne shauing, and he had good hope to doo it againe. In bréefe, they were all endited on the selfe same treasons as the other were the day before, and Iohn Hart, his trayterous Ser∣mon which he made at Rheimes against her Maiestie auouched to his face: their owne writings and confessions, with  wit∣nesse
produced against them: so that they were founde guiltie of the treasons, as the other were before them, except Iohn Colling∣ton, he was quit of the former high Treason by the Iewrie. Thus in breefe I haue certifi∣ed you, of the Treasons which Campion and his confederates, conspired and practised against her Maiestie and the Realme, howe they were manifestly con∣uicted of euery cause, and notably approoued guiltie, notwithstan∣ding all theyr cullored surmises. I beséech God long to preserue her Maiestie and this Realme, and all that beare like false harts as these did, that he will either turne their harts, or cut off their trayterous and deuillish deui∣ses. FINIS.
A breefe Discourse, concerning the deathes of Edmund Campion, Iesuit, Raphe Sherwin, and Alexander Brian, Seminarie Preestes: A raigned and condemned for high Treason, and executed for the same, at Tiborne, on Friday, beeing the 1. of December. 1581. ON Friday, beeing the 1. of December, Edmund Campi∣on Iesuit, and Raphe Sherwin, and Alexander Brian, Seminarie Préestes, béeing condemned for high Treason, against her Ma∣iesties moste royall person, as al∣so for Trayterous practises, tou∣ching the subuersion of the true
and vndoubted Religion héere maintained, with the vtter ruine and ouerthrowe of this Realme of England: were drawne from the Towre of London on Hur∣dles, to the place of execution ap∣pointed, béeing garded with such a sufficient company, as might ex∣presse the honour of Iustice the larger in that behalfe. Béeing come to the place of ex∣ecution, where diuers of her Ma∣iesties Honorable Counsell, with many honourable Personages, and Gentlemen of worship and good account, beside a multitude of people, not héer to be numbred, attended their cōming: Edmund Campion was firste brought vp into the Cart, where, after the great rumor of so many people somewhat appeased, he began to proceede in his confession. Firste he began with a phrase or two in Lattin, when seene after hee sell into Englishe as
thus. I am héere brought as a Spec∣tacle, before the face of God, of Angelles and of men, satisfying my selfe to dye, as becommeth a true Christian and Catholique man. As for the Treasons which haue beene layde to my charge, and I am come héere to suffer for: I desire you all to beare witnesse with me, that thereof I am altogether innocent. Wherevpon, aunswer was made to him by one of the Coun∣ell, that he might not séeme to deny the obiections agaynst him, hauing béene prooued so mani∣festly to his face, bothe by sufficient witnesse and eui∣dence. Well my Lorde (quothe he) I am a Catholique man and a Préeste, in that faithe haue I liued hytherto, and in that faithe I doo intend so dye,
and if you estéeme my religion Treason, then of force I must graunt vnto you as for any other Treason, I will not consent vn∣to. Then was hee mooued as con∣cerning his Trayterous and hay∣nous offence to the Quéenes moste excellent Maiestie: where∣to he aunswered: Shée is my law∣full Princesse and Quéene, there somewhat he drew in his woords to himselfe, whereby was gathe∣red, that somewhat hee would haue gladly spoken, but the great timeritie and vnstable oppinion of his conscience, wherein he was all the time, euen to the death, would not suffer him to vtter it. Héere is with iudgement, a déepe point and high matter to be cōsidered, that this man, alwayes directing the course of his life to a vaine glorious imagination, and alwayes couetous to make himselfe famous: at this instant
made a perfect discouerie of him∣selfe. For béeing somewhat learned, all matters whatsoeuer, as you haue heard before, he bare away with a magesticall countenaunce, the visor of vanitie, aptly fitting the face of onely hipocrisie: what was sounde he would make So∣phisticall, what was the infalli∣ble trueth of it selfe, he would carry in his own conceit, and de∣lude the people with a pleasant quirk, or some such stuffe, onely to purchase him credit and affec∣tion. And he was not to learne, to set a couragious countenaunce on euery such slight reason: where∣by he peruerted many, deceyued more, and was thought suche a Champion, as the Pope neuer had the like. But nowe beholde the man, whom neyther Racke nor Rope should alter, whose faithe was
such as he boasted inuincible: feare had caught holde on this braue boaster, and terrour entred his thoughtes, whereby was disco∣uered his impudent dissimulati∣ons. Nowe let it with patience bée mooued a lyttle, that the outward protestations of this man, vrged some there present to teares, not entring into conceyte of his in∣ward hipocrisie: to make a plau∣sible definition of this perillous deceiuer, not by coniecture, but by proofe it shall be thus aunswe∣red. Edmund Campion, as it is by men of sufficient credit reported, at what tyme he spent his studie héere in Englande, bothe in the Hospital, and also at the vniuersi∣tie of Oxenford: was alwaies ad∣dicted to a meruailous suppose in himselfe, of ripe iudgement, prōpt audacitie, & cunning conueyaunce in his Schoole pointes, where∣through,
he fell into a prowde and vaineglorious iudgement, practi∣sing to be eloquent in phrase, and so fine in his quirkes and fanta∣sticall coniectures: that the igno∣rant he wun by his smoothe deui∣ses, some other affecting his plea∣saunt imaginations, he charmed with subtilitie, and choaked with Sophistrie. The learned, who behelde his practises and peremptory order of lyfe, pittying his follie, & wishing him a more stayed determinati∣on: loathed his manners, yet looued the man, because Chri∣stian Charitie wylled them so to doo. Nowe this glorious Thraso, ha∣uing by his Lybeiles made him selfe famous, and vnder shewe and suppose of great learning, (though in deede béeing approoued, found verie simple, to the spée∣ches giuen of him) subdued ma∣ny to affecte him verie much:
when he was taken, he knew it stoode him vpon, not to loose the credit opēly he had wun secretly, wherefore in his former ridicu∣lous manner, bothe in Prison, at his Araignement, yea, and at his death, he continued the same in all points, which the foulnes of his Treasons blemished euery way. Now indéede, as our English nation is bothe loouing and pitti∣full: so, many séeing the giftes of God, so well bestowed on the man, and by him applyed to so great abuse, through naturall kindnesse bemoned his case, wi∣shing be had not fallen in so trai∣terous a cause. This poynt, least some should haue vsed to a wurse coniecture, I thought good in bréefe some∣what to manifest. Then was mooued to him a∣gaine his Treasons and haynous offences against the Quéenes
Maiestie, which impudentlie he styll denied, séeming to vtter woordes on the behalfe of one Ri∣chardson, one likewise of the con∣dempned Traitours, taking vp∣pon his conscience that it was not he: which hath béene prooued to the cōtrarie, for that it is known, howe this Richardson is he, who distributed Campions Libels and Bookes abroade, & when he was put to his oath, whether it was he or no, he refused to sweare on his behalfe. Pray with them in Englishe, as he was desired, he would not, but sayde his Pater noster in La∣tin, & desired all those of the house∣holde of Faith, to saye one Credo for him. Many indirect aunsweres he made, as when he was mooued to aske the Quéene forgiuenesse, and when the Preacher requested him to shewe some signe of a penitent sinner, when shortlie he replyed:
You and I, we are not of one Re∣ligion. After a fewe silent pray∣ers to him selfe, the Carte was drawen away, and he committed to the mercie of God. There he hanged tyll he was dead, when béeing cut downe, he was bowel∣led and quartered, according as it was appointed by Iustice. Raphe Sherwin seemed a man of better iudgement, more learned, and more obedient, he sayde the Lordes Prayer in English, belée∣uing in God that made him, in Christe his sonne that saued him, and in the holie Ghost that sancti∣fied him: and according to the say∣ing of S. Augustin, desired Iesus, that he would be to him Iesus, as much to say, as his Sauiour and Redéemer. He lykewise confes∣sed him self a Catholique man, & a Préest, intending to die in that faith. But when the Treasons were mooued to him, he lykewise séemed to make deniall thereof.
He asked the Quéenes Maiestie forgiuenesse, and desired that shée might long liue and raigne ouer vs. Then was read to him the Booke of the aduertisemēt, which before had béen read to Campion, and after a fewe prayers he lyke∣wise ended his lyfe. Alexander Brian séemed more obstinate and impious, vsing very little signe of repentaunce, and hartie humilitie: he vsed many prayers to him selfe, and spake very little woorthy the rehearsall. Iustice béeing executed on him, he and Sherwin were quartered, according as Campion had béene before them. God graunt that the offences of these, may be a war∣ning to all other. God saue our Queene Elizabeth.
An Admonition, to all true and faith∣full Subiectes. YOV HAVE in thys discourse (right courteous) breefelye vnder∣stood the horrible and traiterous intent, of Ed∣mund Campion and the reste of his secret confederates, howe bothe against God and natures lawe, they practised and conspi∣red the death of our most graci∣ous
and Soueraigne Princesse, as also the the sum wher∣of, how denillsh and vnchris∣tian like  was intēded, I leaue to the discreet consideration of true and fayhfull Sub∣. Let vs therefore, that pro∣fesse ourselues the children of light, faithfull Stewards to our heauenly master, and duetifull Subiectes to her Maiestie, who (by his sacred and Diuine will) is authorised to gouerne vs, remember the odious and hay∣nous offences by these our owne Contreymen commit∣ted, and let them remaine as spectacles before our eyes, howe daungerous a thing it
is for anye of vs to fall in the like. For of this wee may be fully assured, that though we kick and spurne against the trueth for a time: hee, who is the Author of all trueth yea, and the verie trueth himselfe, though hee suffer vs a  to runne in our owne folly, yet at lengthe hee will strike vs so seuerely, that wee shall woorthelye taste the desert of our trespasses, for hee is the onely Auenger, and he will rewarde vs in his Iu∣stice. Learne we therefore by theyr example, to ab∣horre and detest that Ane∣christe of Room, the aun∣cient aduersary to Gods
trueth, to beware how we deale with anie of his wandring shauelinges and Messengers: for he hath choaked them with his abhominable driftes and deuises, and they vowing themselues his obedient chil∣dren, are prepared to roote vp looue, dutie and obedience, bothe to God, our Princesse and Countrey. Longe may his Gospell floorish and spread heere a∣mong vs, and long may her Maiestie liue in health and qui∣etnes to nourishe and maine∣taine it: as for her aduersa∣ryes, God either turne theyr hearts, or speedily cut them off in their owne deuises. To him therefore let vs commend our selues, our dea∣lings
and thoughts to his will and pleasure; so shall we liue in continuall happinesse, by her, whom God long pre∣serue to our comfort and wealth of con∣science. A. Munday. FINIS. Imprinted at Lon∣don for Edwarde VVhite, and are to be solde at his shop at the little North doore of S. Paules Church, at the signe of the Gunne.
