19240 99855354 20841
A good workeman needes neuer want worke. If this be true, heres a parsell of ten, All lustie able well quallified men, That Scarse haue their equals to eate, drinke, and sleepe And some are fair better to hang then to keepe. To the tune of the nine maids. YOu that good houses kéeps and would good seruants hire, With proper men to eate and sleepe, Ile furnish your desire, My owne experience hath. (In a month or little more) Try'd all that's mention'd vnderneath in number halfe a skore, Marke hw they stand i Rae All lusty ale mn, Then you w good workmen want, come take you chyse of ten. Come hither Tospot Tom. thou art the first in place. This fellow will not stay at home aboue an houres space, Hele at the alehouse stay, from breakefst time till dinner From thence till supper heell be away, by this I was a winner. O this wa  of my men, the chief of halfe a score, All  good workemen then my state. The next was Retchgutt Ralph, right hee to Wood of Kent, A yeareling pigg or else a Calfe his stomack will content, With eight and fifty Egges a lenten meale heele make, And yet hee lookes like one that begs, so leane as any Rake. O this was one of my men th chife of halfe a score▪ You who do want good workmen then take choyce among my store. The third was Slippery Will, his trado he néede not learne, I had two maids and with his skill hée got them both with barne, And two more in the towne, all in a fortnights space, The like of him was seldome knowne, Hée's of a bréeding race. O this was one of my men, the chiefe of halfe a score, You who do want good workmen then take choyse among my store. The fourth was desperate Dicke heed loss his shirt at dice, Besides he hath another tricke, which hee esteemes no vice, What euer he can get by cozening or by stealing Or running into honest mens debt, hee counts it lawfull dealing. O this was one of my men, the chiefe of halfe a score You who do want good workmen then, take choyse among my store.
The second part To the same tune. THe fifth was Sam a thresher, the best I ere did keepe Heede worke foure howres euery day, and the rest héede spend in sleepe. Yf any did him blame, For taking so much paines, Heede soone make answer to the same how can I thresh when't raynes, O this was one of my men, the chiefe of halfe a score, You who doe want good workemen then take choyse among my store. The sixth was Cogging Watt hée us'd to lye and flatter And Gossip-like hee'd prate and that, of what it made no matter, What ere his fellowes said, (though hee ou'd them in show) The tel-tale Rascall more on t made, And that's a good gift you know. O this was one of my mn, the cheife of, &c. The seuenth was Kit the Butcher for him his sweet heart mournes. Héed dresse a Sheepe or a Bullock well, and giue to his friends the hornes. Of all I ere knew in my life, hee was a prtty youth, Hee'd with his candell loke his knife, when hee had it in his mouth. O this was one of my men the cheife, &c. The eighth was George the Grome, a seruant good and able, Because he would not wear out his broom. hee neuer swept the stable. His prouidence was such, to show his honest care. Hée'd neuer curry the horses much, for feare they should lose their h O this was one, &c. The ninth to is painefull Pierce, my honest Husbanman, All his good quallities to, to more thn now I can. But one thing of great note, I here (alone) will tell Because my hempe sheule take pe , hee cast it in the Well, O this, &c. The tenth and last was Nd, the bailiffe of my land, Those tenants that his  fed, he dealt with vnder hand. For bribes and priuate guilts heede let out leases cheape, Now Iudge my masters by these , what benefit I might Reape. O this was, &c. Imagine now my friends, you to a place are come. Where halfe a score good fellowes stand within a little rome, And all doe seruice craue, then doe not them refuse, To keepe them I no liking haue, If I can any way chuse. O these are my brue mn, in number halfe a score, You who doe want good workmen then, take choyse among my store. M. P. FINIS. Printed at London for Francis Groue. and are to be sold on Snow hill by the Sarazens head.
