19429 99836194 450
The Treasurie of commodious Conceits, and hidden Secretes. Commonlie called The good Hus∣wiues Closet of prouision, for the health of her Houshold. Meete and necessarie for the profi∣table vse of all estates. Gathered out of sundry Experiments, lately practised by men of great knowledge: and now newly corrected, and inlarged, with diuers necessary phisicke helpes, not impertinent for euery good Huswife to vse in her house, amongst her own famelie. LONDON. Printed by Richard Iones, at the Rose and Crowne neere Holborne bridge. 1591.
The Printer to all vvo∣men, that couet the practise of good Huswiferie, aswel wiues as maides. GOod Huswifes here you haue, a lewell for your ioy. A Closet meet your Huswiferie to practise and imploy. Aswel the Gentles of degree, as ke the meaner sort, May practise here to purchase health, their houshold to cōfort. nd as the prouer be prooueth true, to remedie each griefe, mongst the rest of the Phisicks helps, the huswifes help is chiefe. Therefore good Huswiues once againe, I say to you, repaire nto this Closet when you need, and mark what ye find there. hich is a mean to make most things, to huswiues vse pertain s al Conserues & Sirops sweet to comfort heart and braine. r banquets to, here may you find, your dishes howe to frame s Succad, Marmalad, Marchapane to & each thing els by name ne powders eke for linnen clothes & wollen, furd or fac'd o keepe them sweet, and safe from Mothes, in chestes when they be plac'd ood medicines to, for present health in Closet here you haue o maintain life, & keep ye yong the chiefest thing ye craue. hus to conclude, I wish ye marke, the benefits of this book. th Gentles state, the Farmers wife, and Crafts-mans Huswife Cooke. d if ye reape commoditie by this my friends aduice▪ en giue him thanks, and think not much, of foure pence for the price. Fare well.
To the Worshipfull, Maister Richard Wistow, Gentleman, one of the assistants of the Companie of the Barbors and Surgions: Iohn Partridge, wisheth increase of knowledge by his worthy trauell. AFter that I had (worshipfull Sir) taken some paine, in collecting certaine hid∣den secretes together, & reduced them into a necessary litle booke, for my owne behoofe & my familiar friends: yet at the in∣stance of a certain Gentlewoman, being my deare and speciall friend, I was constrained to publish the same, & considered with my selfe the saieng of the wise, which is: That good is best, which to all indifferently is of like goodnes, or effect: or which without respect of person, is good to all indifferētly. The cōsideration of which, & her importu¦nacye together, instiged me to cōmunicate vnto the view & publike benefit of al men, this smal book: the contents whereof doth instruct & teach all maner of persons & de∣grees, to know perfectly how to make di∣uers & sundry sorts of new conceits, aswel of meats, conserues, and Marmalades, as al∣so
of sweet and pleasant VVaters, of woon∣derful Odors, Operations & Vertues: with diuers other things, that haue not hitherto bene publiquely knowne: VVhich fact of mine (I knowe) will be, not only, disliked of some, but altogether condemned: not for that it is euil: but that their fine heades can∣not disgest that any other beside themselues should inioy the benefit thereof, hauing for their Maxime, that such things are of small price, as are common to al men: much after our English prouerbs, Quainty & Dainty, Far fetcht & deare bought is good for great estates. But I account that person foolish, & vnworthy help of any Phisitian or Surge∣on, that will refuse to receiue, or gain health by the medicine of any such Phisitian or Surgeon, who by learning the same out of Galen, Auicen, Hipocrates, or any other such like, hath oftentimes cured the diseases in sundrie and many persons, for that the same hath bene commonly vsed: but rather most willingly and curteously to imbrace the same (for present remedie) as a thing ex∣cellently well experimented and prooued.
I need not (Right Worshipful) to vse these woordes for the defence of this litle Booke, considering that your VVorship doth very wel accept such things, as vniuersally bring with them a publike profite and vtilitie whence consisteth your delight, rewarding liberally the traueile of such, who haue and doo traueile therein. VVherefore, for that I among all other persons, doo thinke my selfe most beholden vnto your woship, to gratifie your goodnesse, and to satisfie the request of my friend, I haue compiled this litle booke: which I haue put foorth vnder your worships name and protection: pro∣testing, that if I shal see this woorke, which with some cost and charge I haue brought to perfectiō, be wel accepted at your hands, I shall shortly exhibite vnto your worship, a thing of greater value & estimation. And thus committing your good worship vnto God, I end: who send you your desire of vnderstanding and knowledge. Your Worships to com∣maund. I. Part.
The Authour to his Booke, concerning his friend, whose importunate suit procured him to publish the same. GOe litle booke, of profite and pleasance, Vnto thy good Mistresse without delay: And tel her I send thee for the performāce Of her earnest suit, sith she would haue no nay. Let her vse thy cōmodities, as right wel shemay To profite her friends, for healths preseruation And also to pleasure them for recreation. Tell her, that all thinges in thee contained, I haue seen them put oft times in vre: And geuen thee to be her seruant retained, To serue her, faithfullie doing thy cure: And also say, of this let her be sure, That she with her suit, of me hath obtained Thee, that no gold nor good could haue gained I. P.
The Closet or trea∣surie of hidden Secrets. To make March-paine. Chap. 1. TAke halfe a pound of blanched Almonds, and of white Sugar a quarter of a pound, of Rose∣water halfe an ounce, and of Damaske water as much: beat the Almondes with a litle of the same water, and grinde them til they bee smal: set them on a few coles of fire, til they wax thick, thē beat them again with the sugar, fine: then mixe the sweet waters and them together, and so gather them & fashion your Marchpame: Then take Wafer cakes of the broadest ma∣king, cut them square, paste thē together with a litle liquor, and when you haue made them as broad as will serue your purpose, haue ready made a hoope of a greene Dazell wand, of the thicknes of half an inch, on the inner side smooth and on the outer side round and smooth, without any knags: lay this hoope vppon your Wafer cakes aforesaid, and then fill your hoop with the geare aboue named, the same driuen smooth a∣boue with the back of a siluer spoone, as ye doo a Tart, and cut away all the parts of the cakes, euē close by the out side of the hoop, with a sharp
knife, that it may be round: then hauing white paper vnderneath it, set it vpon a warm hearth or vppon an instrument of yron or brasse, made for the same purpose, or into an Ouen, after the bread is taken out, so it be not stopped, it may not bake, but onelie be harde and thorow dried, and yee may while it is moiste, sticke it full of Comfets of sundrie collours, in a comely order, yee must moist it ouer with Rose-water and Suger together: make it smooth, and so set it in the Ouen, or other Instrument, the clearer it is like a Lanterne horne, so much the morecōmended. If it be through dried, and kept in a drie and warme ayre, a Marchpaine will last many yeares. It is a comfortable meat, meete for weake folkes, such as haue lost the taste of meates by much and long sicknesse. The greatest secrete that is in making of this clear, is with a litle fine flower of Rice, Rosewater, and Suger beaten together, and laid thin ouer the Marchpaine, ere it goe to drieng. This will make it shine like yee, as Ladies report. To gilde a Marchpane, or any other kinde of Tart. Chap. 2. TAke and cut your leafe of golde, as it ly∣eth vpon the booke, into square peeces like Dice, and with a Conies tailes end moisted a litle, take the gold vp by the
one corner, lay it on the place, beeing first made moist, and with an other taile of a Conie drie, presse the golde downe close. And if ye will haue the forme of an Harte, or the name of Jesus, or any other strange thing whatsoeuer, cut the same through a peece of paper, and lay the paper vpon your Marchpane, or Tart: then make the voide place of the Paper, through which the Marchpane appeareth, moist with Rosewater, lay on your gold, presse it downe, take off your Paper, and there remaineth behind in golde, the print cut in the said paper. To bake Quinces Chap. 3. PAre them, take out the coare, perboil them in water till they be tender, let the water run from them, till they be drie: Then put in euery coffin one Quince, in it a good quantitie of Marowe. Also take Suger, Sina∣mon, & a litle Ginger, & fil the Coffin therwith, close it, let it bake an hower, and so serue it. To keepe Quinces vnpared all the yeere long. Chap. 4. TAke ripe Quinces, and at the great end cut a stopple, then take out the coare cleane, and stop the hole againe with the same stopple (but pare them not) and per∣boile them a litle, take them vp, and let the wa∣ter drain from them: then put al the coares, and
some of the smallest Quinces, in litle peeces all to cut, into the water wherein all the Quin∣ces were perboiled, and let them seeth till the liquor be as thick as molten syze that Painters occupy, then take it from the fire and let it coole: in the meane season couch your cold Quinces in a barrell; or in an earthen pot, the great ende downwarde (if the stopple bee out, it makes no matter) and one vppon another. Then put the li∣quor in, that it bee a handfull ouer and aboue them: couer them close, and after iiii. or v. daies looke to them, and when you see the liquor sunk downe, put in more of the same, which yee pur∣posely kept to couer them, as before: then lay a boord vpon them, and a stone, that they rise not, and couer the vessell close with a thick cloth fol∣ded, that it take no aire, so let thē remaine. And when ye intend to occupie some of them, vnco∣uer the vessell, and yee shall finde a creame coue∣ring the whole liquor, breake it in the middest, turn it ouer with your hand, then take out your fruit in order, beginning in the middest first, thē by the sides, so that you remooue nane, if it may be, but those that you take away: and euerie time that ye breake the creame, turne it ouer a∣gaine into his place, for you must know, that the Creame keepeth out aire, and keepeth in the strength of the Syrop therfore it maketh much to the conseruation of the fruit to saue it, and
also to see the vessell close couered. Also, when you will bake your Quinces, wash them well and cleane in warme water, and bake them as before is written. To make Vinigre of Roses. Chap. 5. IN Sommer time when Roses blow, gather them, ere they be full spread or blowne out, and in drie weather: plucke the leaues, let them lie halfe a day vpon a faire boord, then haue a vessel with vinigre of one or two galōs (if you wil make so much Roset) put therein a great quantitie of the said leaues, stop the vessell-close after that you have styred them wel together: let it stand a day and a night, then deuide your Uinigre, & Rose-leaues together in two partes, put them into two great glasses, and put in rose leaues inough: stop the glasses close, set them vp∣on a shelfe vnder a wall side, on the South side without your house, where the Sun may come to them the most part of the day, let them stand there al the whole sommer long: and then strain the Uinigre from the Roses, and keep the Uini∣gre. If you doo once in ten daies take and strain out the Rose-leaues, and put in new leaues of halfe a daies gathering, the Uinigre will haue the more odour of the Rose. You may vse in steed of vinigre, wine, that it may waxe eagre, and receiue the vertue of the Roses, both at once.
Moreouer, you may make your Vine∣ger of Wine, white, red. or claret: but the red doth most binde the belly, and the white doth most loose. Also, the Damaske Rose is not so greate a binder as the Red Rose, and the white Rose looseth moste of all: hereof you may make Vi∣neger Roset. Thus also you may make Vineger of Vio∣lets, or of Elderne flowers: but you must first gather and vse your flowers of Elderne, as shall be shewed here after, when we speake of making Conserue of Elderne flowers. Fine Sauce for a roasted Rabbet: vsed to king Henrie the eight. Chap. 6. TAke a handful of washed Parcelie, mince it small, boyle it with Butter and Ver∣inice vppon a chasingdish, season it with Sugar, and a litle Pepper grose beaten: When it is ready, put in a fewe crummes of of white bread amongest the other: let it boile againe, till it be thicke: then lay it in a platter, like the breadth of three fingers, lay of each side one roasted Conie, or moe, and so serue them.
¶ To make Paste of Sugar, whereof may bee made all maner of fruites and other fine thinges with their forme: as platters, dishes, glasses, cups, and such like thinges▪ wherewith you may furnish a table: and when you haue done, you may eat them vp. A pleasant thing for them that sit at the Table. Chap. 7. TAke gum Dragant, as much as you wil, and steepe it in Rose water, vntill it bee mollifi∣ed. And for foure ounces of Suger, take of it the bignesse of a beane: the iuice of Limons, a Wal∣nut shel full, and a litle of the white of an eg: but you must first take the gum, and beat it so much with a pestle in a morter of white Marble, or of brasse, vntill it become like water, then put to it the iuice with the white of the Egge, incorpo∣rating well together. This done, take foure ounces of fine white suger well beaten to pou∣der, and cast it into the morter by litle and litle▪ vntill it be turned into the fourme of paste: then take it out of the said Morter, and bray it vpon the powder of Suger, as it were meale or flow∣er, vntil al be like soft paste, to the end you may turn it, & fashion it, which way you wil: whē you haue brought your paste to this forme, spread it abroad with Sinamō, vpō great or smal leaues, as you shal think it good, & so shal you forme & make what things you wil, as is aforesaid, with
such fine knackes as may serue a Table, taking heed that there stand no hot thing nigh vnto it. At the end of the banquet they may breake all, and eat the Platters, Dishes, glasses, Cuppes, and all such like: for this paste is verie delicate and sauourous. If you will make a thing of more ffnenesse than this, make a Tart of Al∣mondes, stamped with sugre and Rose-water of like sort that Marchpanes be made of: this shal you lay betweene two pastes of such vessels, or fruites, or some other thing, as you think good. To make fine blanch powder for roasted Quinces. Chap. 8 TAke fine suger, half a pound, beaten in a hot morter to fine powder, of white Ginger, pa∣red, half an ounce, of chosen Synamō a quarter of an ounce, beaten ready to fine powder: mixe them well together, and if you will haue it most excellent, cast two spoonful of Rose or Damask water, in beating of the Suger, To conserue Quinces in sirop condict. alway ready to be serued, in whole or in quarters. Chap. 9. AFter your Quinces are coared and pa∣red, seeth them till they be tender & soft: then lay them out til they be colde: in the meane time, take of the same liquor two quartes or more (according to the number of your Quinces which ye will keep) & put therein
the cores & some other small peeces, seeth them in the liquor to make the sirop strong: straine them, and put into the liquor, being two or three quartes, one pint of Rose water, and for euerie quart of liquor, one halfe pound of Suger: seeth them againe together on a soft fire of coles, till the Suger be incorporated with the liquor, then put in your Quinces: let thē seeth softly, til you perceiue that your sirop is as thicke as life ho∣ney, then set them to coole, and take them out, lay them in a tray or platter till they be colde: then take one ounce of bruised Sinamon, and some whole Cloues: put them with some of the Sinamon in the Sirop, and when it is cold, lay a larde of Quinces in your glasse (called a geste∣lin glasse) or an earthen pot well glased: then straw a litle of your Sinamon vpō your Quin∣ces, then powre some sirop, lay on another lard of Quinces, and again of your spice and sirope, and so foorth till you haue done, & couer them two fingers ouer with sirop aboue, couer them close: and within three of foure daies looke to them: and when you finde the sirope shrunken downe, put in more, and so reserue them. These are to be serued in with sirop. See that the Quinces bee tenderly sodden, and the sirop thicke and strong ynough.
Plums condict in sirop. Chap. 10. TAke halfe a pound of Suger, halfe a pinte of Rosewater, and a pinte of faire Rainwater, or of some other distilled water, seeth the Su∣ger, and the two waters vpon a soft fire of coles till the one halfe be consumed: then take it from the fire, and when it leaueth boiling, put therein halfe a pound of ripe Damasins, or other plums & set it again on the Embers, and keep it in the like heat, til the plums be soft, by the space of an hower if need be: then put into some Cloues bruised, and when it is colde, keep it in a glasse, or in an earthen Gallipot: the stronger the si∣rop is with Suger, the better it will continue. Some put into the sirop Sinamon, Saunders, Nutmegs, Cloues, & a litle Ginger: seeth them not hastilie, for feare of much breaking. To make fine Rice pottage Chap. 11. TAke halfe a pound of Jorden Almondes, and halfe a pound of Rice, and a gallon of running water, and a handfull of Oke barke, and let the barke be boyled in the running water, and the Almondes beaten with the hulles and all on, and so strained to make the Rice Porredge withall. To make Marmalad of Quinces. Chap. 12, AFfter that your Quinces are sodden, rea∣dy to be kept condict as before in the chap∣ter
is written, thē with some of the liquor wher∣in they were sodden (but without any spice) beat them and draw them as ye would doo a Tart: then put some ouer the fire, and seeth them soft∣ly, and in the seething, straw by litle and litle, of powder of Suger, the waight of the Quinces, or more, as your taste shall tell you: stir it con∣tinually, put thereto some pure Rosewater, or bamask water, let it seeth on height, til it be wal¦standing, which thing ye may know, by taking some of it vpon a cold knife, and let it coole, if it be stiffe, then take it off, and boxe it while it is warme, and set it in a warme or drie aire: if you will gilde your Marmalad, doo as afore is spo∣ken of a Marchpane. The best making of a Marmalade is when the Quinces haue laine long, and are through rupe, and very yellow, as in Lent season. And for as much as Quinces are binding, and therefore not good for some sicke folkes co∣stiffe, it is necessary to put a good many of ripe Apples of good verdure, as Renet, Pippin, Lor∣ding, Russeting, Pomeriall, Rex pomorum, or any other Apple, that is pleasant raw, among them, being first drawne from a Tart, and then soadden among the other matter of Quinces. Thus shall you make your Marmalade some∣what souple, and also incrrase the quantity and vertue of the same, especially if it be wel dashed with sweet water.
To make Marmalad of Damsins, or Prunes. Chap 13. TAke Damsins which are ripe, boile them on the fire with a litle faire water, vntill they be soft: Then drawe them through a course Boulter, as ye make a Tart, set it on the fire again, seeth it on height with sufficient Su∣ger, as you do your Quinces, dash it with sweet water, &c. and boxe it. If you will make it of Prunes, euen like∣wise doo put some Apples also to it, as you did to your Quinces. This wise you may make Marmalade of Wardens, Peares, Apples and Medlars, Ser∣uice, Checkers, or Strawberies, euery one by himself, or els mix it together, as you think good To make Succade of peeles of Oranges and Limmons. Chap. 14. FIrst take of your peeles by quarters, and seeth them in faire water, frō three quarts to three pintes: Then take them out, and put to as much more water, & seeth them likewise, and so doo againe, till the water wher∣n they are sodden haue no bitternesse at all of the peeles, then are they ready. Now prepare a Syrop as ye doo for Quinces condict in the si∣rop, in the 9. Chap. before written, seeth them in a glasse or pot.
To make greene Ginger. Chap. 15. TAke the Rases of cased Ginger of the fai∣rest and vse them as followeth: Lay a broad lane of faire sand vpon a low floore on the ground, halfe a foot thick, then lay your Rases of Ginger vppon the sand in order, couer the Ginger with more sand, foure or fiue inches thicke, sprinkle the sande ouer with faire water twice euery day that it be moist, thus dai¦ly doo, til ye shal perceiue your Rases to be soft. Then take vp your Rases, wash them, & scrape them cleane, haue a sirop readie made, as aboue is saide, seeth them in it till they bee well seaso∣ned: take them vp, and with some of the sirope cast them, or put them in a pot of stone. To make Manus Christi. Chap. 16. TAke halfe a pounde of white Suger, put thereto foure ounces of Rosewater, seeth them vpon a soft fire of coales, till the wa∣ter be consumed, and the suger is become hard: Then put therein a quarter of an ounce of the powder of Pearles, stir them well together, put for euery spoonefull a peece of a leafe of gold cut of purpose, cast them vpon a leafe of white paper being first annointed with the oile of sweete Al∣mondes, or sweet butter for cleauing too.
To make Aqua Composita. Chap. 17. TAke foure gallons of the best Ale, drawen from the yeast 24. howers after it hath stood tunned, and put it into a close vessell, wherin you shall put these hearbs following, and foure oun∣ces of Licorase scraped, and bruised in a morter, and so much Annise seed wel garbled: then stirre them together twice a day for the space of three daies, and let them stand 24. howers after: then put them into the stilling pot, and (if you please) you may also put in the Lees of Malmsey or Sacke, or any other distilled waters, but fil not your pot too full: then set on your Limbeck, and close it fast to the pot, and keepe a soft fire vnder it. These are the hearbs with their quantities. Isope, Time, Rosemarie, Sage, Parsley, Borage, Langdebeef, red fenel, Sorrel, Harts∣toong, Bay-leaues, Buglosse, Scabias, Mari∣golde, Costmarie, Ribwoort, Sentorie, Liuer∣woort, Fumitorie, of each a handful. Margeram gentle, Basil, Mints, Champane, Woodbinde, Patience, Valerian, Endiue, Wormewood, Peneroyall, Camomill, of each halfe a handfull. To make Aqua Vitae. Chap. 18. TAke foure gallons of strong Ale or Wine-Lees, and put them in a vessell and couer it well: then put to it three or foure handfull of Rosemarie, Peniroyall, Liuerwoort, Hartes∣tongue,
or any other good hearbs, and stir them together twice or thrice a day, for the space of foure daies: then put them in a brasse pot, and still with a temperate fire, for els you burn your pot and loose your Aqua Vite, which will stinke and look red: also, looke you keep your water in a temper, and when it is very hot, let it out, and put in colde water againe into the vpper part of the Limbecke, and so change your water as it waxeth hot. Take a spooneful from vnder the spoute, and light it with a paper, and if it burne cleane out, it is good, els not. To make Ipocras. Chap. 19. TAke of chosen Sinamon two ounces, of fine Ginger one ounce, of Graines halfe an ounce, of Nutmegs halfe an ounce, bruise them al, and stampe them in three or foure pintes of good o∣differous wine, with a pound of Suger, by the space of four and twenty howers: then put them into an Ipocrasse bag of woollen, and so receiue the liquor. The readiest and best way is to put the spices with the pound of Suger, & the wine into a bottell, or a stone pot, stopped close, and af∣ter xxuii. howers it wil be ready, then cast a thin linnen cloath, and letting so much run through as ye will occupie at once, and keepe the vessell close, for it will so well keepe both the spirite, o∣dour and vertue of the wine, and also spices.
How to make diuers necessarie Oiles of great vertue. Chap. 20. Oleum Hiperici. TAke the tops & flowers of S. Iohns woort that hath red iuice, three ounces, shred the smal, & lay them to steepe in sweet wine, as much as needeth, three daies: then boile them in a double glasse, close stopt, & presse out the liquor from them, which done foure times with fresh flowers, & a litle more wine, if any bee wasted, if not, take the wine the fourth time strained, put to it, Terebinthii, 3. ounces: of good Oile 6. ounces, and of Saffron a scruple, so let thē boile til the wine be consumed: which poured cleare out from the grounds, reserue to be vsed. It is hot & dry, and binding, wherefore it hea∣leth the cuts and wounds of the sinewes, taketh away the paine of the hips, thighes, and bladder, and helpeth the vrine. Oile of Rue. TAke blossoms and tops of Rue so many as you lift, which smal shred, put into some gla¦sen vessell, and poure to so much sweet Oile as will couer them, and close stopt, let it stand in the sunne, or in some other hot place, fiue daies: then boile it, & being strained from the hearbs, take so many fresh hearbs, & vse it as afore said, four or fiue times, & reserue it to vse as aforesaid It is hot, opening, resoluing, and mittigating paine: it heateth the raines, bladder and matrix,
it taketh away the pains of thē & the Colleck, if the belly bee anointed therewith, or a glyster made therewith, it is good for the sinewes, hel∣peth the cramp, and putteth away cold humors. Oile of Dill. TAke the flowers and leaues of Dil. &c. as a∣fore of Rue. It mitigateth paine, openeth the pores, prouoketh sweat, resolueth vapors, impostumes, swellings & hardnesse in any place, and if the back bone be annointed, it easeth the painēs and growing of Feuers. Oile of Elder flowers, in the same maner. It soupleth, cleanseth the skin, helpeth the weaknes of the liuer, and the stopping of the same, and greatly asswageth the paine of the iointes. Oile of the leaues and flowers of Camomill, as of Rue and Dill. It is good against the pleurisie, openeth the pores, resolueth vapors, correcteth the euil qua∣lity of humors, and is good for the sinewes, and abateth the paine meruellously. Oile of sweet Mints, as aforesaid. I comforteth a weake stomack, staies vomit, mooues appetite, helpeth concoction, and taketh away loathsomnes. Oile of Wormwood. It is hot, & comforteth the parts that are too much cooled, chiefly the stomack, prouoketh ap∣petite, takes away obstructiōs, & killeth worms.
Of Oile of Roses, and of Rose buds. It is good against inflamations, it cooleth the burning and boiling of the stomacke, & fret∣ting of the bowels, if it be geuen in glister, and to annoint the teeth, it taketh away the ach. Of the oile of Violet Flowers. It is good against all inflamations and heat. Of the Oile of water-Lillie flowers. It cooleth more than oile of Violets, it helpeth the heat of the raines. To make Oile of Earth wormes. TAke of Earth-wormes halfe a pound, of good Oile two pound, of sweet wine two ounces: boile all together vntill the wine bee quite con∣sumed, then straine it and keepe it. This Oile is good for the sinewes that are cold, and helpeth the paine in the iointes Oleum benedictum. TAke of Oile two pound, Storax Calamite, Labdanū, Olibanū, Saffron, Gumarabbick. Madder, Gum of the Iuie tree, Aloes, Succo∣trine, Masticke, Cloues, Galingale, Sinamon, Nutmegs, Cubebes two ounces, Gum Elamy a pound, Mirrhe Bdellium, half an ounce, Gal∣bamun, six ounces, Spike, an ounce, Rosin of the Pine tree, Armoniacke, Opoponax, two drams: beat all to powder that is to be beaten, and mix it with the Oile, and put all into a Stillitorie of glasse, with the head and receiuer so closed, that no aire come out, setting your Limbecke
vpon a soft fire, twelue howers, encreasing your fire from six hower to sixe, till al be stilled. This done, beat all the residence in the bottome of the Still to fine powder, and with the same oile di∣still it the second and the third time as afore, & it shall be as it were Balme. It is good against Crāps, palsies, paines of the ioints, cold Catars, green wounds & Ulcers: it comforteth the spirits, openeth obstructions: one drop in the eare helpeth the hearing: A Rose-Cake dipped in it and laid to the Temples, hel∣peth the Megrim, and taketh away the swim∣ming of the head: an ounce in sweet wine drunk three daies together, cureth the disease of the Lungs, and the quarterne Feauer: If you giue a spoonefull with wine thirtie daies, with a litle powder of Piony roots: It helpeth the falling sicknesse: so that if the coronall commissure bee also annointed, it easeth the paine of the French Pockes, and is good against the stinging of a∣ny venomous beasts, and for all diseases of the sinewes. To make Conserue of Roses, or other flowers. Chap. 21. TAke buds of red Roses, somewhat before they be ready to spread, cut the red part of the leaues from the white: then take the red leaues, and beate and grind them in a stone Morter with a pestle of wood, and to euery ounce of Roses, put three ounces of Su∣ger
in the grinding (after the leaues are wel bea¦ten) and grinde them together till they be per∣fectly incorporated, then put it in a glasse made for the nonce, and of purpose, or els into an ear∣then pot: stop it close, and so keep it. Thus ye may make Conserues of all kinde of flowers, vsed thereunto. The vertue of Conserue of Roses. COnserue of Roses comforteth the stomack, the heart and all the bowels, it mollisteth & softneth the belly, and is good against black Choller, & Melancholy. Conserue of white Roses doth loose the belly more than Red. To make Conserue of Violets. Chap. 22. TAke the flowers of Uiolets, and picke them from the stalke, beate and grinde them with Suger, as you did your Roses: to these put dou∣ble the weight of sugar to the waight of Uiolet flowers, but to all flowers put three parts of su∣ger to one part of the flowers. The vertue of the same. COnserue of Uiolet flowers is good against the heat and inflamation of Choller, called yellow choller, it quencheth thirstinesse, it maketh the bellie moist and soluble. The vertue of the Conserue of Buglosse. Chap. 23. COnserue of Buglosse flowers comforteth the heart, it is good for the frantick, for the Lunaticke, and for the Melancholike, it is
good for the Sincop & sowning, it taketh away heart-burning, and trembling of heart or sto∣macke, it profiteth against choler. The vertue of Conserue of Borage. Chap. 24. COnserue of Borage flowers is of like vertue: it is especially good against black Choller, or Melancholie, it also maketh one merie. The vertue of Conserue of Rosemarie. Chap. 25. COnserue of the flowers of Rosemarie, comforteth the cold and moist braine, it comfortes also the sinewes, it is good a∣gainst melancholy and flewine. To keep Cheries condict, or Goos-beries. Chap. 26. MAke your sirop as for Plums▪ then take half a pound of Cheries, & cut off halfe the length of the stalk of euery Chery, put thē into the sirop, & vse them as you did the Plums, put in what spice pleaseth you, & so keep it as be¦fore is written: but make your sirope strong y∣nough of suger, least it wax hore & corrupt, then must ye make a new sirop stronger of the suger, & put the cheries in it to keep, as before is saide. Thus may ye do with Goos-beries, to make of thē tarts or sawces al the yeer long, sauing that the Goose-beries may bee well sodden without breaking, because of their rough skinne, so it bee softly & diligently done.
The vertue of the Conserue of Succarie. Chap. 27. COnserue of Succary is good against yel∣low and blacke Choller, and in the bur∣ning and heat of hot Feuers. The vertue of Conserue Of Eldern flowers. Chap. 28. COnserue of flowers of Elder, is good a∣gainst the Morphew, it cleanseth the sto∣macke and the whole body from scabs. Gather the clusters or bunches wheron the flowers growe, when they are newe blowne and spread, lay them vpon a faire sheet abroad in a chamber a day or two, til ye shall perceiue the flower will shake off and fall away: then picke them cleane, and make thereof Conserue, as yee do of other flowers. And whereas it is more wholsome than plea¦sant, therefore put some other Conserue (such as you list) amongst it, when you will occupie it. The vertue of the Conserue of Sorrell. Chap. 29. COnserue of Sorrell is good against all kinde of heates of the stomacke, & other principall partes of the body, and against yellow choller. Take leaues of Sorrell, wash them cleane, and shake off the water cleane, or els tarie til the
water be dried cleane: beate them, and grinde them with Sugar, as aboue, & then keep them. The vertue of the Conserue of Maiden-haire Chap. 30. COnserue of the leaues of Maiden-haire, is good against the sicknesse of the side, called the Pleurisie, and for all the diseases of the breast, and of the Lightes, and in all maladies of Melancholie, and against red Choller. Make it as you doe Conserue of Sorrell. To make Conserue of Elicampana Roots. Chap. 31. TAke the rootes of Elicompana, wash them cleane, slice them into peeces as big as your thumbe, seeth them in faire water till they bee tender▪ take them vp and powne them, & drawe them through a haire sieue: put thereto in the second seething, the double or treble waight of Sugar, and when the Suger is perfectly incor∣porated, take it off and keepe it. The vertue of the same. COnserue of Elicompana is a good comfort to the stomack, & the nourishing of the mem∣bers, it marueilously looseth tough fleame, dis∣solueth, and consumeth the same, by the siege it auoideth it.
To make Conserue of Acornes, or Gladen, with the vertue of the same. Chap. 32. TAke the roots of yellow Flowerdeluce, which groweth in moist ground, otherwise called a Flag root: wash thē & scrape thē, seeth them and order them as ye do of Elicompana, now last be∣fore rehearsed, and so keep it. This Conserue is good against all sicknesse of the braine, and Si∣newes, and against all diseases of flewine. Unto women it openeth natural course, and tearmes. And you must generally learne, that in ma∣king Conserues, fruites & rootes are made with fire & seething. Moreouer, the more Suger or honey is put into them, so it bee not past three pound to one, the cōserue shal cōtinue the better To make Conserue of Strawberies, with vertue of the same. Chap. 33. Take Strawberies one quart, cleane picked and washed, set them on the fire till they bee soft, strain them, put therto two times as much suger in powder as waight of the Strawberies let them seeth till the Suger bee incorporated with the Strawberies, put it in a glasse or ear∣then pot well glased. The vertue of the same. The Conserue of Strawberies is good against a hot liuer, burning of the stomacke, and specia∣ly in the feruent heat of an ague. Thus make Conserue of Damsins and Prunes.
To make conserue of Cheries and Barbaries. Chap. 34. LIkewise you must make Conserue of Che∣ries, and also of Barbaries, sauing that these require more Suger than the other doe, which are not so sowre as they be. Here is to be noted, that of Conserue of fruites may be made Marmalade: for when your Con∣serue is sufficiently sodden & ready to be taken off, then seeth it more on height, and it will bee Marmalad. Moreouer, some make their Conserue, Mar¦malade, & strops, with cleane Suger, some with cleane hony clarified, some with suger & honey together: and after the opinion of some great Clearks, honey is more wholsom, though it bee not so toothsome as the Sugar. To make al kind of Sirops. Chap. 35 TAke Buglosse, Borage, white Endiue, of each one handfull: of Rosemarie, Time, Hy∣sope, winter Sauory, of each halfe a handfull, seeth them (beeing first broken betweene your handes) in three quartes of water vnto three pints, then strein it, and put in the liquor, whole Cloues an ounce, pouder of Sinamon halfe an ounce, pouder of Ginger, a quarter of an ounce, one Nutmeg in pouder, of Suger halfe a pound or more, let them seeth vpon a soft fire wel stir∣red for burning too, vntill it come to thicknesse of life honey, then keepe it Galley pots.
If you put one pinte of Malmesey in the se∣cond seething, it will be better. When it is per∣fect, haue sixe grains of fine Muske in powder, stir it amongst your Sirope, as yee put it into your Gallipot, and couer it. This Sirope will laste many yeares, and is excellent against sowning and faintnesse of hart: it comforteth the braine and sinewes, if it bee v∣sed as much as a Hasel Nut at once, at your pleasure, A Violet Powder for woollen cloathes and Furres. Chap. 36. TAke of Ireos two ounces, of Calamus Aromaticus three quarters of an ounce, of Cypres, of Gallingale, of Spikenall, of Roseleaues dried, of each a quarter of an ounce, of Cloues of Spike, of Lauander flow¦ers, of each halfe an ounce, of Nigella Romana a quarter of an ounce, of Beniamin, of Storax Calamite, of each halfe an ounce, let them be all finely beaten, and searced: Then take two or three graines of Muske, dissolue it in Rose-wa∣ter, and sprinkle the water vpon the powder, and turne it vp and downe in the sprinkling, till it haue drunke vp the water: when it is drie, keep it in bags of silke. A sweet powder for Naperie, and all Linnen cloathes. Chap. 37. TAke of sweet Mariorum (that which is hory is the sweeter) when it hath in him seedes
ripe, cut the brāches, so that the root may spring againe, when this Mariorum is dried, then rub out the seeds and keep them to sowe about Ea∣ster, and the huskes and leaues that grow about the seeds take for your purpose, rub them small (for if you beate them to powder in a morter, they will loose the most part of their sauour) thē take of white Saunders, or of grey Saunders, but look that they be new, of right sweet odour, for if they be olde and haue no pleasant & quicke odour, they are nothing woorth: Take (I say) of these sweet Saunders beaten into fine powder, an ounce, and put it into an ounce of your sweet Mariorum, rubbed between your handes as be∣fore is said, and if you put one or two graines of Muske thereunto, for your wearing linnen, it is the better: sowe these vp in a silke bag together and lay it among your Linnen: of such bagges haue a dozen or two, which will continue many yeares, and when you look to your Linneu, then chafe each of the bags between your hands, that they may yeeld out their sweet odour. Moreouer, in the Summer time, gather red Roses in fair weather, so soon as they be blown and opened, lay them vpon a table, a bed, or fair floore of boords, and now and then remooue thē, least they mould and wax foisty. When they are drie, picke of the leaues, that you may haue two peckes of them, then straw them among and be∣tweene the boughtes and foldings of your linnen
with one handfull of drie Spike flowers, to sixe handfull of drie Roses, and lay your sweet bags amongst them. Be sure that your linnen be euer through drie, ere euer you lay them vp, or els the Roses will waxe hore, set your coer in a drie ayre, and in the winter time or in wet wea∣ther, when ye perceiue your roses to wax moist, then put them in a piowhere or twaine, that they fall not out, and lay them vppon your bed betweene the couerlet and the blanket al night, or els before the fire, let them drie, and strawe them againe. Moreouer, ye must alwaies haue a bag full of drie Roses in store; kept in a drie ayre: for if he loose his rednesse, then looseth the Rose his sweetnesse. Finally, you must euerie yeare put awaye your old Roses and occupie new, but help your sweet bags still many yeares. To make a Pomeamber. Chap. 38. TAke Bensamin one ounce, of Storax Ca∣lamite halfe an ounce, of Labdanum, the eight part of an ounce, beate them to pow∣der, and then put them into a brazen ladle, with a litle Damaske or Rose water, set them ouer the fire of coales til they be dissolued, and be soft like waxe: Then take them out and chase them between your hands as you doo wax: then haue these powders ready, finely Tearred: of , of Cloues, of sweet Saunders, grey or white, of
each of these three powders half a quarter of an ounce, mixe these powders with the other, and chase them wel together, if they be too drie moi∣sten them with some of the Rose water left in the ladle, or other: If they wax colde, warme them vpon a kniues point ouer a chasingdish of coales: then take of Amber Greece, of Muske, and , of each three graines, dissolve the Amber Gréece in a siluer spoon ouer hot coles, when it is colde, make it small, put it to your Muske and Ciuet: then take your Pome that you haue chased and gathered together, and by litle and litle (with some sweet water if need be) gather vp the Amber Muske and Ciuet, and mixe them with your ball, till they be perfectly incorporated, then make one ball or two of the lumpe, as ye shall thinke good, for the waight of the whole is aboue two ounces, make a hole in your ball, and so hang it by a face. If you perceive that the ball is not tough i∣nough, but too britle, then take a courtesie of Storax liquida, & therewith temper your Ball against the fire, but take not too much Storax liquida, because it is too strong. Or, the better way is to haue some Gum, called Dragagouthant, ready dissolued in sweet water, it wil be dissolued in two daies, and with that gather your ball with the heat of the fire: this ball wil be of like goodnes within as with∣out, and of great price.
Some men put in the making thereof, three or foure drops of the oile of Spike, beware of too much because it is very strong. When you will haue your Ball exceede in sweetnesse, breake it, & haue two or three grains of Muske, or Ciuet, or Amber Greece, all you delight in, or alcoge them, dissolue them in rose or, Damask water, and with the san  your Balle ouer the fire till it bee drunk in, then pearce a newe hole, as before. To make a fine Fumigation to cast on the coles. Chap. 39. TAke of  one ounce, of Storax Calamite halfe an ounce; dissolue them as soya Pomander, then haue ready these woods in powders or out of them: Ginger, or Cypres, or of white Saunders and Cloues, of either halfe a quarter of an ounce, all in fine powder, mix them altogether: and with some Storax liquida gather thē together with the heate of fire, then make them ou, of the bignesse of a blacke Slo and with youre seale print it a Cake while it is warme and soft. Of these caste one or two vpon a chasting dish of coales, to purge all pestiferous and corrupt aires out of your houses if you put to the other thinges, the powder of Amber , it will bee the sweeter. Some put also Lavdanum, as before saide
in making the Pomeander, herein doe as the sa∣uour shall please you. To make the same in Oselets. Chap. 40. TAke a litle of fine powder of Sallow, or wil∣low coales, mixe with it some of your Fumi∣gation last before named, in the making, woork them well together, then fashion it with three or foure feete like a Cloue, and when it is drie, kindle the end of it at a quicke coale, and it will yeeld a sweet sauour to put not too much coales, for then it will sauour of them: put not too litle coales, for then it will not keep fire: put not too much Storax liquida, for then it will be too britle and too moist, and will not lightly drie: therefore, it shall bee very well to have some Gum of the Cherie tree or Plum tree, which they call Gum Arabick: dissolue some of it into sweet water, til it be liquid & tough, with this gather your Oselets: or other Fumigations. A moyst Fume vpon a Fuming dish. Chap. 41. TAke a peece of Pomeamber, as big as a Ha∣zell nutt bruise it, put it into your Fuming dish with sweet water, put therunto a few Bay leaues, as much of dried Bazell leaues, a litle Rosemarie, and set it ouer the fire, vpon a Cup , or els in steed of the Pomeamber, put two or three of the cakes before written, broken small, and nine or ten whole cloues: and if you
will haue it  fewer, then put  graines of Muske, and let the leaues and them stand ouer the fire together, as before is said. A Fumigation for presse and cloathes that no Moth shal breed therein. Chap. 42. TAke of the mood of Cypresse, or distemper, of Rosemarie dried, of Storax Calamite, of Beniamin, of Cloues, a like waight, beaten in∣to powder: then take of the powder of Worm∣wood leaues dried, as much as al the others said them well together, cast thereof vpon a chafing∣dish of coales, and set in your presse, and shut it cloase: and thus doe oft times till you haue well seasoned your Presse or coffer. A Perstime for a Chamber. Chap. 43. TAke Rosemarie, sweete Mariorum. Bay leaues, of each a hand full,  other Cloues, vinigre & Rosewater ∣tity, boile these in your perfuming . A which smel is sweet and holsome. A Perfume of Damaske. Chap. 44. TAke Storax Calamite  Benia∣min, Labdanum foure ounces,  ounce Maske foure graines, Cloues and  Rosewater halfe a pound stamp them together and when you will occupie them, put them in your sing pan and boile them.
An odorifferous sweet Balle against the plague Chap. 45. TAke Storax, Labdanum, of each a dram Cloues halfe a dram, Camphix halfe a scruple, Spiknard a scruple, Nutmegs a dram: Of all these make a passe with Rosewater tempered with Gum Dragagant and Gum Arrabicke, stirring and bruising them well of this paste make your balles & warm thē. An Odorifferous white Powder. Chap. 46. TAke Trios elect three ounces, white San∣dall two ounces. Damaske Roses, Lignum Aloes, Beniamin, Ciri Alexand of each two ounces, Maske foure graines, Ciuet, three grains: beat and sift them by themselues, and incorporate them in the same morter you beat them in, and keep it in a vessel wel stopped. A sine red Powder. Chap. 47. TAke Damaske Roses two ounces, Sandilt Attrui one ounce, Ligai Aloes, Ligni Alex. of each a graine, fine Muske three drams, Ciuet two drams, Amber two drams: mixe them and beat them and keepe them together, as before. A sweet Blacke Powder. Chap. 48. TAke Cipri Alerand, Ligni Aloes of each halfe a dram, Sandali Cytrini, damaske Roses, of each an ounce, Cloues three grains, musk three grains, & as much Ciuet, beate these together, and keep them close in a vial well stopt.
A Powder wherewith to make sweete wter. Chap. 49. TAke the wood of Cypresse, or the root of Galingale one quarterne, of Calamus Aromaticus one quarterne, of Drace or Iris one quarterne, of Cloues one quar∣terne, of Storax Calamite one quarterne, of Beniamin one quarterne. Or, ye may take of each of these one ounce for a portion, let all be beaten into powder, and when you will distill your Roses, fill your Still with Rose leaues, and a few Spike flowers, and vpon the top of some, strawe some of your pow∣ders, and so distill them. Some put a litle of the powder of Nigells, Romana, to the other powders. These Cakes will be verie sweete, put the water in a large glasse, & to the pot put twelue graines of Muske, let it hang in the middest of the water, in a thin linnen cloath with a thread, set it in the Sun twentie or thirtie daies, then take the glasse in, and set it in a drie ayre. Conclusions & rules to be vsed in distilling, and the ordering of each hearb of flower before they be distilled. Chap. 50. FIrst, a soft fire maketh sweete water, and the sweetnesse to continue strong. Secondlie, coales  the best water.
Thirdly, wash nothing that you wil still, but wipe it with a cleane cloth. Fourthlie, all hearbes, flowers and seedes must be gathered when the dew is off them. Fiftlie, That which you will still, must lie at the least sixe howers before you still it. Sixtlie, Al Spices corrupt your water, ex∣cept Amber Greece, Ciuet and Musske. 7. Scum your water well. 8. Keepe your still verie cleane. 9. Wash your still, but not often, and then drie it with a drie cloath. 10. The glasse Stil is best, the tinne next, the earth not so good as the thine, and the lea∣den is the woorst of them. 11. Tender flowers, as Uiolets, Jillflow∣ers, and such like; would be stilled or glasse. 12. All compositions must bee stopped close before, and in stilling diligently weighed and measured. 13. Liquid waters must haue greater fire than drie and light waters. 14. Still not your glasse too still. 15. Put store of ashes vnder your still, that your Still shall not burne. 16. Wipe the vpper part of the Stil often, but especially the ridge. 17. Diligence in looking to all things. Borage, must be distilled: the hearb with the roote chopped together.
Hysop, the leaues stripped from the stalk when it beares blew flowers. Camomill, the hearbe and flower chopt toge∣ther in the middell of May. Dil, the hearb in the beginning of May. Fumitory, the whole substance chopped in the end of May. Mint, either red or other, the hearbe, stalke & leaues chopped in the middle of May. Roses, the flowers cutting away the white endes. Rosemarie the flowers, buds & leaues strip∣ped from the stalke in May, in the flowering. Sentorie, the hearbe and flowers chopped in the end of June, Uiolets, the flowers in April. Woodbind, the flowers in the beginning of June. To make the water of the same colour of the Flowers that you distil. Chap. 50. FIrst, distill your water in a Stillitorie: then put it in a faire glasse, and take the buds of Roses and cut away the white, and put the leaues into the stilled water, then stop the glasse, and put it into the Stillitorie to Still, putting hearbes into the Still for feare of burning. After this, straine the water from the leaues, and scum it well.
A compound Water to perfume gloues or other thinges. Chap. 51. TAke Damaske water double stilled a pounde, Maske ten graines. Cauet three graines. Amber greece foure graines: heate all these together to powder, and put it into the water aforesaid, and stop it close, and vse it without any more stilling. To make Damask water. Chap. 52. TAke Damaske Roses, and red Roses of each  handfull, let them drie foure howers in the shadow when take two drams of Labdanum Ni¦gellae Romanae two peniworth, Irios halfe an ounces Storax, two drams, Cloues an ounce, Beniamn Colaus Aromaticus Nutmegs, of each half on ounce Mariorū & Bazel, of each half a hādful: bruise the spice, & put it in Malm∣sey or the lees thereof the space of foure daies: then distil it and scum it fourteens daies. Another maner of making of Damask water. Chap. 53. TAke of race of Iris, of Spike flowers dried, of Cloues, of each an ounce, make them in powder, put them together, with a pint of new Ale in corns, and one pinte of Rosewater in an earthen pot, put thereto a good mary of greene Roseleaues, let them soke in it a night time stopped close, in the morning
when ye shall distill, first, say other Roseleaues in the bottome of your Stillitorie for feare of cleauing too: then take of the Roseleaues out of the pot, and put them with other green rose∣leaues, in your Stillitorie sufficient, and to the water put Muske, as aboue is said. This wa∣ter is excellent to set foorth a Tart, an Apple Moyse, or Almond butter. Powder of Holland against Collick, and the gnawing of the belly. Chap. 54. TAke Sinamon, Annis seede, Fenell seede, Cominseed, of each a quarter of an ounce, of  Luoris three quarters of an ounce, of Gallingale one ounce and a halfe, of Spikenard a quarter of an ounce, of Stene of Alexandria two ounces: beate them all into fine powder, and serue them, whereof take a quarter of an ounce in a messe of Pottage. Powder to make the belly solluble, causing a gentle laske; meete for Noble Personages. Chap. 55. TAke Sene of Alexandria one ounce, of fine Ginger halfe a quarter of an ounce, of Annys seede a quarter of an ounce, beate them into fine powder into your fode Sugar, and make osinges as before of the whole, the number of sixteene, wherof dissolue two of them into a messe of pottage, or in a cuppe of wine, fa∣sting in the morning, and fast one hower after:
If you do put as much of Suger in powder as the waight of the whole powder, ye may keep it in a bladder, and the whole powder will serue eight times to receiue: as euen now is said A receit to restore strength in them that are brought lowe with long sicknesse. Chap. 56. TAke of the brawn of a Fesant or Partridge, or of a Capon sodden or rosted, of each a quar¦ter of an ounce, steepe them in Rosewater two howers, of the kernels of Nuts called Pistatio∣rum, and of the kernel of the pine Apple, of each a quarter of an ounce: of Sinamon in fine pow∣der, the waight of twentie barlie cornes, of the spices of Dianthos, Diamargariton, Letificen∣tes, Galem, of each the waight of fortie graines or Barlie cornes, of the seede of Millon, Pepon, Goord, and Cucummer, of each the waight of ten graines the skin taken off, let them bee all ground small, then take sixe ounces of Suger, dissolued in Borage water, seeth it on height, as for loosings, and when it is sodden inough, then put in all the other geare, and make loosinges thereof. Whereof one is sufficient at once, dis∣solued in a messe of Pottage, or a draught of drinke: Thus do two or three times euery day. To make Loosings. Chap. 57. TAke halfe a pound of Suger, and as much Rosewater, or other distilled water, as for
Mamis , seeth them likewise; and When you will knowe when it is sden ynough, take out some vpon a kniues point, and let it coole; & if it be hard like suger, then it is sodden inought: Then put into it powder of Gluger, Sinamon or Nutmeg: stir them well together, lay it vpon a paper oiled, driue it as thin as you think meet Lay on it your gold leafe with a  taile, cut your Losings Diamond fashion, and so keep them. To perfume gloues. Chap. 58. TAke the gloues and wash them in rosewa∣ter, or Damaske water, till the scurffe of the leather be gone, and then stretch thent foorth softly, and keep the water you wash them with still: thea hang them vp to drie, and then lay them in a cleane linnen cloath that is fol¦ded three or foure times double, and when they be drie, let them lie in Roseleaues dried a day or two, then take oile of Ciuet Almonds, and Muske: and grind them together vpon a Mar∣ble stone, stretch them foorth softly, and with your hande annoint your gloues three or foure times, and euer among stretch them fourth as they drie. Then take Sandise mixed with a litle Amber Greece, and stae the powder of it thinly vpon them, and lay them in a paper, and in a boxes or els most the Amber Greece in a quantity of Rosewater, and mixe the San∣difex in it, and so annoint the glous with the
same: then let them drie, and lay them in faire white paper. 2. To perfume gloues another way. TAke the gloues and wash them, as aforesaid, three or foure times, and wring them euerie time softlie: then take Gum of Dragagant and steepe it in fine Damaske water one night, then straine the Water through a fine linnen cloth, and take the Gum & mix it with an ounce of Amber Greece, and a quarter of an ounce of Muske: first grinde your Amber Greece with oile of Turpentine: then mingle all together, and rowle your gloues: with the same: lay them to drie, and lay a paper betweene. 3. A preparatiue for gloues. WAsh the gloues, as aforesaid, till the sent of the Leather bee gone, then take Beniamin two ounces, of Sto∣rax Calamit one ounce, let them be verie fine: then take oile of Ciuet Almonds and mingle it with Beiamin amd Storax vppon a Marble stone. When it is wel ground, put it in∣to an earthen pot with more Dile of Ciuet Al∣mondes, then put in Cloues in powder, and so let it stand close couered: and when you neede, take a litle Rosewater in a Spoonge, and rub the gloues softlie, and then in like maner, with the oile called Ciuet oile for the same purpose.
4. Another way. TAke twelue grains of Muske, six grains of Amber Greece, three graines of Sto∣rax Calamite, sixe graines of Benia∣min, and a few Cloues: grinde all these together with oile of Ciuet, Almondes. First, wash your gloues with Eusses, dissolued a day in Damaske water. 5. An other for gloues. TAke your gloues and wash them in Rose water once or twice, till all the scurffe be gone from them, and then let them drie, and stretch them well out, fingers and all. Then plaine them, and wash them once or twice: then take two ounces of Storax and as much Ben∣iamin made in powder, dresse your gloues all o∣uer, on a smooth boord before they drie: then hang them to drie, and when they be drie, saue the powder that is left. Then take a pint of Rosewater, & two oun∣ces of Storax, and two ounces of Sinamon, put all these in powder, & cast them to the Rose∣water, and let them seeth in a close Posnet co∣uered; Then take a fine brush; and brush them ouer. 6. An other way to perfume. TAke Amber Greece a dram, of Musk halfe a dram, of Fusses a dram, of Ciuet halfe an ounce, put all these together in a pince of Rose∣water, or Damask water.
4. Another way. TAke a dram of Amber Greece, a dram of Beniamin, halfe a dram of Fusses, a dram of Storax, a quarter of an ounce of Labdanum, put all these in Rosewater. A Perfume for Chestes and Cupbords, and also for Gloues. Chap. 59. TAke Beniamin and Storax of each an ounce, Labdanum and Fusses, of each a quarter of an ounce, halfe a dram of Ciuet: If you burne it for chestes or cupboords, beate it in hote mor∣ter: If it be for gloues boile it, and put it to Rosewater. To collour Gloues. Chap. 60. YOu must haue hulles of greene Walnuts that must lie in water all the yeare long: rolle them well with these hulles, and make them as deepe a collour as you may. How to collour gloues yellow within. TO collour gloues yellow within, take the yolkes of twenty Egs, and put them in a frieng pan, with a soft fire, stir them euer, and bruise them with a ladle, and the oile that ascendeth of them, being annointed on the inside of the gloues, will make them looke yellow. To make muske Sope. Chap. 61. TAke strong lie made of Chalke and sixe pound of stone Chalke, foure pound of Deere Suet, and put them in the lie in an earthen pot, and
mingle it wel, and keep it the space of forty daies and mingle and stir it three or four times a day till halfe he consumed, and to that that remai∣neth seuen or eight daies after, you must put a quarter of an ounce of Muske, and when you haue done so, you must also stirre it, and it wil linell of Muske. To make red sealing Waxe. Chap. 62. TAke to one pound of Waxe three ounces of cleare Turpentine in Sommer, in Winter take foure: melt them together with a soft fire, then take it from the fire & let it coole: then put in Uermilion verie finely ground, and Sallet oile, of each an ounce, and mixe them wel together, and it is perfect good. To keepe Damasins in sirop. Chap. 63. TAke Damasins, and picke them well with a knife or a pin, then take clarifteu Suger, as much as you shall thinke will scrue, and then you muste boile it till it bee as thicke as birdlime. Then boyle your Damasins in the clarified Suger til they be soft, then take them vp and put them in a glasse, then you must boyle the sirop, till it be as thicke as the other was, befor you put in the Damasins. And as soone as it is so thick you must poure it into the Da∣masins, and so couer them close.
A Water for the face, vsed of Gentle∣women. Chap. 52. TAke Goates milke two pound, fine Flower halfe a pecke, the white of three egges, and make it from paste to litle loaues, and take it not too much: then take more of the said Goates milke, and crum of the crummes of your bread into it, let it steepe all night, and wipe your face with a drie cloath, and then wash with the said milke, and in vsing this, it will make the face shine as white as snowe. Another to make the face faire. TAke the shearing of Scarlet four ounces, the whites of two new laid egs, white wine two pound. Rosemarie flowers, or Rosemary it self, and seeth it or still it, but if you seeth it, scum it clean, and when it is cold vse it, and it wil make the skin looke smooth. Another, to remooue high collour in the face. LImons laide in butter-milke is an excel∣lent meanes to remooue high collour in the face. A Water for heate in the face, and breaking out with Pimples. Chap. 65. TAke Allū glasse two pound, the iuice of Plan∣tin, Purslane, beriuice, of each halfe a pound, the whites of twenty egs, beate them and mixe
them and distil them: which water destroyeth chaffinges, heates, pimples, wheales, & scurffes, wheresoeuer they be. To know whether a Woman shall euer conceiue or no. Chap. 66. TAke of the ruine of a Hare, and hauing fraied and consumed it in hot water, giue it the wo∣man to drinke in the morning at her breakfast, then let her stande in a hot bath: And if there come a griefe or paine in her bellie, she may con∣ceiue, if not, she shall neuer conceiue. To make a barren woman beare children. Chap. 67. TAke of those litle Sea fishes, called in Latine Polipi or Polipodes, and roast them vpon the Embers without oile, and let the woman eate of them, and it shall profite and help very much, hauing in the meane time the companie of a man. To make women haua a quicke and speedie deliuerance of their children, and with∣out paine, or at the least very litle. Chap. 68. TAke leaues of Bittanie, and stampe them, or els make powder of them, and giue the wo∣man that laboureth to drinke of it with a litle water, and shee shall bee deliuered incontinent without any great paine or labour.
To stop the running of the Raines fiue se∣uerall waies. Chap. 69. TAke Venice Turpentine washt in red Rose∣water, foure ounces, a Nutmeg, Plantine seede, a yellow Amber bead, of each a like, with like quantitie of Sinamon, & powder of Com∣sery rootes, which being mingled, rolle of the Turpentine in the powder, & make it into fine pilles as big as a beane, and take them in a spoone with sirop of Rubarbe, three in the mor∣ning, and three, two howers before supper, and it will helpe it. Another for the running of the Raines. TAke Nutmegs half a pound, and bruise them in a morter, and knead them in dough, and bake them, which bread is very healthfull. Another special way approoued. TAke Hazell nuts well pilled or blanched two handfull, Sinkfield and knotted grasse, of each a handfull, foure Camphir leaues: stampe the hearbs and straine out the iuice into two pound of Muscadell: then beate the Nut kernels as small as you can, and put them in: also, take an Amber bead, and beat it to powder very fine, which being put in the wine to the rest, stir them all together a good while: then seeth it vntill it come to a pound and a litle more, and drink the one halfe in the morning, and the other at night, making a verie light supper.
An other for the same. Nip and Clarie fried with the yolks of three or foure Egs, and taken euery morning is very good. To strengthen the seed. Chap. 70. TAke Succorie, Endiue, Plantin, Violet flow∣ers & the leaues, Clarie, Sorrel, of each half a handful, with a peece of Mutton, make a good broth, and to eat it euening and morning is es∣peciall good. For the gnawing in a Womans Stomacke. Chap. 71. TAke a good handfull of Spearemint, and a handfull of Wormwood, & heat a Tilestone, and lay these two things on it, and make a litle bag, and when the hearbes be hot put thē in the bag, and so lay them to her stomacke. To make a sweete Damaske powder foure maner of waies. TAke two or three handful of dried Roseleaues two grains of Musk, half an ounce of Cloues, and beat these all to powder. 2. Another way. TAke sixe ounces of Orace, foure ounces of Cloues, two ounces of Storax Calamite, an ounce of Labdanum, with two ounces of yellow Saunders, and a litle Muske. 3. An other way. TAke two ounces of Cloues, foure ounces of Spruce, foure ounces of Storax Cala∣mite,
foure ounces of Roses, three ounces of Beniamin. 4. Another way. TAke three ounces of Cypres, foure ounces of Beniamin, two ounces of Coliander or Labdanum, three ounces of Storax Ca∣lamite, two ounces of Roses, beate all to pow∣der. To make Pepper soft: with the ver∣tue of the same. YOu shall doo this after the same manner as is showed for greene Ginger, in the 15. Chap. that is, with sand, and the like sirope, season and keepe them. Ginger and Pepper in Sirope comforteth a colde sto∣macke, and helpeth much to good disgestion. To keepe Barbaries. TAke clarified Suger, and boile it till it bee thicke, which you shall perceiue, if you take a litle betweene your fingers, it will rope like birdlime: then put in your Barbaries, and let them boile with a soft fire, vntill you perceiue they be tender, then put them in a glasse, and co∣uer them, and so keepe them. For the ague in a womans breast. Chap. 72. TAke Hemlock leaues, and frie them in sweet butter, and as hot as shee may suffer it lay it to her breast, and lay a warme white cotten, and it will driue it away in short time.
For breastes that be sore with milke. Chap. 73. TAke Linseed oile and waxe, melt them, and wet a ragge therein, and lay it to the breast warme, which will drie vp the milke. For a sore breast. Chap. 74. TAke beane flower two handfull, branne, pow∣der of Fengricke, of each a handful, white vi∣nigre a pound, three spoonful of honey, and three yolkes of Egges, seeth all till they bee thicke, and lay it warme to the breast, which will both breake it and heale it, alwaies crushing out the matter when you shift it. To keepe a womans breast from brea∣king. Chap. 75. TAke Sage, Marigolds with the blacke seed, and the sharpest Netles, of each halfe a hand∣full, bruise them together, and lay it to, which will keepe it from breaking. For the breastes broken or not. TAke Oile of Roses, beane flower, and the yolk of an Egge with a litle Vinigre, set it on the fire till it be luke warme, then with a sether an∣noint the place. For the vnnaturall heate of the Liuer. Chap. 76. TAke Borage, Buglosse, Succorie, Violets, Fumitorie, yoong hop buds, Fenell buds, of each a quarter of a handfull: yoong Malowes,
and Mercurie, of each halfe a handfull, boile these in a pottle of whey, and straine them. For the Canker in the mouth. Chap. 77. TAke halfe a pinte of Ale, and a sprig of Rose∣marie, and seeth them together, and scum your Ale, and then put in a peece of Allum, as much as a nut, and a spoonefull of honey, & two spoonfull of Honey-suckle water. To make the face faire, and the breath sweete. Chap. 78. TAke the flowers of Rosemarie, & boile them in white wine, then wash your face with it, and vse it for a drinke, & so shall you make your face faire, and your breath sweete. To make haire as yellow as gold. Chap. 79. TAke the rine or scrapings of Rubarb, & steepe it in white wine, or in cleane lie: and after you haue washed your head with it, you shall wette your haires with a sponge or some other cloath, & let them drie by the fire, or in the Sun. After this, wet them and drie them againe: for the oft∣ner they doo it, the fairer they will be, without hurting your head any thing at all. To driue away all venemous beastes from your house. Chap. 10. TAke Juniper, the seed of Agnus Castus, the shelles of the riuer Creuises, Hartes-horne, the grease or suet of a Bucke, Kerse or towne Cresses, Organy and Bittanie, make of al these
drugs a dough or paste. And when you will vse or occupie it, burne it, for whereas the smoke thereof goeth, the beasts wil void away. Against al poison eaten or drunken. Cap. 81. HAuing knowledge that any man is poiso∣ned, the chiefe remedy is to make him vo∣mite the poison, in giuing him oile Oliue luke warm to drink alone, or mixt with warme water. And if you haue no oile, giue him butter with hot water, or with the decoction of Linseed or the seed of netles, or of Semigrecū, & al these thinges purge the venom as wel downeward as vpward. After, hauing made him vomit diuers times, you must purge him with sharp glysters downward. Then giue him water mixt with honey, and also old wine enough to drinke. But if you can get good Triacle or Metrinate, they are the principall against poisons, with Terra sigillata, Acorne shels, and giue it him in good wine. Let his meat be the fat flesh of old beasts, and fat broths, specially of hens and fat fish, and let him not sleepe: And in continuing with this means, he shal be deliuered by the help of God. To driue away Lice. Chap. 82. TAke encense, and the Lard of a Barrow hog, properly called Barrows grease, boyle them together in an earthen pan or pot leaded, and with this ointment rub and annoint the place where the Lice be.
¶ Howe to make a soueraigne Water, that Maister Doctor Steuens Phisitian, a man of great knowledge and cunning, did pra∣ctise, and vsed of long experience. And therewith did very manie cures, and kept it alwaies secrete, till of late, a litle before his death, Doctor Parker, late Archbishop of Canterburie, did get it in writing of him. Chap. 83. The Receipt. TAke a gallon of good Gascoine wine, then take Ginger, Galinghale, Camo∣mill, Sinamon, Nutmegges, Graines, Cloues, Mace, Annisseedes, of euery of them a dramme: Then take Sage, Mint, Red Roses, Time, Pelitorie of the wall, wild Mar∣iorum, Rosemarie, Pennie mountaine, other∣wise called wilde Time, Camamill, Lauender, and Auens, of euerie of them one handfull: then beat the Spices small, and bruise the hearbes and put all into the Wine, and let it stande twelue howers, stirring it diuers tunes: Then still it in a Limbecke, and keepe the firste pinte of the Water, for it is the best: Then will come a seconde Water, which is not so good as the first.
The sundrie vertues and operations of the same, many times approoued. THe vertues of these waters be these: it comforteth the spirites, and preserueth greatly the youth of man, and helpeth the inward diseases, comming of cold, against shaking of Palsey: it cureth the contractes of sinewes, and helpeth conception of women that be barren, it killeth the wormes in the bellie, It helpeth the colde Gowt, it helpeth the tooth∣ach, it comforteth the stomacke verie much, it cureth the cold dropsie, it helpeth the stone in the bladder, and in the reines in the back: it cu∣reth the Canker, it helpeth shortly a stinking breath. And who so vseth this Water euer a∣mong, and not too oft, it preserueth him in good liking, and shall make one sceme yoong verie long. You must take one spoonefull of this wa∣ter fasting, but once in seuen daies, for it is very hot in operation. It preserued Doctor Steuens that he liued lxxx. and xviii. yeares, whereof ten yeares he liued bedred. To make a water that taketh off al staining, dieng and spots from the handes of Arti∣ficers, that get them by working, and ma∣keth them verie white and faire: It is also good for them that be Sun-burned. Chap. 84. TAke the iuice of a Lymmon, with a litle bay Salt, and wash your handes with it, and let
them drie of themselues: wash thē againe, & you shall find all the spots and staining gone. It is also very good agaynst the scurffe or scabbes. To heale all manner of inflamation, and euil disposition of the aire, leaperie faces, great swollen legs, or inflamed hands. Chap. 85. TAke flower or Amillum made of Barly, which ye shall easily find at the Apotheca∣caries, and seeth it halfe an hower in com¦mon water, then straine it and put it in∣to another new pot that is cleane and neat, put∣ting to it a few Mallowes, Succorie, Hoppes, Endiue and Borage, and seeth all these toge∣ther vntill it be dissolved, and ad to it an ounce of Sandall, and then straine all, and take in a linnen cloath as much Cassia extracta, as will go into two nuts, and put it within the said lin∣nen cloath with the Cassia, while the water bee hot, pressing it so hard betweene your two fin∣gers, that the substance of it may goe into the said water, then put to it Suger or pennides, as much as you will. Of this drink (which is of a verie amiable sauour) you must take from day to day a litle glasse full in the morning, lieng in your bed with your breast vpward, then laieng some linnen cloath vppon your stomacke, sleepe if you can, and take of it also after you bee vp, and haue done your necessarie: the which doing,
you shall finde your selfe verie well healed in fewe daies. But here note, that this must be done in the Summer and not in the Winter, and hee that hath his Stomacke verie colde, may weare before his breast some peece of scar∣let, or other cloath, and sometime annoint his Stomacke with an Oile made for the weak∣nesse of it, the perfect composition whereof, wee will put hereafter. A singular Ointment, which healeth all bur∣ning with fire, not leauing any katre where it hath bene. Chap. 86. TAke the white of two Egges, two ounces of Tutina Alexandrina, two ounces of quicke Lime washed in nine waters, an ounce of newe Ware, with as much Oile Roset as shall suf∣fise, and make thereof an ointment, which yee shall finde verie good for this that we haue spo∣ken of. To draw an arrow head, or other yron out of a wound. Chap. 87. TAke the ice of Valeian, in the which yee shall wet a tent, and put it into the wounde, laying the said hearbe stamped vppon it, then make your binding or band as it appertaineth, and by this meanes you shal draw out the yron. And after heale the wound according as it shall require.
For him that hath a bunch on his head, or that hath his head swollen with a fall. Chap. 88. TAke an ounce of bay salte, rawe honey three ounces, Cummin three ounces, Turpen∣tine two ounces, intermingle all this well vpon the fire: then lay it abroad vpon a linnen cloath and make thereof plaisters, the which you shall lay hotte to his heade, and it will altogether a∣swage the swelling, and heale him cleane and neate. To know what time in the yeare hearbs and flowers should be gathered in their ful strength. Chap. 89. MEdicines are made diuers and sundrie waies, some by leaues, some by seedes, some by roots, some by hearbs, some by flowers, & some by fruits. Such leaues as are put in medicines, should be gathered whē they be at their full waxing, ere that their col∣lour be changed, or that they fade any thing, Seeds when they be full ripe, and the moist∣nesse somwhat dried away. Flowers should be taken when they be fully open, ere they begin to fade. Hearbs should be gathered when they be ful of sap, and ere they shrink. Rootes should be gathered when the leaues fall. Fruits should be taken when that they be at
their full growth, or when they fall, and the hea∣uier fruit is the better, and those that be great and light in ponderation choose not them, and those that be gathered in faire weather be bet∣ter than those that be gathered in raine. And those hearbs that growe in the fieldes, are better than those that growe in Townes and Gardens, and those that growe on hilles in the fieldes are best for medicines, for common∣ly they bee lesse, and not so fat, and haue more vertue. Many hearbs there be that haue special time to be gathered in: and if they be gathered in that time, they haue their full vertue to their pro∣pertie, or els not so good. Some doe help when∣soeuer they bee gathered, & some nought if they be gathered out of time: therefore marke well what I teach thee. Bettanie shall bee gathered principally in Lammas moneth, with the seed and the rootes, and without any iron coole, and it shal bee dried in the shadow: for medicines it may be gathered other times, but euermore it is the better if it be gotten without iron, and it must be gathered before Sun-rising. Swinsgrasse shal be gathered when it plea∣seth you, in time of neede. Camomill shall be gathered in Aprill. Pelitorie shall be gathered in June, before the Sun rising.
Red Docke shal be gathered when they need daylie. Longdebeef shal be gathered in June & July, Peniwoort shal be gathered in the beginning of Winter. Germander shall bee gathered in Lammas moneth. Dragant shall be gathered in June & July. Columbine, in Lammas moneth. Addertong should bee gathered in April. Pedelion, when thou wilt. Groundsell, alway after midday. Walwoorth, when it pleaseth you, without Iron. Violet should be gathered in the moneth of March, and in this moneth should Violettes be put into Suger and to sirop. Roses should bee gathered in Aprill and in May, and of them should be made Suger Rose in sirop of Roses, and in the same moneth shuld oile be made of Camamill. Rosemarie flowers shuld be gathered in May. Sentorie, when he beginneth to flower. Organum, in the moneth of June. Solsequie should be gathered the sixteenth day of August, before the Sunne rising, without Iron. Hartsstrong should bee gathered ere day in Nouember. Aristologia should be gathered the same time
Garlike may bee taken when you neede for medicines. Wilde Garlke should bee gathered when it flowreth. Gourdes should bee gathered in the ende of September, when they be ripe, and dried wher the Sun may be all day. Wild Nep beries should be gathered when they wax yellow. Cucumbers should bee gathered when the fruit is ripe, and the fruit should bee laid vnder vines, where the Sunne may not haue all his strength to him in a moist place▪ that it may roote, for then the seed shall be good, and ful of kernels. Citrull when the fruit is ripe, and dried in a drie place in the Sunne. Calaminte should bee gathered when it slowreth, and drie it in the shadow, and it wil last a yeare. Saffron should bee gathered afore that the Sunne arise. Godur, that groweth among flare, should be gathered when he beginneth to flower, and it may be kept three yeare. Drake should be gathered when it flowereth, and drie him in the shadow, and a yeare it will laste, Eleber must be gatherd in Haruest time. Fenil seeds should be gathered in the begin∣ning
of Haruest, and two year they may be kept The rootes of Fenell should be gathered in the beginning of the yeare, and two yeares they are good. Baldemonie, that some men call Gentian, should be gathered in the last ende of the yeare, and foure yeares he is good inough. The root of this hearb is vsed, and how thou shall shalt know him is this, that he be very bit∣ter, the lesse bitter the woorse. Also, looke that it bee white, whole, and not hollowe within, but sad and not brittle, nor full of powder. Gallingale is called in Phyisick Typus: it may be taken at all times when thou wilt, but best is in the end of Ver: and three daies it must be laid in the Sunne, and so bee dried, that the moisture rot it not, and then you must keepe it in the shadowe. Flowerdeluce should be gathered in the end of Ver, and dried in the Sunne, and it will laste two yeare well. Here followeth the sundrie vertues of Roses, for diuers medicines. Chap. 90. ROses be colde and moist in two degrees: It hath these vertues, stamp it, and lay it to a sore that burneth and aketh, and it shall cease both the burning and aking.
Also it is good for the Feuer in the stomack, and against all euils that are gendred in hot hum∣mors. Also let any woman drink it with wine, and it shall foorthwith testraine bleeding, and help the marrowes of the wombe. Also make oile of Roses, and that is a prin∣cipall Receipt for pricking in sinewes: and the water thereof is good for sore eien, and for hot euils, and the oile is good for head-ach to an∣noint therwith the temples, and the root of him is good, to drawe forth yron or other things in a mans foote, and the red Rose is much better than the white. The sundrie vertues of Lillies. Chap. 91. LIllies are cold and drie in the third degree and so saith Galen, that who so seetheth the leaues in water, it is a noble plaister for sinewes that are shortned, and it is good for all maner of burnings and scaldings. Also when the leaues and the rootes are sod∣den in olde wine, and tempered vp with honey, t is a profitable plaister for sicknesse that are staruen. Also the water and the iuice is good for to wash thy brissers; and to do away the freckles on mans visage or womans: and the roote is good to ripe therewith botches, and for to break them.
Of the sundrie vertues of Milfoyle Chap. 92. MIlfoyle is hot and drie in the second de∣gree, it is good to stanch the bloody flix, and the iuice thereof healeth the biting of a red hound: and if it bee sod in red wine, drinke it, and it stayeth wormes in the wombe, and it softneth hardnesse in a mans wombe, and it helpeth the Jawndies & dropsie. And take the hearbe and stampe it and tem∣per it with vinigre, and it will doo away blood in wounds, and it will cease the toothach, when it is chewed fasting. Also it is good for the stin∣ging of an Adder, when it is sodden in wine, drinke it, and lay the substance thereto, and it will drawe out venome of the sore. Of the sundrie vertues of Rosemary. Chap. 93. ROsemarie is hot and drie: take the flow∣ers thereof, and put them in a clean cloath and boile them in faire cleane water, vn∣till halfe be wasted, and coole it, and drink that water, for it is much worth against all ma∣ner of euils in the body. Also take the flowers & make powder therof, and binde it to thy right arme in a linnen cloth, and it shall make thee light and merie. Also eate the flowers with hony fasting, with sowre bread, or els with other bread, and there shal rise in thee no euill swelling.
Also, take the flowers, & put them in thy chest among thy cloathes, or among thy bookes, and Mothes shall not destroy them. Also, boile the flowers in Goats milke, and then let them stand all night vnder the aire co∣uered, and after that, giue him to drinke thereof that hath the Tisicke, and he shal be holpen. Also, if there be any man that is rammage, take the flowers and the leaues a great quanti∣tie, and boile them together in a good quantitie of cleane water, in that Paciens Bulneat, and it shall heale him. Also, boile the leaues in White Wine, and wash thy face therewith, and thy beard, and thy browes, and there shall no corns spring out, but thou shalt haue a faire face. Also, put the leaues vnder thy bed, and thou shalt be deliuered of all euil dreames. Also, breake the leaues to powder, and lay them on the Canker, and it shal slay it. Also take the leaues, and put them into a Wine vessell, and it shal keep the wine from all sowrenesse and euill sauours, and if thou wilt sel thy wine, thou shalt haue good speed. Also, if thou bee feeble with vnkinde sweate, boile the leaues in cleane water, and wash thy head therwith, and thou shalt be deliuered from that euill. Also, if thou hast lost appetite of eating, boile well these leaues in cleane water, and when the
water is colde, put thereunto as much of white Wine, and then make therein sops, eate thou thereof well, and thou shalt restore thy appetite againe. Also, if thou haue the Fluxe, boyle the leaues in strong Eyzill, and lay them on a linnen cloath, and bind it to thy wombe, and anon thy Fluxe shall be withdrawne. Also, if thy legs be blowne with the Gowte, boyle the leaues in water, & then take the leaues and binde them in a linnen cloath, and winde it about thy legges, and it shall doo thee much good. Also, take the leaues, & boyle them in strong Eyzell, and bind them to thy stomacke in a cloth and it shall deliuer thee of all euils. Also, if thou haue the cough, by stirring or by any other way, drinke the water of the leaues boyled in white wine, and ye shall be whole. Make powder of the rinde of Rosemarie, and drinke it, and if thou bee in the pose, thou shalt be deliuered. Also, take the timber thereof, and burne it to coales, and make powder therof, and then put it in a linnen cloath, and rub thy teeth therwith and if there be any wormes therein, it shall slay them, and keep thy teeth from all euils. Also, of the wood make a boist to smel ther∣to, and it shall keepe thee yoongly.
Also make thereof a barrell, and drinke thou of the drink that standeth therein, and thou nee∣dest not dread of any euill being therein, and if thou set it in the steld, or in thy garden, keepe it honestly, and it shall bring forth much increasing of it selfe. And if a man haue lost his smelling of the ayre, that he may not draw his breath, make a fire of the wood, and bake his breade therewith, and eate it, and it shall keepe him well. Also a man that hath the gowt, take oyle of Roses, and the yolke of an egge, and the flowers of Rosemarie, and medle them together, and do it to his sore, and he shall be holpen. ¶ How to make a speciall soueraigne water, which is of three collours, and it is called the Mother of all waters: which is verie excellent to cure the Canker, the Pockes, or Leaprosie, or any other kinde of super∣fluous humours, or any sore, olde or new, and it is thus made. Chap. 94. TAke Turpentine foure pounde, of Fran∣kensence, Masticke, of either two ounces, Alloes, Epaticke, Date stones, Labda∣num, Castorum, roots of Detany, rootes of Cula Campana, of each two ounces, distill them in a Limbecke of glasse, with a soft fire. The first water is cleare: the second water is
yellow, & swimmeth aboue the other: the thirde water is reddish, like Saffron, and when it be∣ginneth to be red and thicke as honey, then be∣ginneth the third water. The first water burneth like a candle, the second water curdeth like milke, and if you put one drop of the third water into a cup of drink, it goeth to the bottom, & there will it lie an how∣er, & then mount vp to the top, as true Bawme doth, and with this water, if you wash your face twice a day, and chieftly your Nosethrils, it cu∣reth the Rewme discending from the braine, & clarifieth the sight. And if you wette a linnen cloth in this water, and lay it to any sore leg or arme that hath dead flesh, it will cleanse it, and driue away the ach within six howers space & it consumeth al Apostumes, Ulcers, Fistules, Pustules, Emeraldes, and healeth all greene woundes. And if ye dip a linnen cloath therein, and make it six folde, and lay it to the noddle of your necke, it healeth the Palsey: and so like∣wise it cureth the Gowt, or any sinew that is drawne together therewith, hath it three or four times together warme. The water that is of the collour of blood, is of such vertue, that if a leporous man or woman vse thereof fifteene daies together, halfe a spoon∣full euery day, he shall be healed. The first water is of such vertue, that if it bee put in a fresh wounde, it healeth it in xxiiii.
howers, if he be not mortall. And it healeth all kinds of Cankers, Crepces, Noli me tangere, within fifteene daies, if you wash them with the said water euery third day, & if you make rags of cloath, and dip it in the same water, and lay it vpon a plague sore, and drop one drop therein, it mortifieth the malignitie therof, and that short∣ly And if you drop one drop in the eie that hath a pearle, or is half blind, it will recouer it in eight daies without any paines: and if you drinke a spoonfull of it with white wine, it will recouer the strangurie or dissure within six howers, and breaketh the stone within two howers, whether it be in the raines or in the bladder. The wa∣ter that hath the collour of blood is most preci∣ous, it comforteth the weak members, and pre∣serueth the bodie from all diseases, and purifieth rotten blood, and healeth all diseases of the Milte, and keepeth away the Gowte, and cau∣seth good digestion, it purgeth colde and rotten blood, and putteth away ill humours, and hea∣leth all agues. This water mast be vsed from the moneth of Nouember, to the moneth of A∣prill, and you must take but halfe a spooneful at once, nor oftener than ounce a weeke. The manner to make this water, ye must haue a glasse a cubit high, and fill it with Aqua∣vite made with wine, and stop it well, then put it in hors-dong, so that it bee not moist, nor too wet, least the glasse breake, and you must leaue
the necke of the glasse without in the ayre, that glasse through the heate of the dung will boile sore, so that the water will ascend to the necke of the same, and discend againe to the bottome through the aire, and so let it stand thirty daies, then tae out the glasse, and put these thinges following in the water, and stoppe the mouth that it breathe not out, and so leaue it in eight daies. Last of all, put the glasse in Balneo Ma∣rie, with sand, setting on a head with a receiuer well stopped, and make a soft fire, and gather the first water that drops cleare, but when yee see the second water turne into redde collour, change the Receiuer, for then commeth the seconde Water, and that will keepe well in a glasse well stopped: The spices that goe to this water bee these, with the hearbes: Cardonum, Cloues, nutmegs, Ginger, Galingale, Zedoaire, long Pepper, Spikenarde, Lawrell berries, Smallage seedes, Mugwoort seedes, Fenell seedes, Annis seeds, flowers of Basill, Elder flowers, red Roses and white, lignum Aloes. Cubibes, Cardomum, Calamus Aromaticus, Maces, Germander, Frankensence, Turmētil, Juniper, Egremonie, Sentorie, Fumitorie. Pimpernel, Dandelion, Eufrage, Endife, seeds of Sorrell, yellow Saunders, Fetherfoy, A∣loes, Epaticke, of each two ounces, Rubarbe two drams, drie Figges, Reasins, Dates with∣out stones, sweet Almondes, of each two ounces,
Aqua-uite to the quantity of them all, and foure times as much Suger as they be all, that is, for one pounds of Engredience, foure pounde of Suger, two pound of honey. This water is called the mother of all waters. A perfect way to cure the loathsome disease of the French Pockes, paines in the ioints, lamenesse of limmes, palenesse of collour, lothsome scabbes, or any other filthy dis∣ease proceeding of superfluous or euil hu∣mours, as also to asswage ouer grosse and foggie fat bellies, and that without danger Chap. 95. FIrst, it is needfull to prouide for the sicke bodie a close and cleane chamber, out of all grose aire, and cleane warme garmentes, both for body and legges, and at rising and going to bed, a fire of Charecoales, for wood is not wholsome, for smoking: also they must not be troubled with any thing to bring them out of patience, for that corrupteth the blood, which must be new altered: also the sicke bodie muste eate but litle meate, and that kind of meate as shall hereafter be prescribed, and at such times as shall be appointed, and let the sicke body vse plaieng on some Instrumentes, or heare some plaieng, or tell merie tales, and haue no compa∣nie of women, for that is a most dangerous poi∣son for the health of any person in that case.
Secondly, you must prepare two brasse pots or els yron, one being foure gallons, the other sixe gallons, one for strong drink, the other for small drinke: also, ye must haue close couers to them of basse or yron, you must also prepare good earthen vessels, with close couers to keepe your drinke in, of both sortes by themselues: al∣so, you must haue a Strainer of a searce cloath, to straine your drinke after it is decoct, Instru∣mēts to take out dead flesh, and to search a sore, and a syring to cleanse any sore being deep, with the same drinke. Also, you must haue a wood∣den vessell to bathe the sicke body in, at such times as hereafter shall be appointed. Also, you must prepare cleane cloathes to drie the sicke body after a sweat, being warmed well first: o∣ther Instruments you shall need none, but only your wood raped small, or turned, and the bark of the wood pounded in a Morter, and the drugs also small, and your water which you shall de∣coct, the same must be of a good Conduit or run∣nin brook, verie clean without any kind of filth, Chalk water is good. Thirdly, for your strong drink, ye must take your pot of foure gallons, and set it on a fire of coales, with foure gallons of the faire run∣ning water, then put into the same one pound and a halfe of your wood, small raped, or turned at the Turners, but when you doo buy your wood, see it be not olde, and lacke moisture, this
triall is best, take a litle cole burning, and lay it on the blocke before it be raped, and if it be good it will boyle vp on euery side of the coale, like Myrthe: Then put thereto one ounce or a litle more of the barke of the same wood, made in small powder, then take a quarter of a pound of Cummin seeded put whole into the same, and one half quarter of an ounce of Radix and Ru∣barbe, and then stop your pot fast, and lay paste about the couer, and so fast that no aire come out, then seeth it on a soft fire, but euer keepe it boyling, & let it boyle at the least eight houres, then set it by, and vnstop it not vntill it be cold, then take your Searce, and strain it into a fair carthen potte, and couer it close: The sicke bodie muste drinke of this but one draughte luke warme in the morning, and one other at night. Fourthlie, you must take your pot of sixe Gallons, and put in it sixe Gallons of running water, and one pound of the wood raped, and a quarter of Cummin seedes, and decoct it in all kinde of thing euen as the other, being close stopped, and when it is colde, straine it into an earthen vessell or vessels: and that must the par∣tie drinke at meale, and at all other times when he list to drinke, and spare not, but draw it by. Fiftly, the sick body must be kept very warm and not rise out of bed before eight of the clocke,
and then eate a dozen or twenty Reisins of the Sun. & no bread, but a draught of strong drinke warm, and about eleuen of the clock, let the sick bodie eate a litle meat, as may suffise nature, & what meat, it shal be here after shewed: then let the sicke body walke somewhiles in his chāber, or read some booke, or play on instrumentes, to keep him from sleeping: then at six of the clocke at night a dozen Reisins of the Sun, & nothing els but a draught of strong drink warmed. Sixtly, giue to the Patient to eate, these meats following, Chicken, Partridge, Fesant, Hen, Capon, Rabbet, Conie, Veale, Mutton, & none other, nor any salt, nor leauened breade, nor Rie bread, and very seldom roasted, but boyled in water, & no broth nor porredge, nor any kind of sauce: if the sick body haue roste, let it be but euery third meale, and no kinde of fish, milke, or fruites, Reisins excepted. Seuenthly, once in three daies, for the first 9. daies in the morning let the sick body drinke a good draught of the strong drinke somewhat warme, & then lay very many cloathes on him, till he sweat, for the space of two howres: then ease some of the cloathes, and haue warmed lin∣nen cloathes, & rub al the body drie ere he rise, if hee haue any sores that bee deepe, wash the sore with strong drinke, and with a searce, and dip a litle cloath in the strong drink, and lay it to the sore, whether it be sore or knobs.
Eightlie, after nine or ten daies be past, once in three daies let the sicke body bee bathed on this sort. Set faire running water on the fire, and put thereto a great deale of ground Juie leaues, and redde Sage and Fennell also, and by a good fire, when the sicke bodie is going to bed, put the water and hearbes in a vessell of wood, and let the sicke body stand upright in it, by the fire, and take up the hearbes, and rush the body of the sicke. Patient downwards, and then drie him with warme cloathes: vse this three weekes, and by the grace of God the sicke bodie shall be made whole, whatsoeuer hee bee: then if the partie be verie weake, after nine or ten of the first daies, let him eat euerie day at foure of the clocke in the after noone, a new layd Egge, potched in faire water, and as much new bread as will suffice nature, and a litle cleane wine. Use this diet with good regard, as before is pre∣scribed, and (by the grace of God) they shall bee perfectly cured of the diseases aboue mentioned. The maner to make another kinde of Diet drinke of stronger operation, for the same diseases, which by the practise only of one man, hath done very great good, aswell in the Citie of London, as in diuers partes of the Realme. Chap. 96. TAke of the best Guaicum, most heauie, and full of Gum foure pound, let it be well rase
with a Rape, or turned into fine chippes by a Turner, and of the same barkes two pound: of Cardus benedictus, which is called the blessed Thistle, half a pound, of Maiden hair, Cotrach, the flowers of wild, and garden Buglosse, Ana, one pound, sweet Tassia sixe ounces, Annis-seed one ounce and a halfe, white Suger sixe pound, cast all these unto a wine vessell, cleane and apt for the same purpose, vpon which, poure of the cleanest and best white wine that may be got, in quantitie one hundred and fiftie pound, couer this vessell close three daies, thē strain it through an baire cloath: then keepe it in a cleane vessell for the Pacient at dinner and supper, but not to drinke it in the morning and euening. Besides the drinking of this Guaicum at dinner & sup∣per, the pacient may between the times, as one bower before or after dinner or supper, drinke foure or fiue ounces. Also, your aforesaid receits may be put in clean new, white or Claret wine being fiued and made in the prescribed maner. Furthermore, the Pacient that hath the Pox, Dropsie, or Gowt, may drink among, this wor∣thy medicine following: the dosse or quantitie, is two ounces or more, according to the age and complexion of the Patient. Take Maiden-haire, clean fresh Hops, if Fu∣mitorie, Sitrach, called Asplenum, Sene of Alexand. of each three drams, great Centaurie roots, Liquorice, Polipodie, wilde and garden
Buglosse, each, foure ounces, Annis-seeves, Ni∣gella Romana, the flowers of Buglosse, the three Sanders, Cinamon, each, five ounces, put this into twentie foure pound of the Gua∣cum water, sodden after the description in the Compoundes following: then put it in a close vessell, and stoppe the mouth, and when that is done, set the said vessell in an other seething ket∣tle vpon the fire, so let it stande and seeth for twentie vowers faire and softlie, then straine it, and keepe it in a cleane close Vessell for the vse aforesaid: But if the Pacient be full of humors then do thus: take Sene Alexander two pound, Succa Rosarum solatiua, six pound, white Su∣ger seuen pound, Rubarbe elected three ounces, finely cut, Turbit of the best one ounce, put these in a clean stone pot with a narrow mouth: poure into this pot xxiiii. pounde of the common Guaicum water, made in manner in the com∣pounds following: stop pour pots mouth, seeth it in the foresaid manner, vppon a soft fire xxiiii. howers, vntil it come to a thin sirop, called Je∣lup, then straine it, and keepe this precious pur∣ging drink for mornings, the dose one ounce and a halfe, according to the age, complexion and strength: the Pacient must also eat bread three ounces, well baked like Bisket, and the flesh of Chicken, Hen, Capon, Partridge, Fesant, small birds of the wood rosted, excell sodden meates: and if the common drinke be too strong, then the
Pacient may youre thereunto some smal clean Wine or Beere: Let the Patient bee merrie kept in a faire cleane chamber, with sweet per∣fumes, not much feeding, but litle and fine, with cleane warm apparell, and a fire of Char-coles, eschewing Venerie, wines, fruites, fish, grosse  ottage, and white meats: care, anger, cold, much heat: and by Gods helpe yee shall haue present remedie, whether it be for the poxe, or to cleanse the raines, or for them that bee ouer fat or foggie people, full of grose humours, gotten with ease and feeding, to rebate and asswage their fogginesse without hurt, but rather renew them (as it were) and make them seeme yoong. It helpeth also the Gowte, Dropsie, Sciatica, Canker and Cympanie, and many other loth∣some diseases, that proceed from ouer great a∣boundance of grose humours, also for extreame paine in the iointes. The maner to choose the best Guaicum or Lignum vitae. Chap. 97. OF this wood Guaicum, there are three kindes: the first is blacke within, in the heart pale coloured, hauing in it russet lines, verie hard and heauie. The other black within, but white without, hauing verie small lines, is harde and heauie, and not so great as the first. The third is all right white within and without, hauing very small lines, and the hart of this wood is the best, the arme of the
tree is better than the body, the boughes neere the fruites haue more vertue, warmnesse, and drinesse, than the lower parts of the tree, which are groser and more earthly of nature, and the more vncteous the wood is, it is the better, the sap is not so good as the heart, neither the bark as good as the sappe. But the white  sweet & most excellent in operation, and is Lig∣num sanctum, the holy wood. The barke of the straight yoong branches or boughes, being hea∣uie and white, moist, and without liues, harde compacted, be the best barkes for the Pore. All these wooddes called Guaiac, have a Rosin, or matter like Beniamin, or pleasant grim within the wood, which is the spirite or liuely helping humour in decoction for the Porzin the sinewes, veines, muskles, head hands, feet and the bones: No sicknes is so sharp and cruell to nature, but this precious wood wil both quickly and gent∣ly asswage the paine and griefe of the same, if it be ministered accordingly in decoction, namelie, to them whom either the Pox hath tormented, or els the Gowt with intollerable griefe. ¶ A most certaine and approoued remedie against all manner of pestilence or plague be it it neuer so vehe∣ment. Chap. 98. TAke an Onion, and cut him ouerthwart▪ thē make a litle hole in each peece, the which you shall fill with fine Triacle, and set the pe∣ces
together againe, as they were before: after this, wrap them in a wet linnen cloath putting it to roste, couered in the Embers or ashes: and when it is roasted inough, presse out all the iuice of it; and giue the Patient to drinke thereof a spoonfull, immediately hee shall feele himselfe better, and shall without faile be healed. To make a sirop of Vinegre, good for many things. Chap. 99. TAke sharpe Vinigre a pound and a halfe Suger two pound and a halfe, boile it til it be a sirrop: It will digest choller, Me∣lantholie▪ and Flewme: It will make grosse humours thinne: openeth obstructi∣ons, prouokes vrine, expelleth naughty humors, is good against all pestilent Feuers, cooleth and quencheth thirst, and keeps the body loose. To comfort the heart, and take away Melancholy. Chap. 100. TAke the iuice of Borage foure pounde, the flowers of Borage halfe a pound: let these stand infused in hot Embers fourteene how∣ers, then being strained & clarified, put to good Suger two pound, and boile it to a sirop. A sirop to cleanse the breast and the lunges, the cough and Pleurisie. Chap. 101. TAke Liquorice small shred and bruised an ounce, Maiden haire halfe an ounce, Hysope two drams, water two pound, let these lie mixt foure and twentie howers, then boile it till the
third part be consumed, which strained put in of good honey, Suger pellet, and white Suger of each foure ounces, and Rose water three ounces. For spitting either of lightes or lungs. Chap. 102. TAke the iuice of Purslane and Plantine, of each an ounce, red Corrall a dram, and bloodstone half a dram fine powdered mixt together, vse it. For wormes in yoong children. Chap. 103. TAke drie Lupines and make flower of them, which kneaded with hony, lay it to the sto∣macke of the childe. For the swelling of the Cods Chap. 104. TAke Rue stampt, lay it to the grieuen place, and thou shall haue present remedie. For him that cannot holde his water. Chap. 105. TAke the small end of Oken leaues and seeth them in Claret wine, beeing well beaten, lay it as hot as may bee suffered vpon the yard in a plaister fashion. For the Head-ach. Chap. 106. TAke the iuice of Mariorum, and put it into the nosethrils, and it will helpe you.
For griefe of the stomacke. Chap. 107. TAke Masticke, Cloues, Nutmegs, of each a dram, Mace & Sinamon of each half a dram fine powdered: then take the bottom of a brown loafe tosted and dipt in Malmesey, strawing of the said powder vpon it, lay it to the stomacke, and it is a present remedie. For the itch. Chap. 108. TAke vnwrought waxe, fresh butter, Rose Vinegre, red Rosewater, Brimstone fine beaten, and Cloues all boyled toge∣ther, make an ointment. A Gargill for a sore throat. Chap. 109. TAke white wine, conduit water, of each a pound, roch Allum, half an ounce, two spoon∣ful of honey, boyle all to a pounde and a halfe, and vse it three or foure times a day. A water for scabbes Vlcers and pushes. Chap. 110. TAke Plantine water halfe a pound, water of Oranges four ounces, Sublimate pow∣der an ounce, put al in a double glasse or some o∣ther good vessell, and let it boile with a gentle fire, a quarter of an hower, and take it off, and keepe it in a cleane vessell, which vse three or or foure sundrie times and it shall heale them.
To make a water to take out all spots out of cloath of gold, & veluet. Chap. 111. TAke rawe red Arsnicke, Martem Cu∣dum, of each of them a like quantitie, and when they bee well brayed, poure some faire water vppon them, and putting the hearb Cinkfoyle to it, seeth it vnto the halfe, and then let it coole, and set it in the Sunne two how∣ers: then wash your cloath in it, and let it drie in the Sunne. To take spottes of grease and oyle out of all sortes of cloath, white or other. Chap. 112. TAke the water that Pease haue bene sodde in and steep your cloath where the spot is in it, and then wash it with clean riuer wa∣ter, and drie it in the Sunne. To take all maner of spots out of silke. Chap. 113. TAke the iuice of great and round Mush∣roms of a sharpe taste, wet the spottes in it the space of two howers, and then wash them with cleare water, and then let them drie. To take spottes out of cloath. Chap. 114. TAke colde Lie, and lees of white Wine made a litle hot, and mixe them well together. But
you must take heede they bee not too hote, and wash your cloath. A soueraigne remedie for the cough. Chap. 115. TAke Brimstone beaten in powder halfe an ounce, and put it in a new laid Egge soft roste, mingle it well together: then put to it Beniamin the bignesse of a Zich Pease, lightly stamped, and drinke it in the morning at your breakfast: Make as much a∣gaine at night when you goe to bed, and you shall be whole at the second or third time. But if the cough haue holden you long, you must take it so much the oftener. To keepe Poultrie from destroying with Weisels. Chap. 116. RUbbe your Poultry with the iuice of Rue or Herb-grace, and the Weisels shall doo them no hurt: if they eate the lunges or lights of a Fox, the Foxes wil not eat thē. A briefe Treatise of Vrines, aswell of mens vrines as of womens: to iudge by the co∣lours, which betoken health, which sicke∣nes, and which death. Chap. 117.
IT is shewed, that in foure partes of the body dwelleth sicknesse and health: that is, in the wombe, in the head, in the liuer, & in the blad∣der: In what maner thou maist know their properties, and thereof thou maist learne. If a mans Urine be white at morrow, and red before meate, and white after meate, he is whole. And if it be fat and thicke, it is not good: and if the Urine be meanly thicke, it is good to like: and if it be thicke as Asse pisse, it betoke∣neth headach. Urine that is two daies red, and at the third day white, betokeneth verie health. Urine that is fat, white and moiste, betoke∣neth the Feuer quartaine. Urine that is blooddie, betokeneth that the bladder is hurt by some rotting that is within. A litle Urine all fleshie, betokeneth of the reines, who pisseth blood without sicknesse, hee hath some vaine broken in the reines. Urine that is ponderous, betokeneth that the bladder is hurt. Urine that is somewhat bloody of sicknesse, betokeneth great euil within the body, & name∣ly in the bladder. Urine that falleth by droppes aboue, as it were great bolnes, betokeneth great sicknesse and long. Womans Urine that is cleare and shining
in the Urinall as siluer, if she cast oft, and if shee haue no talent to meat, it betokeneth she is with Child. Womans Urine that is strong & white with stinking, betokeneth sicknesse in the reines, and in her secret receites, in her Chambers full of euill humors, and of sicknesse of her selfe. Womans Urine that is bloody, and cleare as water vnder, betokeneth head-ach. Womans Urine that is like to gold, cleare and mightie, betokeneth that shee hath lust to man. Womans Urine that hath collour of stable cleansing, betokeneth her to haue the Feuer quartaine, and she to die the third day. Womans Urine that appeareth as collour of lead, if she be with childe, betokeneth that it is dead within her. Hereafter follow all the Vrines that beto∣ken death, aswell the Vrine of the man as of the Woman. Chap. 118. IN a whole Axis, one part red, another black, another green, and another blew, betokeneth death. Urine in whole Axis, black & litle in quan∣titie, fattie and stinking, it betokeneth death. Urine couered ouer all as Lead, betokeneth a prolōnging of death.
Urine that shineth rawe and right bright, & the skinne in the bottome shine not, it betoke∣neth death. Urine thinne in substance, hauing flee∣ting aboue, as it were a darke Skie, signifieth of death. Urine derstie, stinking, and darke, with a blacke Skie within, betokeneth a prolonging of death. Urine that is of the collour of water, if it haue a darke Skie in an Axis, it betokeneth death. Urine that hath drestes in the bottom med∣led with blood, it betokeneth death. Urine blacke and thicke, if the sicke loth when he goeth to the Priuie, and when he spea∣keth overtwhatt; or that he vnderstandeth no aright, and if these sicknesses got hot from him they betoken death. FINIS.
The Table of the secrets in this booke. TO make a Marchpane. Chap. 1 To gilde a Marchpane, Tart, or such like. Chap. 2 To bake Quinces. Chap. 3 To keepe Quinces vnpared a whole yeare. Chap. 4 To make Rose Vinegre, Chap. 5 A fine Sauce for a rosted Rabbet. Chap. 6 Suger paste to make conceites for banquets. Chap. 7 Blanch powder for rosted Quinces. Chap. 8 To conserue Quinces in sirop. Chap. 9 To conserue Plums or Damasins in sirop. Chap. 10 Fine Rice pottage. Chap. 11 To make Marmalad of Quinces. Chap. 12 Marmalade of Damasins or Pruines. Chap. 13 Succade of peels of Oranges or Limons. Chap. 14 To make greene Ginger. Chap. 15 Manus Christi. Chap. 16 To make Aqua composita. Chap. 17 To make Aqua vitae, Chap. 18 To make Ipocras. Chap. 19 To make diuers necessarie oiles of great vertue. Chap. 20 To make Conserues of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Bo∣rage, Rosemarie, Succarie, Elder-flowers, Sorrell, Maiden-haire, Elacampana rootes, Acornes, Straw∣beries, Cheries, and Barharies, with their seuerall vertues. Chap. 21.22. &c. vnto the 35. To make all kind of sirops. Chap. 35 To make a Violet powder for woollen cloaths &c. Chap. 36 A sweet powder for Naperie & al linnen cloathes. Chap. 37 To make a Pomeamher. Chap. 38 A fine Fumigation to cast on the coales. Chap. 39 To make the same in Oselets. Chap. 40 To make a moist Fume vpon a fuming dish. Chap. 41 A fumigation for a presse & cloths against moths Chap. 42 A perfume for a Chamber. Chap. 43 A Damaske perfume. Chap. 44 A sweet ball against the plague. Chap. 45
To make an odorifferous white powder. Chap. 46 A fine red powder. Chap. 47 A sweete blacke powder. Chap. 48 A powder wherewith to make sweet waters. Chap. 49 Rules to be obserued in distilling of all hearbes and flowers. Chap. 50 To make the water of the collour of the hearbe you distill. idem. A compound water to perfume gloues &c. Chap. 51 To make Damaske water. Chap. 52.53 To make powder of Holland against the Collick. Chap. 54 A powder to cause a gentle laske. Chap. 55 A Receit to restore strength, being weake with sick∣nesse. Chap. 56 To make Loofings. Chap. 57 To perfume gloues eight maner of waies. Chap. 58 A perfume for chestes and cupboords. &c. Chap. 59 To collour gloues. Chap. 60 To make muske sope. Chap. 61 To make red sealing Waxe. Chap. 62 To keep Damasins or plummes in sirop. Chap. 63 A water for the face, vsed of Gentlewomen. Chap. 64 A water for heat in the face, and for pimples. Chap. 65 To know, if a woman shal euer, conceiue or no. Chap. 66 To make a barren woman beare children. Chap. 67 To make women in labour haue speedie deliuee. Chap. 68 To stoppe the running of the raines three or foure waies. Chap. 69 To strengthen the seede of man or woman. Chap. 70 For the gnawing in a womans stomacke. Chap. 71 To make sweete Damaske powder, foure manner of waies. Chap. 72 To make pepper soft, with the vertue of the same. Chap. 73 To keepe Barbaries. Chap. 74
For womens breasts that bee sore, fiue seuerall waies. Chap. 75. &c. For the vnnaturall heat of the Liuer. Chap. 76 For the Canker in the mouth. Chap. 77 To make the face faire, & the breath sweet. 78 To make haire as yellow as golde. Chap. 79 To driue all venemous beastes from your house. Chap. 80 A Remedie against all poison eaten or dronken. Chap. 81 To driue away Lice. Chap. 82 To make Doctor Steuens water, with the soueraigne vertues of the same for many things. Chap. 83 To make a water to take away Sunburning, spots and stainings of the face and handes. Chap. 84 To heale leaprie faces and swollen legs. Chap. 85 A singular ointment, for burning with fire. Chap. 86 To draw out an arrow head or other yron out of a wound. Chap. 87 For one that hath his head swollen with a fall. Chap. 88 To know what time hearbes should bee gathered in their full strength and vertue. Chap. 89 The sundrie vertues of Roses. Chap. 90 The sundrie vertues of Lillies. Chap. 91 The sundrie vertues of Milfoile. Chap. 92 The sundrie vertues of Rosemarie. Chap. 93 To make a soueraigne water of three collours, called the mother of all waters. Chap. 94 To make two the best and vsuall sortes of  with the perfect manner to cure  Pockes, and other loathsome and  dis∣eases. Chap. 95.96 The manner to choose the best Guaicum or Lignum vitae Chap. 97 A most certaine and approoued remedie against all manner of pestilence or plague, bee it neuer so vehement. Chap. 98
thinges. Chap. 99 To comfort the heart, and take away the melancholy. Chap. 100 A Sirope to cleanse the breast and the lunges, the cough and the pleurifie. Chap. 101 For spitting either of lightes or lunges. Chap. 102 For wormes in yoong children. Chap. 103. For the swelling of the cods Chap. 104 For him that cannot holde his water. Chap. 105 For the headach. Chap. 106 For griefe of the stomacke. Chap. 107 For the itch. Chap. 108 A gargill for a sore throate. Chap. 109 A water for scabbes vlcers and pushes. Chap. 110 To make a water to take out all spottes: out of cloath of golde and veluet. Chap. 111 To take spottes of grease and oile out of all sortes of cloath. Chap. 112 To take all maner of spots out of silke Chap. 113 To take spots out of cloath. Chap. 114 A remedie for the cough. Chap. 115 To keepe poultrie from destroieng with Wesels. Chap. 116 A briefe Treatise of Vrines &c. Chap. 117 To know Vrines that betoken death. Chap. 118 FINIS.
