20861 99851002 16254
A briefe relation, of what is hapned since the last of August 1598. by comming of the Spanish campe into the Dukedome of Cleue: and the bordering free Countries, which with most odious and barbarous crueltie they take as enemies, for the seruice of God, and the King of Spaine (as they say.) Heereunto is adioyned a Translation out of Latin, of a Letter of the Emperours Embassadour, to the Admirant of Ar∣ragon, the Generall of the said Army: With his answere. Together with a description of the VVhale of Berckhey, or the great fish which stranded or came on shoare at Berckhey in Holland, the third of February 1598. With anotation therupon. Also a Letter of the Emperour of Germany, to the Ad∣mirant of Arragon, Generall for the Archeduke Albertus, in the Countries of Cleue and Munster, &c. With the Admirants answere. The conspiracy of the three Bishops. The death of the Earle of Brooke. The Admirants Letter to the Counsaile of Gulich touching the death of the said Earle. The list of the Souldiers leuied by the Protestant Princes of Germany. Faithfully translated out of the Dutch coppy Printed at Roterdam. Imprinted at London by Iohn VVolfe, and are to be solde at his shop in Popes head Alley, neere vnto the Exchange. 1599.
The scituation of the lands of Cleue and Munster, Where the Spanish forces now are. map of Cleve and Munster, illustration of a whale.
A breefe relation of what is happe∣ned since the last of August 1598. by the comming of the Spanish campe into the Countries of Cleeue, &c. DOn Francisco de Mendossa, Admi∣rante d'Arragon, &c. Generall with Earle Frederick van den Berge, as Marshall of the campe belonging to the Archeduke Albert, in the Begin∣ning of Septēb. last, An. 1598. came to the Riuer of Rhine, at Orsoy, with 62. Ensignes of Spaniards, 19. En∣signes of Italians, 2. Ensignes of Irishmen, 4. regiments of Wallons, containing 43. En∣signes, 4. regiments of Germaines of 42. Ensignes, to∣gether with 168. Ensignes of footemen, which in all is esteemed to be 22. thousand footemen, with 2. thousand horse comprehended in 28. companies, aswell Spaniards, Italians, Netherlanders, and others: with these troopes the aforesaid Admirant, desired to be let into the little cit∣tie of Orsoy scituated vpon the Rhine, a mile aboue Berck, & being by the Marshall of Cleue (who protested as Neu∣trall) denied, he began to seale the cittie,Orsoy taken. which the Citti∣zens perceiuing, being affraide, let his people in, vppon promise, of onely passing the Rhine. But he forgetting his promise, began to strengthen the cittie, and caused 10. En∣signes of Wallons, and 3. regiments of Spaniards, with 12. companies of Horsemen, to be passed ouer the Rhine,
and ouer against Orsoy at Walsem, he caused a strong Sconce to be made. Vpon the Castell of Orsoy laye some Souldiours belonging to the Prince of Cleue, to the which the Admirant went himselfe in person, with thrée Fryars and a hangman, hauing many halters in his hand, with which he threatned the Souldiours, that if they would not deliuer vp the Castell, they might confesse themselues, for that there was a hangman ready to hang them,The Castell summoned and yeelded. so that the Souldiours were forced to yéelde the same vp vnto him: also all other Forts and Citties thereabout he caused to be summoned, taken, pilled and ransomed, not fauouring the citties of Alpen and Meurs, which had obtained a letter from Albertus, that they might remaine as Neutrals. By letters written out of the Campe, was vnderstood that the Admirant had taken Orsoy the 10. of September, with intent to remaine there, & to strengthen the same on both sides of the Rhine, before that he would attempt any thing else. The Campe did as then nothing else but ouer∣runne, and robbe the land of Cleue as enemies: by some prisoners was vnderstood that they meant to winter in the Neutrall Citties, to spare the Brabanders and Flem∣mings, that the Souldiours daylye by wante of money runne away. That the heads in the campe were different. Earle Frederick counselled to go towards Ouer-ryssell, but the Admirant would passe downe alongst the Rhine. The Cittizens of Orsey, made pittifull moanes and requests to their Lord the Duke of Cleue, to obtaine of the Admirant that with wife and children they might peaceably depart, leauing all their goods and wealth behinde them, for they were by the Spaniards forced to worke like slaues. The 25. of September, the cittizens and chéefe in Cleue land, concluded that the redeliuery of Orsoy should with all diligence be procured, and that if in case the Admirant de∣nied to doe it, that as then with all expedition, meanes should be sought to leuie men, for the defence of the Coun∣try, which of many was little estéemed.
The last of September, theThe cheefe Counsellors and officers touching mar∣tiall causes. Creyts, at Dormont being assembled, concluded to send the Earle of Lippe to the Ad∣mirant to procure the rendring of Orsoy. There was great want of money and victuals in the Campe, for the Country aboue fiue miles round of Or∣sey was destroyed, insomuch that the souldiers ran away in great number, as well Spaniards as other. The sixt of October, some part of the Campe departed to the Castle of the Earle of Brooke, situate on the Roer, who notwithstanding that he shewed all good neutrality and that he defended his libertie they forcibly besiedged, beshot, tooke and pilled (as enemies) his Castle, and place of residence or dwelling, his wife and children they conueyed to a monastery: the Souldiers of Cleue & Berge, with the house-kéepers, which were flee into the Castle, contrary to their promise and agréement, they flew in the fielde, after they were with theyr consents departed from the Castle. The Earle himselfe they vsed as a criminall pri∣soner, & notwithstanding that he answered himselfe as be∣ing a Noble man belonging to the Empire, and appealed therupon, & that he had yéelded vp the Castle vpon conditi∣on of life, lands & goods saued, for himself and those which were with him vpon thesame:The Lorde of Herdenbergh with a Prea∣cher murdred in the Castell. they forced him to goe to Masse, and as they fell in disputation thereabout, they there slewe his Nephew the Lorde of Herdenbergh wyth a Preacher. This Castle of Brooke being thus as enemy taken, without in any sorte respecting their promise, that it was yéelded vpon condition of life and goods saued. The Ad∣mirant of Arragon, Don Francisco de mendossa, durst well defend the same to the Counsaile of Cleue, that it ought not to be badly taken what his men did, that there was oc∣casion giuen: And that those of Cleue and Berge ought not to reuenge all what happeneth, but ought much rather to haue pacience, in hope of a good ende of those miseries, which now they endured through néede, for the common good,
and that there ought no enmity to be shewed, to the end not to bring themselues in the danger of the furious and bitter armes of the angred Souldiers, which were thereby moo∣ued. Moreouer the Iesuits make themselues heard, that those which resist them, doe make themselues subiect to the cruell punishment, and that they are rewarded according to their merits, and that they haue punished them to the example of the others, to the ende that none should doe so any more, but holde themselues in dutifull obedience, and forberance in this especiall néed. The eleuenth of October when this hapned, the Admi∣rant set some number of men to Buricke situated on the Rhyne beneath Bercke ouer against Wesell: the Cittizens being Neutrals refused to yéeld vp theyr Citty, but séeing that they would force them, were constrayned to yéeld, and were thereby ouercharged with great numbers of souldiers. On the same day happened the most detestable murder, of the Earle of Brooke, after he was risen from the Ta∣ble in the euening,The Earle of Brooke mur∣thered. and walking in the Court of the Ca∣stle, there came two Souldiers of the Garison to him; ask∣ing him if he would walke into the Garden, whereto he condiscending they went out of the Castle Gate thorough the Garden, towards the Water mill, where one of the souldiers at vnawares, gaue the Earle a great blow, with a halfe Pike vpon the head that he felled him, the Earle crying O Iesu: which done he drew out his swoord and thrust it through him, whereat hee cryed once againe O Iesu. One of the Earles seruantes being by, ranne away and leaping downe into the mill-damme saued him∣selfe. The fourtéenth of October the Duke of Cleue sent his deputy to the Campe of the Count Maurice, Counsaile of State, and of the warre, protesting that all what the Admirant did to them, did not happen by any consent of the countrey, but by méete force, and against his will and
the countrie. This yet notwithstanding the opinion in the vnited prouinces was, that the Spaniard would not at∣tempt those things in the land of Cleue, without the expres consent of the emperor, according to the Admirants charge giuen him by the king of Spaine, and the Archeduke Al∣bertus, and confirmed by the Emperour in Anno 1596. who then willed him to that end to haue his forces ready, that they ought well séeke to get all the land of Cleue into their hands, and to holde the same, with the Prince thereof, in¦wardship, and so to assure themselues, the lands should not fall into the hands of the Princes of Brandenborgh & Swez∣brugh, the which by right of marriage might pretend to be the néerest heyres, all which, those of Spaine & Austria would  hinder, because they are of the reformed religion, and might inre to the vnited prouinces. Of these and such like complots, the vnited Prouinces haue diuers times ad∣uertised the Counsell of Cleue, and to preuent these com∣plots, they had also proffered to make certaine agréements to the fréeing of the riuer of Rhine, and as then thereby to haue withstood these inuasions, but it was at that time not estéemed nor beléeued. This common opinion was in a moment more and more spread abroade and confirmed in the thoughts of searching spirits, because that newes came, that the citties of Diuxla∣ken and Holt were likewise taken, together with Essen Wynendall, and the Forte or house of Hullen, vsing them most odiouslie, killing and murdering all those which they knew to be of the reformed religion, & enemies to their en∣terprises: also they broake the new Neutrality which was granted to Meurs, & lodged 8. companies of Horsmen therin. The Admirant also besought the citty of Bockholt, that he might lay 500. horse in their cittie, and to those of Borc∣kum 300. horse. He also besought those of Wesel to take in 2000. footmen of his, and 1000. horse: or else that they should make vp 200. thousand Crownes, and a monthes breade for his
Campe, and to deliuer hostages at Burick, that the Count Maurice should attempt nothing about Wessell and Lippe, with many other such vnséemely and shamefull demaunds and fearefull threates: vaunting himselfe of the facte of the Earle of Brooke, threatning to vse all other in like sorte: yea to vse the Earle of Lippe, no lesse then the Earle of Brooke, and that therefore, they should not trust vpon a∣ny ayde, for that there was none in the Dutch nation which should dare to touch him. The cittizens of Wessell being in great feare and distresse were forced vpon the 22. of October, to come to an agréement, that they should giue for their citty, and the citty of Rees, 150. thousand Gilders, and a thousand measures of Rye, and caused a Bridge, to be made ouer the Lippe which was accordingly effected vpon the 23. of October. Those of Santen promised 18. thousand Gilders, and other places more. With this money he paide his men which had long cal∣led for money, and passed the Lippe, and sent all about the citties of Munster for money: Also they raunsomed many Gentlemens houses, many whereof they moste wickedly ransacked and pilled. They also robbed the villages of Winterswicke and Alten &c. commaunding those of Em∣merick to make a bridge ouer the Water of Hetter. Also hee sent some men with Ordinaunce towardes Rees, de∣maunding the citty for a time to lay his men in, vpon their refusall he caused more Ordinance to be brought to it, and so feared the citty,Rees taken. that they were forced to yéeld it vp to him, without any respit of an houre, to assemble their cittizens: and laide in the same citty to the costes of the cittizens 8. Ensignes, he also tooke all the Castles there abouts. Vpon the second of Nouember, the Admirant de∣maunded passage for his Ordinaunce through Emmerick by which meanes he made himselfe master of the citty and leauing a great number of men therein, departed with his campe to Elton. Also hee tooke Yselborgh where many
cittizens were wickedly murthered. The Prince of Cleue had his Embassadour by the Duke of Lorraine, who be∣sought the Duke to write to the Admirant and to the Re∣gent at Brussell, that the countrie might be fréed from this trouble. Also he vndertooke to mooue the King of France (the land of Cleue being concluded in the peace) to that end to send to Brussell. A copie of the Letter which the Emperours Legat wrote to the Admirant. ILlustrious and worthy Prince, it is knowne aswell to your excellencie, as to me, what at two seuerall times hath béene betwéene vs done and effected: First in the cittie of Gelder, when your excellencie first approached these countries with your campe: and afterwards, when by charge and commaundement of his Emperiall maiestie, I treated about the mariage of the illustrious prince of Cleue, Gulich & Berge, with the daugh∣ter of Lorraine, I haue declared, that the said illustrious duke of Cleue, is very badly, & vnreasonably dealt withall. The citty of Orsoy being forcibly taken from him, and the kings souldiours run vnbridled, vsing all manner of cruel∣tie, in murthering, spoiling, & burning, as enemies and rob∣bers, not fauoring the liues nor goods of many. And where before I stedfastly beléeued, that a Prince (whose worde ought to be sure) and had by so many promises bound him∣selfe, would be found true, as concerning that the cittie of Orsoy should within 10. or at furthest within 20 dayes, be discharged of those expences, and redeliuered.
Item that the Campe should bee remooued out of these Neutral lands, as soone as Berke shuld be rendred. And the more did I beléeue that this should haue béen fully accom∣plished, because that the same hath at diuers times bin pro∣mised and confirmed, by worde and sealed letters to the Illustrous Prince of Cleue and his sister. I now finde my selfe greatly deceiued, sith I perceiue nothing but break∣ing of promises and néedlesse delaies, yea more, there is nothing followed vpon the promises, but foe-like enter∣prises, and the iust contrariety of the said promises. For being departed I haue vnderstood, how the one Citty af∣ter the other hath béen forcibly taken, and others constrai∣ned to paye great summes of moneys and quantities of corne: all the which comming to the Court I found to be true: and more ouer heare and sée some Citties taken, and other some with great cruelty forced to pay great ex∣actions. Any one, who willingly would haue his coun∣try fréed from such troubles may easily iudge howe the Emperour (in whose behalfe I am héere appointed, to take care for the country and the Prince thereof) with all the other Germaine Princes: yea all other Princes of Eu∣rope, will be mooued at the report hereof, for this is a mat∣ter which toucheth them in generall. The house of Lor∣rayne shall by this marriage be ioyned and bound to that of Cleue: also the house of Lorraine, shall by a new brother∣hood be knit to the King of France. And many Princes, doe belong to this house aswell by bloud as mariage. Therefore one ought to take care, that all these toge∣ther, be not vexed nor vrged by the great dishonour and shame which is done them, and so to renue and teare vp the olde wound, which is yet scarce whole, which I wishe his Catholique Maiesty, (as being one of his welwillers) to looke vnto. Where are there any so vnwise and vnexperienced that vnderstand not, that it greatly hindreth and disturbeth the seruice of God, that a Catholique Prince, who hath with
such zeale and innumerable charges defended and vphelde the Catholique religion in the middest of the streames and stormes of heresie, should bee thus suppressed and spoiled, and his kindred be dispised? That leauing the enemy vnassaulted, the whole power of the warre with the worst and basest rascals that can be found in the world, shall be bent against the Kings couzens and bloud kindred. That the Churches shoulde bée pylled, and the Monestaryes robbed: the spirituall men thrust away and beaten. The young Virgins (deuoted to God) rauished, and all holines tredden vnderfoote. Also that the Embassadour (which among the heathens are frée) are with publique force apprehended, as is hap∣pened to my owne person, and the Embassadours of other Princes, some daies past when I came by water to Cleue. Where can any one (I say) be found so simple and sence∣lesse, that doeth not perceiue and marke, that this stretcheth to the dispising and hindraunce of Religi∣on? Besides, that which is greatly to be doubted, that is that the honour of the renouned house of Austria, will be dispi∣sed of euery man, the which vntill nowe for their iustice, and kindnesse, the simplicity of their enterprises, and hono∣rable déeds, hath béen fauoured ouer all, as also, because they haue alwaies wisely shunned, the suspition, of friends or foes, of bearing armes in any wrongefull warres: yea it is to be suspected, that the Catholique Kinge, and all o∣ther raisers and authors of those cruelties, shalbe by God most iustly punished, the guiltlesse bloud which they spyll. crying for reuenge. For (O beloued) what prosperity are those to expect which themselues fauour nothing, nor leaue nothing vnspoiled: which lay their hands vpon (and mo∣lest) their kindred as straungers, their friendes as enemies, the worthy as malefactors, and the guiltlesse as the guil∣tie? I am forced by my office to aduertise his imperial maiesty
of these bloodie tyrannies, euen in a rowe as they are hap∣pened. I admonish and earnestly pray your honour, to de∣sist from vsing of violence henceforward, but to the contra∣rie to giue and render againe to the hands of the illustri∣ous Prince of Cleue, his taken Citties, Castels, and forts, to transport your Armie for some other continent, to make amends and restitution of the damages doone, and to giue no occasion of further displeasure or discommoditie. All the which although it were, lawfull, iust, lawdable and besée∣ming to a Prince, yet will I by the bearer héereof, expect a reasonable and discréete answer, I commit your Honor to the protection of God. From Cleue the last of October, 1598. Vnderstood. Carolus Sonderpuhill, Legat of his Imperiall Maiestie. The Author.In sooth, I beléeue that this Embassador meanes well enough, and would willing see the Carte goe vpright, but his Lorde and maister is not of that minde. For were it otherwise, and that he were displeased therewith, where∣fore dooth he not deale earnestly with his brother Alber∣tus? who must confesse to haue giuen his Lieutenant the Admirant commission and charge, to take the citties of Cleue, to robbe them, and murther the people by multi∣tudes, &c. Or he must say, that the Admirant had doone all without his consent and commaundement, and of propria authoritate: Hath he then doone this without commaun∣dement? he ought then to punish him well for it, and to set the citties of Cleue and Munster in their fréedome againe, and to recompence their damages. But it appeareth daily more and more, that the court of Spaine, the Emperor and his brethren, as also the Pope, are well agreed, & that all is but dissimulation, they faining to be displeased with the things whereof they are causers. I will therfore to the de∣light and seruice of the Reader, yet ioyne heereto the copie of the Admirants answere.
Superscription. To the Noble and worthie Lord, Carolus Sonderpuhill, Knight of Ierusalem, Counsellor and Legat of the Emperour: my especiall goodfriend. NOble and Worthy Lorde, wee haue with all reuerence the seuentéenth of Nouember, recei∣ued your honors Letters, dated the last of Oc∣tober, wee haue also vnderstood each point of the same. First we commend and praise your honors ser∣uice & care, in the executing of the commaundement of his imperiall maiesty, touching the encreasing of the honour and welfare, of the Illustrous Prince of Cleue, and the de∣fence of his countries and subiects. Your honor séemes at this present iustly displeased, by reason of many faults and misdemeanors, which (being first beheld and not sufficient∣ly grounded) would greatly agrauate the Kings campe and vs, except that from the beginning and first enterprise, the cause could be prooued, that those which are accused should haue sought and procured, miserie and calamitie, in∣stéed of helpe and counsaile, insomuch that these troubles must be moderately applyed to the circumstance of the matter and cause, of the time, of the place, and necessity. I wish that your honour were well informed of the estate of this matter, and of the right wherewith his royall Maie∣sty maketh those warres, of the méekenesse which is vsed therein: as also of the good affection and seruice of his roy∣all Maiesty, and the Estate of the Empire, together with their iudgement of the cruell tyrany of the obstinate. Item of the necessity of this enterprise, and the things which are hapned: as of néedfull maintenance, the scituation of the places of the illustrous Prince of Gulich, the necessity in al∣tering of the p, according to the oportunities of
the warres: Item of the good déeds of his royall Maiestie, and of his true affection, as also of the most illustrous Prince of Gulion, and the whole Empire. Of all which, and many other causes, if that your honour were fully ac∣cording to the truthe informed (which we hope shall short∣lye happen) we doubt not in the least, but that your honor would as fréely and willingly as other, vnderstand the whole reason and disposition héereof, imputing the faulte of the trouble to the authours, and wholy excuse his royall Maiestie, yea and haue compassion of them, since that for their great and laudable déeds, they are vnreasonablie and falslie belyed and blamed. Your honour should also inter∣pret for the best, excuse and defend our déedes, affecti∣ons and care, before the Prince and his subiects, in respect of the furthering of the discipline, and the patience of the vnease which we endure, by reason of the greatnesse of the campe, and the differing of payes. Also your honour could double the seruice shewed vnto the illustrious. Duke of Lorraine and other Princes, and dayly with all dilligence and care, hinder the feare of the difficultie, and vn ease of the French Kings side, who is to be feared in the Empire, and will not séeke the aduauncement of the Prince of Cleue. Your Honor should also mooue his emperiall maiestie, and the estates of the Empire, to the ioyning in this war, against the common perrill of Christendome, to wit, against the causers of this great mischiefe. But this all shall more manifestly, by the déede and experience of the matter, as also of the royall Maiestie, and the illustrious Archeduke Albert, and our care, together with the estates of the Empire and other Princes, he brought to light, we esteeme according to the oportunitie of the time, to haue sufficientlie satisfied the illustrious Prince of Cleue, Gu∣lich, &c. by our last letter, which also we did imparte to your honour, and also esteeme that they ought by the same to be found good: what toucheth the rest, I beseeche
your honor, by the loue and goodwill which you beare, to his emperiall Maiesty, to his royall Maiesty, to the Arch∣duke Albertus, and the Illustrous Prince of Gulich (which by fraternity are bound together) as also by the loue which your honour beares to the preseruation of the Catholique religion, yea whole Christendome, to continue constantly in the good affection and reason, as your honor hath alrea∣dy begun, to be ayding with his counsaile and déedes to the common causes and vs, and to guide and gouerne the mat∣ters with the illustrious Prince and his counsaile accor∣ding to your wisedome. We beséech God to graunt your honor health, constancy, mercy and strength, to finish such a holy péece of worke. From the campe before Deutecum the 12. of Nouember. 1598. Vnderstood. Your honors wholy deuoted. Don Francisco de Mendossa, Great Admirant of the Realme of Arragon, Marquesse of Quadelles, de Valde penas, of the Stately Calatrononian order, Steward of the Catholique King, as also Counselour at Standes, and of the Martiall affaires, chiefe Steward in the Court of the most Illustrous Archeduke Albertus: And Captaine Generall of the Carrabins. IS not this an euident and reasonable answere, iustly might wee euery where bée exclaimed on, and called barbarous and bastardes, not worthy of the name of Netherlands, if wee should resigne to the Spaniardes (whereof the moste parte are but Baptised Iewes) our right and fréedome, which to mayntaine, so many thousandes of vertuous men haue loste theyr lyues,
and the earth béen dyed with their bloud, haue we no com∣passion on our selues? let vs call to minde the miserie which our wiues and children are to expect, if that we be maste∣red by the Spaniards, eyther by force, or their deceiptfull treatise of peace. Wee are bound to take care for them, since they themselues haue not the wit: Let vs then make it appeare that there is yet a valliant Lyons heart a∣mongst the Netherlands, for the preseruation of the true Catholique Religion, or priuiledges and fréedomes, and for the turning off of slauery and seruitude. Vpon the 7. of Nouember the Admirant assaulted the Towne of Deutecum in the County of Zutphen,Deutecum taken. and by appointment the Souldiers departed it with their wea∣pons, he marched forwards towards the Forte of Scuy∣lenburch, scituated in a bogge, which hee also tooke. The Admirant hauing want of all things, durst not aduenture any further: For being that he had denyed safegard to the Country people or Boores of the County of Zutphen, to dwell quietly, but allowed them time and leasure, to flye with their corne and cattle into the stronge Citties: hee found no victuals for his Campe, and were forced in stéed of bread to eate Colwort-stalkes, clodded bloud of beastes, and what els they could get. About this time there was an assembly in the Cittie of Dortmont, of the Deputies of the Princes and Lords, be∣longing to the Westphalian Creyts, whereof the Chiefe is the Earle of Lippe, whether all the complaintes of the Neighbour countries were brought. In which assem∣bly was resolued, to write Letters on the 13. of Nouem∣ber to the Emperour, and to the foure Princes Electors, of the Rhyne, that they also might write to the Emperour, and to the Admirant, and at Brussell to the Cardinall An∣drew of Austria, Gouernour of the Netherlands. Appoin∣ting to méete againe at Collin in Ianuarie. When the Admirant, by the resistance of Count Mau∣rice, and the Campe of the vnited Prouinces, had béen for∣ced
to retyre. Fearing want of victuals and other necessa∣ries, he departed the 16. of Nouember for the Bishopricke of Munster, leauing fiue Ensignes at Deutecum, with a Banner of Horsemen of Mendo a Spaniard. The Earle Fredricke tooke Bockholt, and also Borcken,Bockholt and Borckentaken. where they dealt very badly with the Cittizens. From thence they departed for Schermbacke and other places as Dortmont, Essen, Dorsten, which they shot at, Coesuelt, Steenwort, Rekelinckhuesen, and many Gentlemens hou∣ses. They were also twice before Oostdorp, but were faine to retyre: those of Ham resisted them also valiantly. They threatned the Bishopricke and county of Osnaburgh with fire, demaunding an hundred thousand Dollars, but it was denyed, and they tooke Souldiers to them. Barlote was sent to Emmerick, where on the 23. of Nouember he would with more men bee let in: but being that there were thrée Ensignes belonging to the Earle of Bye, the Cittizens with their (forced) helpe, held Barlote out. Who thereat greatly spyted at his departure from thence, threatned the Citty greatly. To excuse this refusall there was sent the Deacon with certaine of her persons to the Admirant, de∣claring that Neutrality had been graunted them, and that there was no reason the same should be broken. The Ad∣mirant gaue for answere, that the time, the seruice of God and the King required such, and therewith they ought to haue patience: Whereupon the Deacon replyed that it would be a great shame and reproach before God and the world, and to the name of the Catholique Spaniards, that all promises and contents may bee broken and answered with the seruice of God and the King,The Admirant is by the Dea∣con, reprehen∣ded for being an vpholder of Iesuits, in brea∣king his word and promise. and with the estate of matters, which things the Turkes and Moores did not do. And so doing yt it was no maruaile, though the vnited Prouinces would not trust to any peace, since that neigh∣bors and friends are so dealt withall. The Admirant was greatly enraged and ashamed at these words, sending the Embassadors away, but not without peril of their persons
Shortly after the tenth of December the Spanish Ga∣risons were forced to abandon Emmericke by the Count Maurice with the Army of the vnited Prouinces, where the Admirant laye at Rees with thrée thousand men, and Barlot at Doornicke, and diuers other there abouts, and could not hinder the same. For on the 4. of Decem∣ber, some of the Count Maurice his men marched vp aboue Rees, and thrust the ditches through, which notwithstanding were guarded by souldiers, they scarce being able to saue themselues from the water, and were faine to bee carried in boates out of the houses wherein they had hidden themselues: and Emmericke was suc∣coured to kéepe themselues Neutrall, taking in some of their Princes souldiers for their defence. In this sort the Spanish Campe forced the Citties of the Bishopricke of Munster, to take in their Garrison, also the Bishopricke of Essen ouerrunning the houses and Ca∣stles belonging to the Earle of Benthem & Scouwenburgh, taking, pilling and ransacking of churches and monesta∣ries, robbing all the country people, with an vnruled crue of Souldiers, surprising, afflicting and murdering them with such horrible cruelty, that it is vnpossible to expresse it, & all vnder the coulour of the seruice of God & the king. The Protestant princes assembled againe in Ianuary at Collen, for they are so tormented yt many of them are con∣strained to abandon their houses, wel perceiuing what they ought to feare. Those of Osnaburgh denied the Spaniards the demaunded ransome of the Citty, opposing and defen∣ding themselues with their Lord and Bishop (who is of the house of Bruynswicke) against the Spaniards. The like is done by those of the citty of Munster and take in souldiers to their ayde, so that the enterprise which the Spaniards had vndertaken (by the winking or eye shut∣ting of the Prince Elector of Collen), is failed them. It is manifest that they procured to make the house of Austria great, and that they would sée that all the Netherlandes,
Cleue and Gulich with their neighbors, might fall vnder the same, rather then that they should be inherited by Pro∣testants or their lawfull Princes. Heereupon the Princes had appointed to méete at Ausborch in December last. The citties in the Dukedome of Cleue were perswaded, that the Spaniardes would not any more vndertake any séedges or to surprise any thing more by violence: wherfore those of Calcar, Goch, Cleue & others, resolued, to resist thē and to stand by, and asist one another, to defend themselues with their weapons, and not to let in their enemy: yet not∣withstanding that those of Calcar are great Catholiques, and their Cittizens greatly enclined to the olde Religion. They were moste fearefully assaulted by this Catholique Spanish campe. For when the cittizens had begun moste valiantly to resist and defend themselues, and beate downe their enemies: there was no remedy nor fauour found, but were after the most rigorous sorte so assaulted, and enemy-like battered, their gates throwen downe, and after many liues lost, the Citty was taken vpon the Christmas euen last, which brought such terrible astonishment to the other citties, that the people fled in great heapes, and were for∣ced in the colde winter to leaue the country. By reason whereof those of Goch sent Embassadors to the Admirant at Rees, to make an agréement with him, as also did the o∣ther citties: but it was in vaine, he sends his men thether∣wards and deceiptfully entred Wees, (lying an houres go∣ing from Goch) which they ensconced strongly and sum∣moned the cittie of Goch to take in 500. footemen and thrée companies of horse of his: Many cittizens flying were defended by the horsemen of Nimmeghen, insomuch that the enemy durst not touch them vpon the Plaine betwéene Goch and Cleue. The souldiers were suffered to enter, but as the horsemen being come before the citty, the entraunce was by the Cittizens (in shutting their gates) hindred, wherat the chieftaine of the said horse threatned thē: meane while the cittizens got sauegard from the Prince & Empe∣ror,
which is the cause that in February there returnd ma∣ny of Goch thetherwards again. What wil follow, time & experience will teach: But it séemes that the Admirant, knowing well enough how he standeth with the house of Austria, will not passe much for sauegards, but will prose∣cute his intent. For conclusion we will (for this time) commit the cause to God, beséeching him to preserue & defend al louers of the patrimony, from al such imoderate, cruelty of the Spanish tyrants, which are neuer glutted with spilling of guiltlesse bloud, and more then brutall rauishing of yong Virgins, and chast matrons, and vnmeasurable murtherous robbe∣ries, Their obstinacy, which they vse to their frée Coun∣tries is so great, that it cannot be thought nor expressed in more odious sort, but they will surpasse all in wickednesse, not respecting any of what religion soeuer, young or olde. This (louing and kinde Reader) is a faire glasse for vs, wherein we may speculate and ouercast what wee should he to expect of these notable gallants, if they should sup∣presse vs. Therefore let euery one, watch and pray to the omnipotent God, for mercy and assistaunce, that hee will giue vs all a valient vnited heart, whereby wee may preuent all these said cruel tyranies of the Spa∣niard. To his honour and glory, and the good and saluation of vs all. Amen.
The Whale of Berckhey. Or A description of the great Fish which stranded or came on shore at Berckhey in Holland, the third of Februarie 1598. With a breefe relation of such things as happened therevpon and since the same. I IT is most certaine and true,I will for bre∣uities sake, o∣mit al signes & tokens which haue happened in the heauēs, or the ayre, at diuers times, and will onely tell some histo∣ries of some Sea-monsters, being that the subiect of our writing, is of a Sea-monster. In the time of the Romish Pope Eugenius the 4. (as Bapt. Fulg writeth) there was taken on the shore, a Sea-knight, whose shape was much like a man, excepting that on his head he had two small hornes, and but two fingers on each hand, his feete like tailes, and at his armes he had two little wings, like vnto those of a Bat. Heerevpon presently ensued the bloody warres which the Dolphin of Fraunce, sonne to Charles the 7. made against the Switzers by the instigation of the said Pope Eugenius, who would (against the Emperour Sigismund his will) haue had the synod which was appointed at Basel, to be helde in Italy. Also the said Pope was the cause that Ladislaus the young King of Hungarie, broke the truce which was made with Amurath the Turkish Emperour, in discharging him by his Papall power, of the deere and great oathe wherwith the said peace was confirmed and as∣sured, wherewith Amurath being mooued and spited, assembled a mightie hoast of horse, men and footemen, to reuenge himselfe vppon Ladislaus. It chaunced that both armies ioyning together, the Turkes began to faint, which Amurathe perceiuing, lifting vp his eyes and hands to heauen, said: See Iesus Christ, this is the truce which thy Christians (in swearing by thy name) haue made me. If now thou beest a rightfull God, defend thine and mine honor. These wordes were no sooner spoken by Amurath, but the Hungarians and the Polonians were put to flight, and the most of them slaine: amongst the rest the King Ladislaus and Iulianus Cesarinus, the Popes Embassadour. This happened neere vnto Varna, Anno. 1444. the 10. of Nouember, according to the writing of Bonfino lib. 6. c. 3. Shortly after this, Eugenius was deposed, and a Duke of Sauoye set in his place. You that say that one is not bound to keepe any oathe or faith vnto Heretickes, chawe and re∣chawe this accident. An other example. In Anno. 1281. it happened that some Fisher∣men caught in their net a Sea-monster, much like a Lyon, which as soone as it was aboue water, began to moane and lament, as a man that is greeued, and was brought aliue to Rome to the Pope Martin the 4. Shortly after ensued the Sicilian Vespers, which is the time when (in the Papistrie) are sung the Vespers, there being through the intisement of Pope Nicolas the third, and through the complot of the king of Arragon (on the Easter daye) murdered all the Frenche garrisons, which the French king had in Sicilia. In the yeere of our Lord 1522. there was seene at the sea side neere Rome, a Sea-mon∣ster, hauing the face of a woman with great brests, her haire all intangled, with long eares like a Beagle, but in shape more like an Ape then a man. At that time Sultan Soliman, sunne to the Turkish Emperor Zelim, besiedged the Knights of S. Iohn which kept Rhodes, and so strongly assaulted them, that he made himselfe maister of the whole Iland. A little before that, Posthumes Albinus the Romaine Generall, with his whole armie, was by the French discomfited: It seemed in many places, that the Sea was on fire, which was a signe of the ensuing burning warre, which at that time was kindled in many places of the worlde. that God hath often declared through tokens and signes in the ayre, the earth, and from the deapth of the seas, that his mightie hand was raised, to punish lands and nations, for their wickednesse, by warre, pestilence or famine: peruse the holye Scriptures, reade the olde Chronicles, and that which I tell you héere will be mani∣fest vnto you: and yet although euery man can espie a to∣ken, yet can none deuine what they signifie. It hath plea∣sed God Almightie to hide that from vs, thereby to kéepe vs more in awe and feare.
II. For when that in the yéere 1598, the Sea had vomited a mightie Whale on our shore at Berckhey, who in euery ones sight was horrible to beholde, I also was amazed and admired so rare a thing, and (as all the rest) doubted that some strange matter would ensue thervpon, and that God was displeased: but no one could imagine what would follow, nor what God had ordained thereby. Vn∣till that out of Brabant there came tumbling a pamphlet, wherein at large the full signification thereof was disclo∣sed, no otherwise but if God had tolde the writer what he had disposed. III. I helde my peace, my mouth and my pen, hoping that God ere long, would shew that he had not caused that Whale to strande in Holland, as a token that he ment to reduce these Netherlands vnder the yoake of that cruell monster, who séeketh nothing else but through fire and sworde, to destroye these excellent countries, he is like a
Whale, who whatsoeuer he catcheth in his chops, he swal∣loweth, teareth, and deuoureth without mercie, for I haue hoped alwayes that God would make the Spanish tyrant starue for hunger, like the Whale did after two dayes and thrée nights. IIII. This Monster was 24. elles in length, 22. téeth he had, which all like hornes long and sharpe fitted the one within the other in the hollow vault of his mouthe, his eyes smal, standing déepe within his head,Membrum virile. the thing was great and long, two finnes he had, each of two elles long, & broade ¾ and ½, he had a toung of huge bignesse, in his throate lay a monsterous bladder like an Oxe gut, which vomitted a∣boundance of filthe, which with great streames flowed from his body, in so much that what through his stincke, and what through his bignesse, he was most horrible in euery ones sight. V. This all fits right well with Signor the Admirant, who (Conueniunt rebus nomina sepe suis. The Generall of the male-cō∣tentish campe, is, Franciscus Mendosus Ad∣mirandus Ar∣ragonie Mar∣chio Quadelles Valdepenas &c Mendosus, a, um, is as much as a man that is full of lyes or faults: Admirandus, a wonderfull and notable fellow: Valdepenas, is as much as one who greatlye plagueth and molesteth other men, and shall in the ende, greatly be punished for the same. And that these names agree with his conditions, he shewed as soone as he was passed the Rhine, for hauing taken the cittie of Orsay, and the Castell yet holding out, he went himselfe in person accompanied with a hangman, and a Fryer, to the castell, threatning them, that if they were not resolued to render vp the Forte, they might prepare themselues to be confessed, and that the hange∣man was there ready to hang them: nay more, himselfe tooke the halters out of the hang∣mans hands, and lifting them on high, shewed them vnto the besieged. I beleeue not, that on our side, there be any captaine or commaunder, that would haue helped the hangman so well in his office. "That which some esteeme for a great miserie and calamitie, (viz. to leese house and lands) those of Cleue & Munster, esteeme it a great happinesse, and are very glad, that in abandoning all, they may escape bare and naked out of the tyrants hands. as his name signifies) is parlous gallant, with 24000. men he passed the Rhine, and first tooke Orsay. Euery one was affrighted through out all the land, each cittie imagi∣ned that they leueld at them, yea séemed that at a clappe he would haue taken all the Citties which lye héere belowe on the banke. But it was not so, the case goes otherwise, he whetteth his téeth in the lands of Cleue & Munster, "where he so abuseth both men and women, that no body can en∣dure by him.
VI. By the small eyes of the Whale, is signified the little foresight and vnaduisednesse of the Admirant, who was so gréedy to conuay his great hoast déeper into the coun∣trie, that he tooke no care for his foode,All wise Generals, fore∣cast, where and frō whence the campe may be best victuailed: but this won∣derfull fellowe comming ouer the Rhine whē the Corne was ripe, would not giue the coun∣trimen of Zut∣phen any saue∣garde, whereby in lying peaceably in the countrie, they might haue victualed the Campe. But willingly gaue them respite and leasure, to flie into the strong Citties: insomuch, that shortly after, his Souldiours through hunger were constrained to eate Coletwort-stalkes, and clodded blood of beasts: rootes, and hearbes, &c. And whilest that the land was full of food and victuals, they said, it is not royall, nor honourable inough, for the King to take contribu∣tion of his subiects: but now when the clownes were fled, he graunteth them sauegarde. for the Countrie people fled, and conuayed the Corne and cattle away, inso∣much, that Signor, through famine was constrained to eat Colewort stalkes, for they could not get any bread: yet when this hungrie crew, came into theSo I call the citties of Cleue and Munster: but truly the Spaniards doth not now esteeme or holde them for Neutrall, but as his owne, and respecteth them no more then hee dooth Deutecum, which alwayes heeretofore hath beene on our side. And euen as the Pope did giue this king of Spaines predecessors, the land of America, (whereof the Heathen king Ar∣tibalyba greatly wondered saying: Surely this Pope must needs be some great foole, to giue my countrie and citties, wherein he hath not a foote of right, to an other.) Euen as great right and reason hath he to giue Albertus (who is one of his best sonnes) the Lordships of Cleue and Munster, if so it may please his holinesse: But to whom soeuer the said Prouinces be∣longeth of Cleue and Munster, the Spaniards supposeth to haue good right in them, saying that at the time when Knipperdolincke and Iohn Becolt of Leyden, with the Annabaptists in Anno. 1533. had made themselues maister of the Cittie of Munster, the Bishop beeing not able ynough to take the Cittie againe, and to beate out the Annabaptists, he besought those of the house of Burgundie for ayde, promising that himselfe and his subiects at any time thereafter, should bee thankfull vnto them for it. Now is it the right time (saide the Spaniards) to accomplish that promise, and therefore they thinke they may lawfully call in their debts and to pay themselues. See how easily a staffe is found when one will beate the dogge, if one cannot finde a straight one, a crooked one will serue the turne. Neutrall citties and there lodged inSome poore Cittizens, which with their hands and the sweate of their browes get their liuing, are peste∣red with ten, fifteene, yea twentie souldiers in their housen, other some 25. 30. 36. more or lesse, which eate and consume all what the miserable Inhabitants of the neutrall citties, are able any way to get. My Lords they sit at the table making good cheere. The hoast like a Page must stand behind them, bare headed to serue them, yea he must see them with mo∣ney, before they will vouchsafe to touch one bit of the good meate which is set before them. Where Signior the Spaniard hath any gouernment, there the Gentlemen and Cittizens of the Citties must stand with cap in hand, and bow themselues to a filthie rotten, pockie, Spanish basketmaker, and such a one must bee called Signior, as is woorse then the most basest Boore in all the Netherlands. heaps, listen what they did: Browne bread, and powdred flesh they scorned to eate, throwing it at their hoasts féete,Yea so wicked and immodest are these pockie abho∣minable wretches, and heathnish Christians, that they will not respect wenches of eight, nine, tenne, eleuen, or twelue yeares of age. and through their villanies they haue vndone many a maide and honest woman.
VII Through the vnnecessarie and vgly tongue of the whale is signified,Whē our ships the last yeare were come in∣to the Pepper countrie, and that the Hea∣then King at Bantam for a summe of mo∣ney had gran∣ted them traf∣ficke in his countrie, hee notwithstan∣ding soone broke his promise, seeking to destroy our men, contrarie to his oath and promise. Where∣of being reprooued, and demaunded the cause thereof, he answered that hee had no bone in his tongue, and that he could turne and winde the same at his will and pleasure, this may likewise be applied to the Spaniard, for he breaketh his oath and promise as often & when he listeth. And being he cannot condemne those of Cleue and Munster of heresie, and that the olde rule of the Concile of Trent (faith ought not to be held vnto heretickes, can take no place there, The Admirant, when complaints are made that hee hath not helde his pro∣mise, answereth. The seruice of god and the king require so much, that I cannot keepe my promise. Hath he not cause and reason ynough, thinke you, to breake and violate the oath. It is euen with the Spaniards as it was whilome with the ambitious heathens, Iulius Caesar, and others, which were wont to say: Si violandum est Ius, regnandi causa violandum est. Alpen, Anholt, and Meurs, vnto which the Cardinall vnder his hand and Scale had graun∣ted neutralitie, haue notwithstanding by the Admirant bene taken. that the promises which the Spaniarde ma∣keth vs, are vaine and of no woorth. It is stinke, it is filth, burning and murthering which stickes in his heart, and herewith his minde is stuffed & puffed vp like the bellie of the whale, with filthie infection.The Spaniard seemes to haue minde vpon nothing so much, as vpon the Romish re∣ligion, and the furtherance thereof. In so much that his Catholicque Maiestie, the king of Spaine is esteemed to be the truest and faithfullest seruant vnto the Romish seate. Vnder this hypocriticall vaile, they seeke to cloake their insatiable ambition, couetousnesse, and bloodthirst. Euery where that they lie in Cleueland, they do no more fauour the Catho∣licques, then those of the reformed religion or others, yea the places could be named where they haue broken the Churches and monuments which by our people were leaft vndefa∣ced. Shew of holinesse and pariurie are the two sinnes, wherewith hee purposeth to subdue the Netherlands. He hath heretofore done many an exployt, but since that his deceit came to light a very litle. Al his deuices are deceit, enormious in each ones sight, e∣uery one feares his crueltie, be they protestantsI speake of some such Papists, which hauing tasted the Barbarous cruelties of the Spaniards, know full well that they fauour none, but euen such ouer which they haue no power. Those which long and wish for the victorie of the Spaniards wish for their own de∣struction, be they whatsoeuer they may be, or Pa∣pists, they know his dealings. VIII. The Whale lying on the strand, euery one that came thither shortned his taile, cutting a péece thereof. The Spaniardes taile is also well shortned, for by reason of the hunger which the poore Souldiers endured, many haue dyed, and many other haue beene slaine
by our men, also many fled away, both by day and by night, insomuch that his hoast is lessened by the one halfe,When the e∣nemy marched vp to Deutecū, his excellencie forsooke the place where he lay, ensconsing himselfe vpon the dyke in battaile arraye, a long while expecting the enemie, who with his campe laye at Elterberch, about a halfe league from our campe. The enemy euery moment was at an allarum, where his excellencie neuer made any, neither was this lustie Spaniard so bolde as with his great armie, once to assaile our little heape. This is the right sitting vnder the de∣fence of the highest, and to dwell vnder the shadowe of the almightie, Psal 91.1. Many of iudgement & vnderstanding, esteeme, and hope that the Lord of hoasts hath ordained this yeare many great victories to his excellencie, as in the yeare last past. with∣out any hurt or hinderance to ours. Oh a shrewd knocke for these blood thirstie hounds, how vnaduised was he, that counsailed them to come into these watery landes, in the which already they haue endured so great shame. IX. As héeretofore the warlicke RomaineThe renow∣ned Hanniball had at diuers times discom∣fited the Ro∣maine boasts, especially the victorie which he obtained by Cannas in A∣pulia, is wor∣thy of memo∣rie, where so manye thou∣sands of Romaines dyed, that Hannibals souldiers besides other spoiles, got from the hands of the slaine, three bushels of Rings, and if Hanniball at that time had followed on his victorie, he might easily haue taken Rome, and subdued all the Romaine Empire. Shortlye after he came with his armie (which alwayes was woont to vanquish,) into Italye, at which time the Romaines made Q. Fabius a Dictator, who perceiuing the insatiable desire of Ha∣niball, his experience and order in the warres, ensconced himselfe wel, and would not for any thing giue Hanniball battaile, but laye still, by reason whereof he was of euery one esteemed a coward, but he cared not for that, and so long he lay still with his forces, vntill Hannibals Campe, with the long lying had consumed it selfe, and came to shame, wherof the Romains gaue him this praise. Vnus homo nobis canctando restituit rem. Fabius in sitting still, vanquished the valiant venturous Hanniball. So hath also our Lorde the noble Count Maurice shewed his great experience in the martiall affaires, in driuing the enemie with all his mightie troupes out of the land, without blow or shocke. O noble blood of Nassau, O prince of Orange, mightest thou once cast downe thy eyes and bebolde how Iacke of Spaine is bearded byGood reason had Earle Peter of Mansuelt, to say (when he heard that the Prince of Orange (of laudable memorie) had a sonne borne, whose name was Mauritius,) If this childe haue his Fathers wisdome, and the vallour of his Graund-father Mauritius the Prince of Saxonie, he will giue the King of Spaine enough to doe. Maurice thy sonne, migh∣test thou once sée how hee hath clipped and shortned his taile, thy heart would reioyce, and thy ioyes be redoubled, in beholding thy sonnes vallour and vertues.
X. Next toEarle Adolph of Nassau was made Emperor in Anno 1292. and raigned 6. yeares, main∣taining greate warres against Albertus duke of Austria. Adolph of Nassau came to the Empire Alber∣tus, a Prince of the house of Austria. Adolph suffered each one to kéepe and hold his goods and lands, each their Cit∣ties and their people in peace.And beeing that the Histo∣rie whereof we haue here spo∣ken, is worthie of memorie, for the resemblance of the matters which happen now, and being that it is a∣boue three hundreth yeares ago that they happened, and therefore not so well knowne, I wil for the delight of the wel-willing Reader, rehearse the summe thereof, as it is written by Io∣sias Smilers, lib 1. de Repub. Heluet. Albertus was a great enemie and an enuior of the freedome of the Switzers, he had many children. All which hee intending to inrich, sought to stretch out his commaundement farre and nigh about his Empire, and hath rent and torne diuers Lordships from the same, and ioyned them to his house, as his owne: hee was very troublesome and dammageable vnto all his bordering neighbours, he feared not, nor was not ashamed, (with dishonourable and lawlesse reasons) yea with open might to demande and make his owne, that which belon∣ged vnto others. The spirituall persons which were rich and wealthie, hee endeuoured to bring the matter to such a passe, that they should sell him their rights, or that they would ac∣knowledge him and his children for euer, for their hereditarie Defendors, Lords, and Pro∣tectors. Also he besought the Earles and Barrons of Switzerland to acknowledge the Lords of Austria for their Land-Lords, which before were subiect to none but to the Ro∣maine Emprour. Hee also forcibly detained the paternall inheritance of his brothers sonne, ouer whom hee was appoynted Tutor. Some citties did Albertus (what through prayers, faire promises and threats) teare and separate from the Empire, and clouted them to the house of Austria. But the most part haue denied his importunate requests, and would not in any wise submit thē∣selues to him. Shortly after that the Embassadors were returned, many of the Citties and Lordships of the Switzers sent vnto him certaine persons, beseeching his Emperiall Maiestie that it might please him, to confirme them the rights and preuiledges which his predecessors had graunted them. Wherevpon in great rage he answered, that hee would doo that which they requested, euen as they had granted him his demaundes: and further, that hee had or∣dained certaine Gouernours which he would send them, and by them they should vnder∣stand his will more at large. And for Gouernours, hee appoynted one named Grislerus, and another named Peregrinus Landenbergius. These Gouernours of the Emperours at the first dealed very kindly and discreetly with the people, thereby seeking to steale the hearts of the communaltie, & to make them obedient to Albertus. But seeing that they profited nothing that way, they assayed what crueltie and tyrannie would worke. For breuities sake, wee will passe ouer many things wherewith Albertus Gouernours tried the good Switzers, and one∣lie tell what Grislerus hath done, who was Gouernour of Switz and Vri. He builded a strong Castle by his Lords command neare Altorf, which in their tongue he named Twing Vri, &c. Which is as much as the yoake by which those of Vri shall be brought to the vttermost sla∣uerie and obedience. This Castle being finished, he caused within Altorff to be set vp a high Pole, and vpon the top, a flat Cap, commaunding that euery man with vncouering of the head and bowing of the knee, should honour the said Cap, as much as if the Emperour or himselfe in person were present, knowing well that those which hated the Emperor & him, would neuer doe the same, but he did it to the end that he might haue occasion to attache those which were suspected. It chaunced that one William Tell, at sundrie times passing by the Cap, honoured not the same, which being reported to the Gouernour, he sought to ex∣cuse himselfe, in saying, that he knew not that the matter was of such importance. But Grisle∣rus not content heerewith, tooke one of William Tels sonnes (whom he knew the Father loued best, and laying an Appell vpon the childes head, said, vnlesse then you shoote of this Appell without hurting the childe, thou shalt dye. The Father answered that hee would rather dye then aduenture it. Well (quoth the Gouernour,) except that thou doost it, both thy selfe and thy sonne shall dye. William Tel perceiuing, that prayers would take no place there, tooke the Bowe into his hand, and there through Gods helpe, shot off the Apell without touching the childe. The Gouernour had marked that William Tel had ta∣ken two arrowes out of the Quiuer, whereof the one he had stucke at his girdell, wherfore he asked what he ment thereby. William Tel answered, that he ment nothing thereby but that it was the order of Archers. The Gouernour not content therewith, would needs know the grounde of the matter, promising him, that if hee would tell him the trueth, his life should not be touched. William Tell vpon these promises, said: that his intent was (if he had slaine his sonne with the one arrow) to haue killed the Gouernour with the other. O wicked wretch (quoth Grislerus) thy life will I not take, but I will commit thee to a prison, where thou shalt see neither sunne nor moone, nor speake to any body, and there thou shalt end thy daies. And causing his hands and feete to be bound, tooke him with him in a ship going from Vri to Cusnac. When being in the middest of the lake, there arose such a mightie storme, that they esteemed themselues lost, the Marriners not being able to guide the Ship, abandoned the same, to the mercie of the windes and the waters, and Grislerus in this distresse, asked if there were no meanes to get a shore, whatsoeuer it might cost. Where∣vpon one of his seruants replyed, that he doubted not but they should get a shore, if Willi∣am Tell might stand at the Helme, for he was a strong man, and very expert at Sea, which they hearing, vnbound William Tell, and set him at the Helme, where he laboured greatly to bring the Ship neere the land, which within a while did: and espying a great Rocke (which at this day is yet called Tels Rocke) he steered the Barke fully thereupon, and at the approa∣ching, leauing the Helme, and catching his bowe and arrowes, leapt ouer boorde vppon the Rocke, and withall his might launching the Barke againe, ranne into the countrie, and the Barke after long tossing, some dayes after got to Brunnen, from whence Grislerus trauailed towards Cusnac by land. William Tell beeing well acquainted with the wayes, hid him∣selfe behinde certaine bushes in a Valley, through the which hee knewe Grislerus should passe: and hauing his Bowe in a readinesse, at the tyrants passing by shot him thorough, which done (because that he would not be taken) he fled to some cheefe persons which hee knew to be great enemies of the Emperours and Gouernours, vnto which he declared the matter, and hauing consulted vppon it, tooke heart, and by little and little, droue all Alber∣tus officers out of the lande, thereby recouering their lost freedome, which vntill this daye they holde. Compare our Albertus with his Cardinals flatte Cap, to this Albertus wher∣of we haue spoken, and you shall finde, that two Egges laide by one Henne cannot re∣semble one another better. Beholde the ende. Assoone as Albertus got the Scepter in his hande, hee made strife and debate in Switzerland. The which with subtiltie, and afterwardes with strife and odios practises he sought to ioyne to his house. But Albertus aymed amisse, the valiant sturdie Switzers haue (for their countries fréedome) spared ney∣ther goods nor blood, they ioyned togither and played the men, vntill such time as they had banished Albert out of the land.
XI. The noble bloud of the house of Nassau,His excellen∣cie hauing dri∣uen the enemy out of Emricke rendered the same willinglye into the hands of the Duke of Cleue, without any wayes tou∣ching any one in life or goods. holdeth yet the same steps which Adolph long agoe shewed them. Albert likewise followeth the paces of his Graund-fathers, who tyrannized Switzerland: he séeketh to teare and seperate the land of Cleue from the Empire, as euery one may see.These bloud∣suckers were not contented, in hauing taken the good Earle of Brookes Castell, and imprisoned him, but haue against their promises most wickedly murthered him, and burnt his body to Ashes. Oh cruell tyrants: but O worthie Earle, who in dying in the right beleefe, didst witnesse the true religion with thy blood. The goods of this good Lord were publikely with the sounde of Drum and Trumpet, solde in the campe, euen as the souldiours are vsed to fell the bootie and pillage, got of their open enemies. When the Earle of Valkensteine and Brooke, &c. would haue defended his countrie, he was imprisoned, murdered, and burnt to Ashes. You Princes of the Empire, how long will you suffer this, how long will you sléepe with open eyes, is it not yet enough, the Spaniarde himselfe saith, that you are LyonsThat some thinke that Albertus with his ayders, vpon the writings and requests of any King or Prince, would leaue and abandon the confe∣derate citties, is in vaine; But will do as of late yeares did the Earle Tunis of Oldenborch, who hauing forcibly taken the house or castell of Dolmerhorst with the appurtenances. Those of Spier, in the Emperours name, wrote vnto him, that he should render the same againe to those vnto whom it did lawfully belong. The Earle hauing receiued the Letters (after the contents read) helde them a prittie while to his eare, saying. I heare no Gunnes, as if he would haue saide, what I haue purchased by force of armes, I will not suffer to bee taken awaye againe by papers. but bite not. XII. O thou God of hoasts, vouchsafe mercifully to beholde thy countrie, and defend the same with thy strong arme, against these halfe white Moores: Suffer them not O Lord, to execute the rancour of their hearts, against the people which thou hast chosen for thy heritage. It is true that we deserue to be wholie cast from the sight of thy sa∣cred face. We haue deserued to be robbed of thy holye worde, which now thou teachest vs: yet Lorde for thy names sake, fauour vs yet and alwayes, shew thy mercie to thy Church.
XIII. O you states of the vnited lands, who haue chosen for your Lieutenant the Counte Maurice, melt all your spirits together, beséech GOD continually to encrease in you (through his goodnesse) the spirit ofConcordia res parue cres∣cunt. concordeIt is an olde saying: Roma∣nus sedendo vincit. wise∣dome andWoe to the lande whose king is a child, eyther in years or vnderstand∣ing. vnderstanding to the building of his church, and the countries good. But first séeke for Gods king∣dome, further (by all meanes) his Church, then will hee cast his blessing vpon this land, and abolish all Achitophels complots: and at your soules departure from hence, receiue them vp to him in his celestiall dwelling. Religio verè ligat, Where the hearts of men are not through the bonde of true religion bound together, there is no foundation. Therefore, all those which seeke the countries wel∣fare, must also and especially procure the furtherance of the true Catholicke reformed religi∣on, in euery place where it is possible, setting wise and learned men to preache the same, and ordaining good Schooles, wherein youth may bee well educated and taught, not onely in speach and sciences, but especially in the true religion, to which ende the Emperiall goods ought to be vsed, which doone, there shall be no occasion giuen to the enimies of the religi∣on and the patrimonie, to say, that we driue away the Monckes and Fryers, not so much through zeale of religion, as because we might get the fingering of the spirituall goods. FINIS.
THE LETTER OF THE EMPEROVR OF GER∣manie, to the Admirant of Arragon, Generall for the Archeduke Albertus, in the Counties of Cleue and Munster, &c. With the Admirants answere. The conspiracie of the three Bishops. The death of the Earle of Brooke. The Admirants Letter to the counsaile of Gulich. The list of the Souldiours leuied by the protestant Princes of Germanie. Faithfully translated out of the Dutch copie Printed at Roterdam. Imprinted at London by Iohn VVolfe, and are to be solde at his shop in Popes head Alley, neere vnto the Exchange. 1599.
A Letter of the Emperour Roduphus the second, to Don Francisco de men∣dozza, Admirant of Arragon, Generall of the army of the King of Spaine, in the Lands of Gulich and Cleue, touching the dammages by him done in the Empire. I Rodulphus by the grace of God the se∣cond, chosen Romaine Emperour, at all times an augmenter of the Em∣pire, in Germany, Hungaria, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia and Sclauonia &c. king, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Steyr, Keredten, Gray and Wittenberch, Earle of Tiroll &c. send gréeting to the well-borne, our especiall beloued Don Francisco de mendossa, Admirant of the kingdome of Arragon, Marquesse of Quadelles, Knight of the Calatranonian order, Commaunder at Valazenas, Generall vnder our beloued bro∣ther Albertus Archduke of Austria: also to V. N. and N. to all and euery Regiment, Admiranty, Coronels, Captaines Lieue∣tenants and Commaunders of Souldiers horse and foote, of what nation, State and condition soeuer vnto which these our credible letters may appeare, be shewed or declared, to such as remaine in our Empire, or the Fortresses, ground, bottom, Cit∣ties, Townes, Sconces, and Riuers of the same, by Water or Land, wee make knowne, that our Princes and Lordes of the Netherlandish and Westphalian Croytes especially the high-borne Iohn Wilhem, Duke of Gulich, Cleue, and Berge &c. our beloued Nephew, who of a longtime most o∣bediently had made knowne and highly complained vnto vs in what manner you Admirant, with a great Hoast, Force and Might, yea aboue 30000. armed men, are departed out of Bra∣bant in the ende of the moneth of September last past, and pre∣sently taken your way through the Dukedome of Gulich, in the same month forcing, and besetting his Citty of Orsoy, and after that, you haue sent certaine thousands of horse and foote o∣uer the Rhyne, where they haue cast a Sconce, and on both sides
of the same, taken all the cattell and beasts, great and small, spoi∣led the flat land, and besides this oppressed the poore people with imprisoning, ransoming, burning, and murthering in such odi∣ous sorte, as the like hath not béene heard héeretofore of any: insomuch that the greater parte of the inhabitants and subiects haue béene forced to abandon their housen, lands, and all else, what with their great labour they haue béene able to get: héer∣with not satisfied, but haue sent the souldiours into the countrie of Berge (being a place appertaining to the Duke of Gulich and the late Weringen of Dau Earle at Valkensteyn, dwelling vp∣on the house called Brooke, haue assailed the same, and notwith∣standing that the Earle of the house had rendred vp the same vp∣on condition of liues and goods saued; haue murdred diuers of the said souldiors, and the Earle himselfe who had the Admi∣rants sauegarde, they helde some dayes imprisoned and vpon a time (by the will and consent of the Captaine who laye in the house) being gone to walke abroade, they haue must wickedlye murthered him. Meane while, the armie hath taken and forci∣bly marched through some cities of Glene, as Burich, Dinslaegen, Holt, Rees, Emmerick, with other Forts, Gentlemens housen & Villages, appertaining to the said Dukedome, the which some of them, they haue with their Ordinance beaten downe, destroi∣ed, ransacked, forced and deuoured, amongst which were many spirituall and temporall persons, without fauouring any one, but plaging and tormenting them to the vttermost, some with imprisonment, other with strangling, and such like, togeather with the violating and deflouring of women, damsels & maides, in more filthie or beastlye sorte then euer hath béene heard, and haue moreouer so oppressed the Cittie of Wesell, that they haue béene forced to pay 150. thousand Dollars, the one halfe ready, and the other at shorte time, together with 1000. measures of Rye, which they haue béene forced to promise to the Chéeftains of you the Admirants campe; ouer and aboue the houses and Lordships, as Kruydenberch, Weyfflyck houen, also the Princely Gentlemens housen and Forts, as Lhan, Windendal, Dusport, Noisan, Impel, Dornich, Lackunsen, Woremsemmerwogen, and also reduced the Duke of Gulich himselfe, with his court, to the extreamest and the vttermost pouertie, with many more other places, which haue béen with force taken, ransacked and spoiled, whereof we haue a great number of specifications sent vs. Also
some of the armie haue vaunted to dare to suppresse and driue away the Duke in person. Aboue all this you Admirant with your Spanish souldiours, haue attempted to beset some Citties in the Prouince of Munster, and those which denyed your de∣maunds, you haue by force compelled and taken; also you haue caused the said bishopricke, with the Episcopall gouernour and counsailor of the same, Alexander vay Vehellen as vppermost, to be presented with a quarter letter, and besides the same, you haue taken and surprised the Dukedome of Cleue, together with 30. Citties and Bourghes, as well of Munster as Cleue, to the vse of your Souldiours for your winter Campe, and also wholye spoiled the bishoprick of Essen and Weerden: also there are dayly vsed in the strengths and Lordships of Gelder and other borde∣ring neighbors, such robbing, and raunsoming, that no husban∣drie nor trade of marchandise can be excercised. Wherefore we are constrained, as also are all the other princes, the which ther∣vnto haue greatly solicited and beséeched vs, and since that you haue vndertaken and attempted such an vnreasonable enterprise and haue not in any wise béene willing, by admonishments and warnings to abstaine thereof: but that you Admirant without any respect, haue fallen vpon the peaceable countries of the holy Romaine Empire, and those which are sworne to the same, with such an armie, yea without any leaue or warning: we nor any of our Princes, Lords & estates, nor any of all the other Nether∣landish gouernement, expected any such enimitie of the King of Spaine, and lesse at the hands of our most déerely beloued bro∣ther Albertus Archeduke, &c. but to the contrarie, haue alwayes trusted vpon good and friendly neighbourhood, where now you haue suppressed the lands (subiects of the Empire) with your sol∣diours, made the same to pillage, and wholy spoiled and empo∣uerished it, notwithstanding that we haue héeretofore at diuers times, written our minds therof vnto you, as also to our beloued brother Albertus. Wherby it séemes that you little estéeme and care to follow any our aforesaid warnings & admonishments to the least point, as you ought: wherfore it behooueth vs to haue a sharpe & néerer regarde and to vse other means for the same. And therefore we commaund you Admirant of Arragon, together withall your Chieftaines, Commaunders and Soldiers, aswell in perticuler as generall, in vertue of the power of the Empe∣riall Romaine Maiestie, as subiects to vs and the holy Em∣pire, vppon paine of life, where they may be found, and to
the others, ours and the Empires high and low subiects, allyes vassalls, &c. or which are scituated vnder vs & the holy Empire, vpon paine of ours & the holy Empires Cursse & excōmunication together with the losse of their Benefices, Priuiledges, Frée∣domes, dignities, loanes, landes and goodes, in what place so∣euer vnder vs, and the Holy Empire, or their allyes, they may lye or remaine, which shall transgresse the same, to execute them without néed of any further declaration. Earnestly and strickt∣ly commaunding, and willing, that you and euery one of you vnto which these our letters, Vidimirte and credible writinges shall appeare, or be shewed, or declared, with all your souldiers, without any other conduct, to depart from ours and the holie Empires territories and ground, and to discharge the same, a∣bandoning all Citties, Forts, Gentlemens houses, villages, strengthes and Sconces, which you haue (as aforesaid) taken from the Duke of Gulich, the Bishopricke of Munster & vs, and the state of the Empire, howsoeuer they be named: and that you make restitution of all losses, and pay the dammages, by you done and caused, and to those of Wesell and others, the forced moneys, charges and ransomes, without any rebatement: and to the end that you Admirant may shew and make knowne that the death of the Earle of Brooke hath beene without your con∣sent or will: you shall render againe vnto the Countesse, (wife to the said late Earle) all her taken goods, moneys, Iewels and plate, or els the full worth therof, to reestablish and set againe in their first estate, the molested spirituall and temporall persons, without misusing them any further. And to take héede, hence∣forwards, not to attempt any thing in the way of enmitye a∣gainst the aboue named, nor any other subiects of ours, or of the States of the Empire in any sort whatsoeuer. At your perils, and behaue your selues accordingly which wee admonish you very earnestly. Giuen at our Castle of Podecray the 30. of the month of December. 1598. Rodulph. V.L. Cardino. Ad mandatum, Ces. Marst. Arnd. Hanniwalt. in Dosso.
An extract of the answere of the Admi∣rant, vpon the Emperours Letter, as the writing maketh mention. THat he is not to make any accompt of this nor other letters and writings, and that if the Emperours forces stoode on the one side of him, and the holy Father the Pope, on the other side with his ex∣communication, commaunding him a∣gaine to depart, that he would not for all that obey them, as hauing a Lord, who had commaunded him to doe this exploit, except that by force of Armes he were forced to resolue other∣wise. A conspiracie made betweene the 3. Bishoppes, viz. the Bishop of Bamberch, the Bishop of Wirtzburgh and the Bishop of Saltzburgh, to bring the Spanish inquisition into Germany, and what en∣sued thereupon. WHereas the Bishops of Bambergh and Wirtz∣burgh (both lying in the Mayne in Frankenland) had made a great conspiracie and complot, in∣tending to bringe and reduce the Romish Em∣pire (especially Germany) vnder the damnable Spanish inquisition, they met together at Wit∣zenburgh, to conferre about it, but God through his mercy dis∣couered and broke their conspiracy, by the sudden death of the Bishop of Bambergh, in whose closset, and in the Chauncery at Bambergh, were found wonderfull practises and deuises, wher∣vpon some of his Counsaile were imprisoned: It was knowne that there was a day limmitted, vpon the which diuers Nobles and others, should haue béen murthered, hauing the said twoo Bishops together with the Bishop of Saltzburgh, helde great correspondence with the Spanish Admirant of Arragon, to in∣troduct
the said Spaniards into Germany, & in that sort to make a destruction of the Euangelistes: But all was by the Bishop of Bamberghs sudden death detected. The bishop of Wirtzburgh being ridden on hunting, fell from his horse, by which fall hee burst his arme, and was beides to bruses with the fall, that he lyeth on his death-bed. The Bishop of Saltzburgh hath since had the halfe of his Palmes burned whereby we sée how strangely God hath punished these  Bishopps, and brought the treason and  in , who by their diuellish practises séeketh tranize  all the world. God, through his wonted mercy , manifest & anihilate their wicked enterprizes, to the praise and glory of hys Holy name. Amen. The death of Maurice Oan-Hun, Earle of Valkensteyn and Brooke, &c. most vvickedly murthered by the Spaniardes, according to the report of one Goehaert Hensgen his seruant, being present at his death. IT is knowne vnto each one that vpon the 16. of October last, the Admirants men came before the Earle of Brookes Castle, the which they demaunded to be deliuered vp into their hands, and that the Earle should Cashéere his souldi∣ers, for he had some number of Cocke feathers, (certaine men of warre so ) The Earle answered that he stood vpon his Neutrality, & that they ought to leaue him vn∣molested: they not caring for that, would haue him dismisse his people, and to commit himself vnder theyr defence and protecti∣on, withall bringing thether foure péeces of Ordinaunce, wher∣with they compelled them to der themselues, life and goods saued. When now they had entred the Forte they tooke the Countesse and her little children, and conueyed them away into a monastary. The Souldiers of Cleue and Berge (with other people fled thether) being departed, were (notwithstanding the conditions and promises) pursued, stre and robbed, The Earle himselfe they helde prisoner, and vsed him very hardly, compel∣ling
him to goe to Masse, with other such like molestations. Moreouer, certaine dayes after the taking of the Castle, be∣ing in disputation, they murdered his Nephew, the Lord of Herdenberch, together with a Preacher. And by reason that diuers mutterings are abroad of the death of this Earle, on sundry manners, I wil héere recount the same according to the confession of his owne Ser∣uant, Gochaert Hensgen, at Duseldorp the fourtéenth of October. VPon Sunday the 11. of October in the euening, the Earle being at Supper, had with him a Captaine (a braue man of person) together with his Iustice, and hys Steward: hauing all supped together, he went out to walk in the Court, where presently came to him two Souldiers of the Garrison, in blew Cassockes, asking if it were his pleasure to goe abroad to walke and take the ayre? wher∣vpon he replyed I: the one of them ranne vp to the Cap∣taine but came presently againe, and so went together out of the Gate: the said Earles seruant followed them through the Garden, where the Souldiers denyed to let him haue something in this hand, for the which he asked his said Ser∣uant: yet taking vp a little sticke, he passed alongst towards the Water Mill and the fish ponde, where some fishe lay caught. The Earle beckoned to the one Souldier to take it vp, who stood still, whilest the other at vnawares stroke him a mighty blow on the head with a half Pike: insomuch that he fell to the ground, crying O Iesu: which done, the Souldier drew his swoord, and therewith thrust him thorough, wher∣at he cryed once againe O Iesu, but so fayntly that he could scarce be vnderstood: meane while the other souldier caught vp a flaile before the Mill, wherwith he stroke at the Earles seruaunt, who perceiuing it, (being néere the ditch) leaped downe into the damme, so that the blowe did but touch his shoulder, from whence with great labour (the souldier still thrusting at him) he got to land on the other side, and so esca∣ped. There were two other souldiers in the Garden, which
were commaunding the Gardiner and the Fishermen to bu∣rie some dead bodies which were slaine at the taking of the Castel, and were appointed by the murtherers to stay there. This is as much as yet is come to light of the Earles death, whose body (as some say) was afterwards burned in a Barne. A Letter of the Admirant of Arra∣gon, to the counsaile of Gulich, touching the death of the Earle of Brooke: Written two dayes after the taking of the Castell. Translated out of Latin. NOble, mightie, and honourable Lordes and friends, some dayes past we haue answered two of your Letters, which were brought vnto vs by the noble Henrye of Boorloe, whereby you wrote that no occasion of com∣plaints, or of any harme should be giuen by the Campe, in the places about the Rhine, or other landes, appertaining to the illustrious Duke of Gulich, and that you also through your wisdomes and experience, through méere goodwill and desire of the common good, and his Ma∣iesties seruice, you had well considered that the King of Spaine, not of any will or desire, but through méere néede of the common danger and welfare, did make these warres, and brought his Campe there, and that through delaye of paiment, the Souldiours were through néede, forced to runne séeking of hearbes, and elsewhat, for their foode and liuing: the force of all which disorder was not to be to the reproche of the king, nor the Chieftaines of his Campe, but to those which were causers thereof, and that ought not presently to be reuenged, with killing and murthering, but one ought to endure much, vppon hope of a good end of the
manifolde mischiefs and miseries: the which would not only be pleasing vnto vs, but promised that the king, and the illu∣strous Archeduke would be mindefull of it, and excuse the same as the necessitie required. And it is wished that all o∣thers, which owe all such seruice, to vse the selfe same waye eyther through themselues or their people, and in all mode∣destie to ioyne their willing mindes and furtherances to our actions. And whereas we haue from the beginning (to the common good) made our mindes knowne, publickly and priuately de∣clared our goodwill, to the Earle of Brooke, by wordes, mes∣sengers and Letters. At last (after many great complaints, of the misrule and had dealings of his men) wee receyued of him a Letter in Dutch, the contents whereof we scarce vn∣derstanding, and yet by interpretation found them some∣what bitter, and estraunged to amity, we answered him a∣gaine in Latin (which is common to all nations, and vnder∣stood of all) that he would send vs the meaning of his Letter, with his minde, to the ende that we might the better an∣swere him, and to conuert his minde and ours to the com∣mon seruice, which we hoped he would haue doone: and ex∣pecting certaine dayes his answer, there came dayly more complaints and outcryes to our eares, of the murthers, slaughters, and all manner of Barbarous cruelties doone to our Souldiors and others persons, by the said Earles cock∣feathers (or souldiours so called) to our great gréefe and com∣passion, which all notwithstanding we (still expecting his answer) dispised, and haue not any wayes consented to any harme of his by worde or déede, vntill at last, by reason of the tumult of the whole campe of the chéefe captaines & others, of all nations vppon these neuer heard cruelties, of slaying and murthering against the guiltlesse persons of our campe, by the Earles people, we concluded to send him our third writing, containing our displeasure, of his foe-like actions, wondering that he answered vs not, declaring that it would be a great shame and dishonour to the royall campe, to suffer such indignitie to remaine vnpunished, wherefore we reque∣sted, that he would punish and dismisse all such cockfeathers
and murtherers, or els deliuer them vp into the hands of the Iustices to punish them, and that for the rest hee should settle himselfe to all amiable seruice. These letters we gaue vnto a Spanish Colonel, causing him to take with him, souldiers and ordinaunce, suspecting the Earles continuance of obsti∣nacie, yet with charge, that comming to the Castle, he should summon the Earle vpon the contents of the Letter, and in friendly sort to speake vnto him, and with all honour and reuerence to declare him our mindes: vpon the which if hee should seeke any further delayes, make refusall, or any showe of enmity, that then the Colonel should martial wise, forciblye take him, yet with such condiction, that if in case the Earle should bethinke himself better, and should by déeds shew the same, that then his person, wife, children and his housholde shoulde haue all their goods and heritages sa∣ued. When now the Spanish Colonel, sought by all friendly meanes to come to the Earles speach, and to accomplish the contents of the Letters, and that the Earle againe sought diuers néedlesse delayes, they betooke themselues on both sides to armes: wherby ensued, what in such like tempestu∣ous assaults of angred souldiers by so many wrongs, is vsed to happen: yea often against their Commaunders will, the more because his Campe was of many sortes of peoples, whereof the greater part, yea the whole Campe was great∣ly encouraged by the barbarous cruelties, slaughters, mur∣thers and damages suffered: which the Kings people estée∣med to be done by the counsaile of the neighbour countryes, with which they were in League. IesuitsThere was a third sort of people in the Campe, the which according to right and reason, disclosed, gaue and appropria∣ted to euery one his actes, with the causes thereof, accusing the Earle the more because that for many yéeres hath shew∣ed himselfe a defendour and vpholder of all sedition, with chaunge of religion, not only setting the Countries of the Illustrous Prince at contention, but also himselfe raysde seditions, in the other common Landes, hauing euer since the wars, conspired, consulted and traded with the enemies
of the commonwealths rest, of the religion, and of the Em∣pire, and they accompt the Authours and men of such bad euents, to be more dangerous and damageable in a common wealth, then those which through their instigation vnwit∣tinglye giue themselues to armes, and so fall into like fault, insomuch that the common opinion is, that therefore the said Earle not onely, according to the lawe of armes, but also according to the lawe of God and man, hath receiued his rewarde according to his deserts, and that others by his ex∣ample will take warning, and the people be mooued to obe∣dience: we notwithstanding (according to our naturall kind∣nesse) haue had compassion vppon his and the poore peoples mishap, that they haue not followed good counsaile in time, and therefore haue wee related your honours the same at large, not that we will answere the fact, or that we desire (in the least point to haue the authoritie of the illustrious prince of Gulich or yours, to be deminished (which we rather with all honour séeke to augment) but that we might in strength∣ning your wisdomes, procure, that with the like sorrowe they wil bewaile the anger of God, and the madnesse of men, and to pray stedfastly, for that which is néedefull, for the good and quietnesse of the commonwealth and the religion, and with diligence to foresée therein, as néede requireth, wi∣shing also that you will interpret and publish the whole to the best: In the which we beséeche God to strengthen your Honors, and long to continue you in good estate. From Orsay the viii. of October 1598. In this sorte was the Earle of Brooke murthered in colde blood, and his death answered. Reade and Iudge.
A List of the troupes of men of warre, furnished by the Germaine Prote∣stant Princes, in the defence of the Spanish For∣ces, and their bloudy and tyranicall enterpri∣ses, all ready begun in Westphalia, and the Neighbour Countries. HEnry Duke of Browneswick maketh out. 3000. horsemen, and 9000. footemen. The Duke of Lunenburch. 1000. horse and 2000. foote. The Duke of Brandenburch Prince Elector. 2000. horse and 4000. foote. The Bishopricke of Maghdenburch. 1000. horse and 2000. foote. The Duke of Saxony Prince Elector. 2000. horse and 4000. foote. Wirtzenburch. 1000. horse and 4000. foote.
The Marquesse of Antzbach. 1000. horse and 4000. foote. The Count Palatine of the Rhyne. 1000. horse and 4000. foote. The Prouinciall Earle of Hessen. 1000. horse and 3000. foote. The Count of Lippe. 500. horse and 1000. foote. In all 13500. horse and 37000. foote. For the payment of these Souldiers shall be vsed the gathered contribution against the Turke. FINIS.
