22249 99852374 17690
A DISCOVRSE OF HIS OWNE, OF THE MEANES AND SVFFICIENCIE OF ENGLAND, for to haue abundance of fine silke, by fee∣ding of Silke-wormes within the same; as by apparent proofes by him made and conti∣nued appeareth. For the generall vse and vniuersall benefit of all those his Countrie-men which embrace it. printer's or publisher's device Pro patria pario.
blazon or coat of arms
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE IAMES, BY THE Grace of God, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. MY desire to aunswere most dread So∣ueraigne) the care and studie of my parents, so to breed mee, as that I might bee made fit for some ser∣uiceable imploymēt in the Com∣mon-wealth, and the remēbrance of that matter, whereunto mine earthly part must re∣turne, being nothing else but food for wormes, hath these 7. yeeres entertained some part of my life, with an earnest or rather burning desire, not only to learn and find out the readiest and assuredst way, how to reare vp, nourish, & feed Silk-worms, the most admira∣ble & beautifullest cloathing creatures of this world: but also the exactest & best means to preserue and su∣steine thē, with no lesse affectiō to make good & pro∣fitable vse of both. Whereunto hauing in some small measure attained, am willing for the publike benefit of so many of my coūtrey-men, as shall as thankfully embrace it, as I louingly & freely offer it, to frame my labors as motiues & means for thē: to draw frō their proper lāds the inestimable treasure of Silke (there til
now inclosed & locked vp,) euer since the first Chaos. And to the end, that these mine endeauours might purchase the better credit & allowāce with your Ma∣iestie: haue Englished a most worthy & select treatise of this subiect, writtē in French by D'oliuier de Serres L▪ of Pradel, with an annexed discourse of my owne cōtinued proofes in England, & the sufficiency ther∣of, for the yeelding of abundant store of pure Silke. Wishing that after this my publishing of thē, the thing it self may fructify & encrease in such ample measure and proportiō here, as it did there, whē mine Author had once brought his to view. Which vndoubtedly wil be done, if your Highnes wil be graciously pleased to giue life & strēgth to this my slēder & weake first∣borne Impe, that thereby it may grow & spread like the flourishing Cedar-tree of Libanus, to the perpe∣tual, & vniuersall good of all that shall imitate mine example: & the granting thereof likewise by your Ma∣iestie, wil not only more earnestly stir thē therin; but also incourage & egge me on to perfect this work by longer & more continued practise & experience; (if perhaps my through want of further knowledge) of the natures of these excellent creatures, haue left any part thereof defectiue or vnpolished. All I aime at is to do your Highnes, & my Countrey seruice, where in I will perpetually striue with vnresistable perseuerāce to mine vttermost, & will euer pray to God for your Maiesties long and most happie raigne ouer all your Kingdomes and Dominions. Your Maiesties most loyall and dutifull subiect, borne and bound to do you seruice: NICH. GEFFE.
TO MASTER NICHO∣LAS GEFFE. AS thou deare friend with they industrious hand Reachest this rich inualuable Clue; So once Columbus offred to this land That from which Spaine her now-hie courage drue. And had not she prouok'd by his designes, Traueld to find what hidden was before, Ne're had her Argo's from the Indian mines Powr'd their full panches, on th' Iberian shore. From small beginnings how braue noble things Haue gathered vigor and themselues haue rear'd To be the strength and maintenance of Kings That at the first but friuolous appear'd: So may thy Silk-wormes happily increase From sea to sea to propagate their seed That plant still, nourish'd by our glorious peace Whose leafe alone, the labouring Worme doth feed. And may thy fame perpetually aduance Rich when by thee, thy countrey shall be made
Naples, Granado, Portugale, and France, All to sit idle, wondring at our trade. The tree acquainting with the Brittish soyle And the true vse vnto our people taught Shall trebble ten times recompence the toile (From forraine parts) of him it hither brought, In spight of them would rob thee of thy due, Yet not depriue vs of thy noble skill, Still let faire vertue to her selfe be true, Although the times ingratefull be and ill. MICHAEL DRAYTON.
TO MAER NICHOLAS Geffe, my esteemed friend. NEuer was yet the subiect in this land H'as brought to light, like hope as thou hast done, Nor set his braines to worke; nor mou'd his hand More purposely, then what thou hast begun. Whilst greater heads were poring vpon toyes Thine hath been fraught this Iland to aduance With studious care, and intermixt annoyes And times expence; (sull seuen ye'res perfectance) Hath made vs free-men, of thy rich found trade, And freely hast imparted vnto all; The arte, skill, meanes, and way hast open laid For to enrich the great ones and the small. Spaine shall hence forward keep her silks at home, And Italy disperse hers where she may; The Merchant shall not need so farre to rome, Since thou hast shewen a short and cheaper way By silly wormes, which euer heeretofore The vse to keep with vs hath bin vnknowne, To draw that great abundant fleece of store From them, (by thy discouery amplie showen) The silken fleece to England thou hast brought There to endure till Doomes day cut her clue, And when thy bones, the wormes haue eate to naught, Yet shall the wormes thy fame still fresh renue, And ere thy name, thy house, thy stocke, thy line, Be highly honored by this great designe. GEO: CARR.
TO HIS OWNE, WORTHY MASTER GEFFE. LEt me (of those so many of our Clime, Who stand to thee (sweet friend) in honor bound, For thy deare paines confer'd vpon the time, Who hast for vs, fame, pleasure, profit, found:) Render thee thankes, that cannot speake thy praise, Wishing all condigne honor to thy daies. Henceforth the greedy prison shall not eate Poore wretches, wofull mappes of misery, Since in thy worke all may some liuing get, By vse of much, or little industrie, Wherein the finest wittes their power may straine, The grosser, exercise their bodies paine. Our populous land is free from forraigne broile, These iron times but little business giue, Yet now the discontent his head may toyle, And learne a quiet vertuous life to liue. A blessed med'cine faire Imployment is, Cu'ring sicke minds that else would do amisse. Among'st those lands which sing the memory Of their deare Children, who with pious care Haue them ennobled, by th'vtility Of Artes, that long vnto them hidden were: Faire England boast's thy birth in happy houre, Who to her garlond ad'st so rich a flower. ROBERT GOODVVIN.
THE PERFECT VSE OF SILKE-WORMES AND THEIR BENEFIT. IF the Silke-worme had been knowne by the auncient Au∣thors and writers of Agricul∣ture and husbandry, we need not doubt, but the praise of so rich & worthy a creature had been sung by them, as they haue done that of Bees: but by such default, it hath remained without name ma∣ny ages. Virgil discourses▪ as by passing, of the rich fleece that the Forrests of Ethiopia, & Setes brought forth, without mentioning the quality or meanes to gather it See in these words. Virg. Georg. 11. Quid nemora Aethiopm molli canentia lana? Vellera{que} vt folijs depectant tenuia Seres? The first no∣tice of silke at Rome. From whence some, as Solin and Sernius, haue thought this to be Silke and that to proceed directly of the trees▪ Such hath been the first notice of the Silke giuen in Italie, which was in the raigne of the Emperour Octauius Augustus confirmed by Plinie
more then seuenty yeeres after, (for hee liued in the time of Vespatian) he ther to addeth, that in the Ile of Coos, there growe, Cypres trees, Turpentine trees, Ashes, and Okes; of the leaues of which trees, fallen to the ground in maturity, through humiditie of the same, breede wormes bringing forth silke. That in Assyria the Silke-worme called by the Greekes and Latines, Bombyx, makes his neast vpon the earth, which he fastens to the stones, where it hardneth ve∣ry much, remaining there conferued all the yeere, that makes webs after the fashion of Spiders. Aristo∣tle also saith, that in the Ile of Coos, Pamphyllia daughter of Ltous, was the first inuentris of spinning and weauing silke, by the which intricate and fol∣ded▪ vp discourses, compared to the practick of these times, appeareth how far off the ancients were from the true knowledge of the Silke-worme, hauing not knowne from whence they came, nor how they are nourished, so by their silence they witnesse, in hol∣ding their peace, of the egges, and the leaues of the Mulberries for their food. Vpiscus witnesseth, that in the time of the Empe∣rour Aurelian (two hundred yeeres after Vespatian and more) silke was sold for the weight of gold, for which dearnes, but especially for modesty, he would neuer weare to be all of silke, but mingled with other matter; although Heliogabalus his predecessor was not so sparing, as saith Lampridius. Like modestie is noted of King Henry the second, which would ne∣uer weare silke stockings, although that in his time the vse of them was then receiued in France. Many others in divers times, haue spoken of the silke, as So∣lin,
Marcelin, and Srin, which name the Silke-worme Zir, from whence comes the Latin wood, Siricam, that is to say, Silke, as witnesseth Pausanias in his description of Greece, Martial also makes men∣tion of the silke by these verses. Nec vaga tam tenui discrst aranea tela, Tam leue nec Bombyx pendulus vrget opus. And of the work of Silk-wormes Propertius saith, Nec si qua Arabia lucet Bombyce puella. Vlpian an auncient Lawyer, speaketh of the silke in the title De Auro & Argento Legato, in this sort, ve∣stimentorum sunt omnia lanea, linea{que} vel serica bombyci∣na &c. It is a thing receiued of al, that the inhabitants The begin∣ning of the silke.of the country of Seres, first of al manifested the silke, hauing brought the seed from the Ile Taprobane, o∣therwise Sumata, situate vnder the Aequinoctiall, in longitude from them of forty sixe, to forty eight de∣grees of latitude. The country of Seres, so called of a citie of the Prouince, is that which at this day is na∣med, Cattay and Cambalis, in East Asia, adioyning on the West to Scytia Asiatick; and of the South to the Indies, gouerned by the great Cham of Tartary. At the lēgth these things came to light, by two Monks, which brought from Sera a citie of the country of Cattay the graine of Silke-wormes to Iustinian to Con∣stantinople, (the raigne of which Emperour began the yeere of Christ 526.) from whence the know∣ledge of rearing and bringing vp this creature, is di∣spersed throughout all Europe. So Procopius hath written after many other. From the citie of Panorme Where first of all the silke was wrought in Europ, and finallyin Scicile is come the manner to vse the silke, where first of all it was shewed by the meanes of certaine
workmen in this arte, brought thither prisoners by ger King of the forsaid Ile of Scicile, in the time of the Emperor Conrade. Lastly these excellent sciences haue takē footing in certain Prouinces of this realm, but by tract of time and distances, not all at once▪ For as God hath accustomed to distribute his be∣nefits by little and little, so much the better to make vs relish his graces: so the knowledge of the Mulber∣ry tree hath first been giuen vnto vs, after that the vse of it, to the end to make prouision of food, before we charge our selues with the creature. In what time, and in what Prouince of this kingdom. I will not here reckon the causes and times of their more forward bringing in into this Realme, but in the raigne of Charles the 8. in the voyage that this King made to the kingdome of Naples, the yeere a thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and foure∣teene, some Gentlemen of his traine, hauing noted the richnes of the silke, at their returne home did affect to prouide their houses of such commoditie. Afterwardes the warres of Italy ending, they sent to Naples, to fetch plāts of Mulberries, which they pla∣ced in Prouence, by reason of the little distance of cli∣mates of each countrey, making the enterprise easie. Some say it was in the borders of such a pro∣uince, ioyned with that of Dauphine, where the Mulberries first grew, marking also Alan, neere to Montellimar, which was then planted by the meanes of his Lord, which accōpanied the King in his voy∣age: As the old great white Mulberries yet at this day to be seene, giue some assurance. But be it there, or elsewhere, it is certaine that in diuers places of Prouence, Langredoc, Dauphine, the principalitie of
Crenge, and aboue all the Countie of Venessaine and the Arshbish opricke of Auignon, (for the great com∣merce that they haue with the Italians) the Mulber∣ries and their seruice are at this present verie well knowne, there also the handling of the silke appea∣reth in great beautie; where continually increaseth an earnest desire to plant Mulberries, for the experi∣mented commoditie which comes of them. In sūme, there the Mulberry is held for the most assured pennie falling into the purse. At Toures this busines is already receiued with great profit and applause; and certaine yeeres since hath begun to manifest it selfe at Caen in low Normandy; yet vnknowne to the Silk wil come faire & good throughout al this Realme, a few places excepted.rest of this kingdome, through the carelesse retch∣lesnesse of the inhabitants, and to the great shame, almost of all these prouinces, seeing that in them the Mulberrie, and Silk-worme may liue and profit. For the affection I beare to the publike, I haue in the beginning of the yeere a thousand fiue hundred eightie nine caused to bee printed a particular Trea∣tise of this foode and norture, intituled, The gathe∣ring of the Silke, and addressed it to those of the com∣mon Counsell of the citie of Paris, to the end that thereby their people might be sufficiently stirred vp, to draw from the entrailes and bowels of their landes, the rich treasure of silke therein hidden. By this meanes, bringing to light the millions of gold inclosed and locked vp: and by such riches to fi∣nish the honor of their city, with this last of her or∣naments, abounding aboue the rest in all sorts of ri∣ches. Amongst the pleasant places of the void fields of Paris, I haue marked Madril, and Vicenes wood,
royall mansions, and very capable to receiue and no∣rish three hundred thousand Mulberries, for the largenes and qualitie of their grounds, and facultie of the aire, the leaues of such trees in their times, may bee happily and profitablie employed; The appa∣rence of which is great, to draw from thence abun∣dance of silke, for the publike commodity, and par∣ticular profit of the citie of Paris, when by dressing of the silke, it shall nourish infinite numbers of peo∣ple of her proper inhabitants, and poore and misera∣ble folkes, which flocke thither from all the Prouin∣ces of the Realme. What places it desireth. Where the Vine groweth, there also will come the silke, an apparent demonstration, sufficiently verified by reiterated experiences, in diuers coun∣tries discordant of climats. Nay going farther, where the Mulberry only liues, without speaking of the Vine, the Silk-worme will not chuse but profit; as is knowne not long since, within the citie of Leiden in Holland, in the yeers a thousand fiue hundred ninety three, nintie foure and ninty fiue; where the Noble Duchesse of Ascot caused to be nourished Silk-worms with good successe, and of the silke which came of them, was made apparell, which her gentlewomen wore, with great wonder of those which saw it, be∣cause of the coldnes of the countrie. Histories record that in the time of the auncient Gaules, France brought forth no wine: behold now at this day a∣bundantly prouided of so exquisite a drinke, by dexterity of those which haue opportunly imploied their profitable curiosity. Many beasts and strange plants, cōsent to liue amongst vs with requisite care,
(which former times held impossible) the which e∣uery one notes almost euery where, without com∣ming to examples. I will not heere reckon vp the Orenge trees, Lymon trees, Pouncitron trees, and other precious trees, which are nourished in all aires and countries, though neuer so cold, seeing that in such curiositie unnes out great expence. The care of gathering the silke is not alike, the end of that is profit, not only particular delectation. For there is no heede at all to be taken for the Mul∣berries which as in the open field, it is onely for the little cattle that feares the cold, which would bee preserued from it. And what thing is easier to do then that, how cold soeuer the countrie bee, seeing the Silk-wormes are lodged in houses, and not a∣broad, and also in a season, not altogether cold but in the spring time, and part of the sommer? All the hindrance that can be here alleaged, is, that the ga∣thering the silke will bee more late then in a south countrie: what importeth that, so one hath abun∣dance of good and fine silke, if one reapes not in the north parts in May and Iune, as they doe in Lan∣guedoc and Prouence, if they doe it in Iuly and Au∣gust? In like manner, wee want no store of good wine in France, though our vintage be not so soone as in hotter countries. The Mulberries haue fore∣gone the knowledge of nourishing the Wormes, as I haue saide, in attending the which, many vpon hearesaie, were constrained in vaine to nourish Silk-wormes, & haue discredited such husbandry, estee∣ming this cattell can profit but in places where they hauebeen of long time naturalizde, whereby, with
impatience haue extirped and puld vp the Mulber∣ries as vnprofitable trees, which before, and at the first report of their worth, they had planted with great affection. But those which constantly haue attended the seasons, are proued better husbands, and abundantly prouided of Mulberry leaues, then, when the knowledge to guide and conduct this creature is knowne: an example which is marked at Nismes, & in many other places of Languedoc, seruing for instruction of those which at this day wil delight in so profitable an husbandry: the which to their contētment they shal find in these discourses, assem∣bled the Sciēces, both to dresse the trees, and nourish the creatures: whereby they shall be deliuered from the trouble of a languishing attempt, and the hazard of ill feeding the Wormes. Silke brought first into the heart of Frāce by the King. The King right well knowing these things, by the discourse which he commanded me to make for him on this subiect, the yeere a thousand fiue hun∣dred ninety eight, resolued to haue white Mulberrie trees brought vp in all the gardens of his houses. And for this effect, in the yeere following that his Maiesty went the voyage of Sauoy, sēt into Prouence, Languedoc, and Viuares▪ Monsieur de Burdeaux, Baron of Colences, generall Surueyor of the gardens of France, a Lord accomplisht with all rare vertues▪ and by this same way the King honored mee to write vnto me, to imploy me for recouery of the foresaid plants; to which I gaue such diligence, that by the beginning of the yeere 1601, there was brought to Paris to the number betweene fifteene and twentie thousand. The which were planted in diuers places
in the gardens of Tuilleries, where they are happily sprung vp. And his Maiestie not willing that such treasures should remaine any longer thrust together in certaine corners of his realme, but that his people should vniuersally relish them, adding to the riches of the peace, which by his meanes and the celestiall fauour, all France most quietly enioyeth, hath or∣dayned by the Commissioners already deputed by his Maiestie for the generall commerce, should ad∣uise for the most easiest dispatches that might bee possible, to furnish his kingdome with Mulberries, to the end to gather silke from them; and in going on to establish the handiworke. Vpon which, and following his Maiesties will, after good and mature deliberation, contracts were passed with the mer∣chants vpon this subiect, at Paris the fourteenth of October and the third of December a thousand sixe hundreth and two, confirmed authorised, and ratifi∣ed by Letters Patents of his Maiestie, contayning the furnishing of the said Mulberries in the foure ge∣neralities of Paris, Orleans, Toures, and Lion. Also of a certaine quantity of seede or graine of the said trees, to be dispersed by the elections of the said Generali∣ties. And for so much more to accelerate and ad∣uance the said enterprise, and to make knowne and diuulge the facilitie of this worke, his Maiestie cau∣sed expressely to be builded a great house at the end of his garden of Tuilleries at Paris, furnished with all necessaries, as wel for feeding the Wormes, as for the first works of the silke: enioyning furthermore, that all the leaues that mought be found, as well of white, as black Mulberries, already planted in diuers
places of the said generalities, should be taken by the expertests for this deputed, and employed to the nourishing of the Wormes the said yeere, to the end to giue generall notice that the temperature of the aire, and francknesse of the soyle are more then suffi∣cient to bring forth silke, in like or better force, lustre, and goodnesse than that which we haue ac∣customed to receiue with great expence, from pro∣uinces the most farthest off. All which things haue so easily sprung out through the grace of God, and the good successe of our Prince, for whom thehea∣uens haue reserued all the most excellent inuentions of our age, that wee must no more doubt, but with∣in short space, by the cōtinuation of his thrice excel∣lent beginnings, France shall see it selfe redeemed from the value of more then foure millions of gold, that euery yeere goeth out for furniture of stuffes compounded of this substance, or of the matter it selfe, to the end to worke it in this kingdome. Be∣hold the beginning of the introduction of silke into the heart of France, where the example of his Maie∣stie hath been ioyned to his commaundements with great efficacie, for the good of his people. Into Germa∣ny by the Duke of Wit∣tenberge. And as by commendable emulation, worthie Sci∣ences neuer rest in one only place, but passe euer for∣warder in the spirits of vertuous personages, it is come to passe not long since, that Frederick Duke of Witenberg, a Prince meriting all praise, hath establish∣ed in his territories, both the feeding of the Silk-wormes, and the handling of such matter. The suc∣cesse whereof hath been so fortunate in the begin∣nings, that those haue been constrained to confesse
the enterprise to bee profitable, which before con∣demned the counsell of it, builded vpon the coldnes of the countrey of Germanie. The Worme brings forth Silke. But seeing that the silke comes directly from the Worme, which vomits forth all the silke; and the Worme proceeds from the graine, the which is kept ten moneths of the yeere, as a dead thing, taking life againe in his season. The worme is nourished of the leafe of the Mulberrie, the onely victuall of this creature, which liuing no longer then sixe, seuen, or eight weekes, more or lesse, according to the coun∣trey and constitution of the yeere (the heate short∣ning his life, and on the contrarie the cold lengthe∣ning it) within this little while, by the silke which he leaues vs▪ he paieth largely the expēce of his feeding. As the nations are sundrie which keepe him, so is he named diuersly. The Greekes and Latins haue called him Bombyx: and at this day in Italy, Caualieri, and Bachi; and in Spaine, Glauor: in France, Vers-a-soye; in Languedoc, Prouence and there abouts, Magniaux. What earth and what manuring the Mulberrie desireth, what seede of wormes is to be chosen, what lodging, and what handling the beast requireth, which comes of those, what is his bearing and vse, shall bee shewed hereafter. By which discourses, shall cleerely appeare the riches of this foode: and that the land imployed to such husbandrie, brings more mony in lesse time, than by other fruits which may bee planted on it, at least, whereof one may make any account. An audit of the expence, and the com∣ming in of this feeding. Commonly, a thousand pounds of the leaues of Mulberries being ten hundred waight, is sufficient
to satisfie and feede an ounce of the seede of Silk-wormes; and the ounce of graine, makes fiue, or sixe pounds of silke; euery pound being worth two or three crownes, and more; wherefore ten or twelue crownes come of ten hundred waite of leaues: the which quantitie twentie, or fiue and twentie trees of a meane sise will alwaies bring forth; yea a much lesse number wil suffice them, if they be old trees and great, as there are in many places, as neere Auignon, being so ample and abundant in armes and bran∣ches, that one tree will furnish with sufficient leaues to feede an ounce of seede. But because such trees so qualified are very rare, there is no certain account to be made. For the cost of the affaire, the fourth of the totall is taken: so there remaines three parts of liquid reuenew, which makes seuen crownes and a halfe, or nine crownes, that twentie, or fiue and twentie Mulberries will bring euery yeere. I con∣fesse that alwaies an ounce of seede doth not make fiue or sixe pound of silke, for sometimes it makes almost nothing; when by the infelicitie and vnlucki∣nesse of the season the leafe being ill qualified, by vnholsome nourishment, causeth diuers mala∣dies in the Wormes, when the pest is rife amongst this cattell; or when their stages are not made ve∣rie firme where the Wormes are lodged, falling vpō them are surely killed, or when by other accidents they die. But likewise it is a thing confessed of all those which exercise themselues to this foode, that such a yeere happens, when an ounce of feede will arise to make ten pound of silke and more: and that is then when the race of the creature, his
lodging, his foode, the time, the hand of the go∣uernour, doe acccord and agreee for the good of this household. And who knowes not that corne, wine, fruits of trees, and cattell, of ten times faile by tempests, drowthes, humidities, & other excesses of the yeere? And who would desist from tilling and sowing the ground, or who would stub vp his Vines and trees, or casshier the food of this little beast, for their fayling in some yeer? There is none to be foūd so brainlesse and ill aduised. It shall appeare hereafter that by the gouernment of this creature there can be nothing raised without curiositie, diligence, and expence: For the which things many despise this houshold, as fantastique, painefull, and chargeable. But they deceiue themselues, because they consider not, that for moderate hire, one shall finde people now sufficient exactly vnderstanding this art, which will vndergoe the charge of all that which depends vpon it. Of gathering the leaues. And for to particularise the expences, I may say, that an hundreth or sixskore gatherers, whereof three quarters, are women, or boyes▪ are sufficient to gather all the leaues necessarie to feed ten ounces of the seed of the Wormes, and to bring them into the place of the cattell, the Mulberries being not farre distant from the house as is requisit. To the payment of which worke for the qualitie of the persons, ari∣seth not to much mony. For it is in victuals that the most is consumed. But if the feeding of the leafe∣gatherers trouble you; for money only you may be supplied with their seruice by the day, or by the
gathering, according to the order of many cities where such traffique is vsed. The wages of the Gouer∣nour. Touching the gouernour, his wages are cōmonly two, three, or foure crowns a moneth, besides his di∣et: and his charge is to gouerne the Wormes, and to hatch them from their seede euen till their silke bee made; that is to say, to render it wound vp▪ One only man will gouerne so many Wormes as you wil, pro∣uided hee bee assisted: the which will be done with folke of little price, seeing all sorts of persons, men and women are capable of it. Touching the seed. As for the feed of the Wormes, you are not to rec∣ken vp that which they haue cost you, because they will restore you enough euery yeere in renuing thē, for the conseruation of the graine. But here will lie such expence in the rancke of that made in the buy∣ing of bords and tables, for the skaffolds, as also for the making fit the lodging: these things are to be or∣dained for the ground-worke of this reuenue being durable, & without consuming, at the least but very little. And although it is requisit to haue euery yeere some small quantity of new seed, to continue a good race, as shall be said, yet is there for that no more ex∣pence, seeing that of the sale of the seed, which you shall reserue, you may buy of another for your pur∣pose. Vpon which discourses making your account, you shall find that much better cheape you shall keep the Wormes comming of ten ounces of grain, then fiue and twenty or thirty sheepe: for the which, yea for lesse number, you must keepe a shepheard all
the yeere▪ which are three hundred sixtie fiue daies. So by that you euidently see how much the expen∣ces of one cattell differs from the other: And by this reckoning, which of the two makes more reue∣nue, though that by vniuersall iudgement the yeel∣ding of sheepe is very profitable. And doubt not, but that Cato in his answeres touching feeding, for to become rich, had meant it of the Silke-worme, if This feeding hindereth no worke of the ground.hee had had the knowledge of it. The feeding of Silke-wormes is likewise very commendable, be∣cause they hinder not any worke of the fields; com∣ming in the moneths of Aprill and May, when they haue no other occupation to call them from it. Gi∣uing such backwardnes, a meane for the master ea∣sily to find sufficient people to serue this turne: the which in this time hauing no other busines, are very easie to be had, to get their liuing, and some piece of money, to come forth out of the backe season of the yeere; wherby the nourishing of this cattell is made more easie, by them only contemned, which know not how much the ell is worth: But for the rest, the licorishnesse of the coyne, that they drawe from it (without losse of their other husbandrie, but as ca∣suall accompts) affects them continually, to plant new Mulberrie trees, with augmentation of the number, in like sort to augment their reuenue. Of the Mul∣berrie trees. The Mulberry trees being the chiefest foundati∣on of this reuee, that shall be the first whereat you shall leuell, for to plant so great a quantitie, and so soone, that in a short time they may giue you con∣tentment. The which you cannot hope of a small number while they are young, for the little leafe-age
which they render, till they are come to a meane growth. But to attend while the Mulberries haue reacht their perfect greatnes, and not till then to dis∣leaue them, to serue in this purpose, would bee to passe your time without tasting the sweetnes of this reuenue. Wherfore it is necessary to haue abūdance of these trees, to the end that of many little ones, you may draw as many leaues, as from a few great ones. So without much tarrying after their planting, you shall reape pleasure and profit within a few yeeres. Such a great quantitie of Mulberries may be limited to two or three thousand trees; a lesse number, I thinke the master of the worke ought not to enter∣prise this busines withall: because here is a question of the profit, which cannot grow but of a sufficient number of trees. For the particular nature of the worke, it is necessary here to employ it in a great vo∣lume, otherwise the play wil not be worthy the can∣dle; that being for women, which for pleasure nou∣rish some few of this creature. Yet the master of the worke shall not stay heere in so faire a way, but shall augment alwaies his Mulberrie yard, therto adding euery yeere certaine hundreds of Mulberrie trees, for that at the length, plentiously abounding in leaues, he may haue wherwith to nourish great quā∣titie of Wormes; and the rest also for the succour of his trees, whereof a part shall rest, as shall be demon∣strated in these discourses following. The 7. booke, 7. chapter of Husbandrie. Of the order requisite to plant, and bring vp the Mulberries, is not heere a question to speake of, else∣where the Science being shewed: but very well to represent the obseruations necessary for their scitua∣tion
and entertainement; that the trees may be con∣ueniently lodged and gouerned, to endure long in seruice. For not taking good heed, within a little time they wil faile, as waxing old in their first youth. These trees are so easie to take roote, that wheresoe∣uer it please you, you may bring them vp: but with much more aduancement, they will grow in a fatte and moyst ground, then in a leane and dry. For the quantitie of the leaues, it is to be desired, to plant the trees in a good soile, but not for the quality; because that the leafe neuer comes forth so fruitfully out of the fat earth as out of the leane (hauing that of com∣mon with the Vines) whereof the most exquisite grow in a light molde, so that that land there brings a grosse and fulsome leafe, and this here a delicate and sauorous; likewise of the nurture of this latter leafe, the Wormes commonly make a good end; the which happens very rarely of the other, yet that The fifth place for good and wholesome leaues.is by the meeting of a kindly season. The leaues of Mulberries will be well qualified as appertaineth, if you plant them in a leane place, & far from springs of water, prouided that they he exposed to the Sun, for with the Vines, the Mulberries hate a watrish and shadowie situation: in some there will bee the most assured foode, where thevines grow best. And though that the Vine, & the Mulberries, to compare them together, brings forth more in a strong ground then in a feeble; yet so it is that the little of their bearing being delicate, is more to bee prized then the abundance of that which is grosse. Adding, that touching this cattell here, one cannot abuse nor deceiue him in giuing him meate, contrary
to his nature, for either he will refuse to eate it, or ea∣ting of it will neuer doe well. And this his delicate∣nesse, turnes to the profit of his master, which im∣ployes his leane grounds in Mulberries, and by con∣sequent occupies not his fertill plow-lands, which remaine to him francke, and not charged with these trees: of which the importunitie is very great oppressing by the rootes and branches, almost all sorts of seede which can be sowed neere them. But to thinke also to plant Mulberries in a base and infer∣till ground, that should be a falling into extremitie, grossely deceiuing ones selfe, for the little growth they will make although they take there; their tar∣ditie giuing you cause enough to repent you of this Where to plantthe Mul∣berrie.counsell. These shall be then the places where you shall edifie your Mulberries, which you shall iudge proper for the vine; that is to wit, in a soyle of a meane goodnes rather drie then moyst, light then heauie, sandy then clayie. Such a ground will beare leaues to your desire, and in a meane quanti∣tie whereby you shall haue sufficient, by the way of numbers of trees, amplifying them as hath been said. How to dis∣pose the Mul∣berries for woodes in ranckes. Frō foure to foure fathoms, or frō fiue to fiue, in al pathes to the line, you shall plante the Mulberries if you wil make forrests of them & desiring to dispose thē by ranks at the borders of your plough lands, or about the sides of other possessions; they may be plā∣ted somewhat neerer together without restraining thē too much: the which cannot be done without great losse to the trees: one may very well amplifie the distance, as much as one will, for the Mulberries
cānot be set too far a sunder, seeing the apparēt profit that the aire, the Sun, & the amplitude of the groūds, aides to the growing great of the trees, and good∣nesse of the leaues. But for that, the onely sides and By allies.borders of arable lands, Vineyardes & other parts of a demeanes moderately large, doe not suffice to re∣ceiue a great number of Mulberries requisit for a∣bundance of food: and that elsewhere, the leaues of the trees which are within the thickets, is not so good as those about, because they neither haue sun nor windes at libertie. A meane between these two extreames hath been found, conueniently to plant the Mulberries, for the profit of their leaues, and without hindering the tillage of good lands; that is, to plant the Mulberries amongst the lands, in double racks equally distant two fathomes and a halfe, being of like measure espaced one tree from an other, the two rancks making one alley, and to dis∣pose the allees in length and crosse the field, inter∣crossing one another, leauing great square plots emp∣tie, euery one cōteyning an acre, or more if one wil, there to sow corne, which will bee reaped without being trowden downe by the gatherers of the leaues: But these will be the allies, which onely will suffer the treading downe, where for their small oc∣cupation of ground, the losse of the corne will not be great. It will likewise be necessarie to plant the trees in such sort, that they be not one right against the other, to the end not to enterpresse, rather that he of one ranke be set against the emptie place of the other, by that they will haue aire enough to grow flourishngly by the aide of the Sun, which will re∣maine
free for them on the sides of the great squares. In the which, not onely may bee commodiously sowne corne, but also planted vines where they will profit; being not there too much cloyed with the shaddow of the trees, yea spread with pastures, ha∣uing but giuen to the trees 4 or 5 yeres, for to roote. For by the manner of the parted land, of the allies, well tilled, and sometimes dunged the Mulberries will profit enough. For the hard turfe of the pasture cannot much hurt them, seeing it ioyneth but on one side. So shall the Mulberrie-yard bee directed, with much profit for the good of the leaues, and without any thing hindring the demeanes; which so furnished with Mulberries will remaine most pleasant to behold, so will they spread and amplifie, so much the better, the more often the master shall visit his land, as to that he shall bee stirred vp by the easie walks in these faire allies, in which, if it seemeth him good, he shal sowe some graines, as oats or field pease, which will alwaies pay for tillage of the ground. The sorts of the Mulber∣ries. There are two races of Mulberries discerned by these words, blacke and white, discordant in wood, leafe and fruite: hauing neuerthelesse that in com∣mon to spring late, the dangers of the coldes being past, and of their leaues to nourish the Silk-worme. One sees but one sort of the blacke Mulberries the woode whereof is solid and strong, the leafe large and rude in the handling, the fruit blacke, great, and Three colors of fruit of white Mul∣berries.good to eate. But of the white, there is manifestly knowne three species, or sorts, distinguished by the onely colour of the fruit, which is white, blacke, and
red, so separately brought forth by diuers trees, bea∣ring all neuerthelesse the name of white. This fruit is little disagreeable of taste, for his flashie sweetnes, whereby it is not edable by others then by women which haue lost their relish, children, and poore peo∣ple in time of famine. For the rest they resemble all three one another, discording nothing by them∣selues; neither in leaues which they bring forth of a meane greatnes and a smooth feeling: nor in wood, being yellow within, as that of the blacke Mul∣berry, and almost as firme, by reason whereof all these Mulberries are proper and fit for Ioyners worke. The leafe comming of the blacke Mulber∣ries, The silke takes his qua∣lity of the leafe.makes the silke grosse, strong, and heauie: on the contrarie that of the white, fine, weake, and light: so different through diuersitie of the nature of the leaues, wherwith the Wormes are nourished, which they yeeld of their worke. For which many desi∣ring to compound these things in hope of profite, feed the Wormes with two sorts of meates, by di∣stinction of times; that is to say at the beginning, with white leaues, to haue the silke fine; and in the ende with blacke to fortifie it, and make it weigh. In which alwaies they meete not: sometimes the changing of the meate, as of the delicate, into grosse, being not agreeable to the Wormes which are importuned and cloyed with it. Nor shall it be to purpose for the grosse founding which one would giue to the silke, holding a contrarie way, to begin by the blacke leafe and ende by the white. So such mingling of meates is not receiued in the great feedings of the Silke-wormes, but only where
the leafe of the white Mulberrie is rare, inuented for necessitie. For the most assured, it shall be all of one victell, wherewith we will nourish our Wormes, and that of the most profitable, which yeeldes to silke; the which how much the more fine it is, so much the more prized, and in the ensuing so much more money it giueth, the end & period of this bu∣sines. And yet though that the white leafe makes the silke feeble and light, you must not for that set it behind the blacke: seeing the same discords not so much in his qualities from that comming of the blacke leafe, but that there remaines force enough for the most exquisite workes, and weight suffici∣ent to bring in reasonable summes. This is in com∣parison of that silke there, that this is held light and weake: such being the difference betweene grosse and subtill things. Neuerthelesse one must not be so scrupulous, as vtterly to reiect the blacke Mulberries for the silke, but only for the mingling of the food, it being not permitted in the nourishing of them, but by constraint, as I haue saide. Touching that which remaines, there are countries where they are very profitable for this busines: as in diuers places of Lumbardie, and hitherwards in Anduze, and Alez, and in other places towards the Seuenes of Languedoc, where great profit is made of the silke which comes of the blacke Mulberries. And although that such sorts of silke for the grosenes, be but of little price, in respect of the other, yet leaueth it not for that, but to bring in a good reuenue, considering the quantitie. Iointly that for the sale, it is found necessary, though it be course, in many works in which it is imployed.
The white Mulberries grow faster thē the black. If your land be already planted with blacke Mul∣berries, keep you there without affecting your selfe to accompany them with white, for the reason allea∣ged: but being a question to begin the husbandrie, hauing not any Mulberries, of one sort, nor other, preferring the better before the good; you shall al∣waies chuse the white for your Mulberrie-yard. In which it seemes that nature her selfe incites vs by the fore growing, that she hath giuen to the white Mul∣berrie beyond the blacke: it being an assured thing that the white Mulberries do more easilie take, and grow then the black, aduancing more in two yeeres, then the other in sixe. Besides which commoditie, the branches which by that speedy shoot they bring forth, is cut at times, as wood, augmenting the reue∣nue of such trees. How to chuse the best kind of Mulberries. Amōgst the white Mulberries yet there is choise: By the searching out of some, it hath been found that the leaues comming of the white Mulberrie, bearing the blacke berries are better then any o∣ther. Of which curiositie making vse, we will furnish our Mulberrie-yard, if it bee possible, only with the Mulberries of such sort, to the intent that in our nurture, nothing be wanting. Neuerthelesse as the humors of men are diuers, some hold that the leaues of the trees bearing the white Mulberries, are the best: prouing their opinion by the poullen and swine, which neuer delite in the fruite of the Mulberrie trees bearing red and blacke berries, but through want of others, by that deeming them most delicate. Aboue all be sure to banish from your Mul∣berrie-yard the leaues too much indented, for be∣sides
that, it is an apparent signe of small substance, it abounds not so much in food, as that which hath To graft those Mulberries which haue need.lesse nickes. Wherefore the remedie is to inoculate such trees in the budde or scutchion hauing need of such freedome, whence the profit which comes of it is great for this food; seeing that by this meanes, the little of the naughty and wretched leaues, may bee conuerted into abundance of substantiall and good, with as much aduantage, to change in orchards, by like arte the sauage and wilde fruits, into manured and good, a notable article and point for this hus∣bandrie. This infrāchising may be practised to your wish in Mulberries of all ages, young and old, in those here, on their new shoots of the precedent yeere, the trees hauing bin then poled (or without so much delaying, to haue dissheaded them in the moneth of March, & Iune following to graft them) and in those there vpon the smallest trees of the nurserie. To graft these trees in their tender youth is much to be prized, for the aduātage to be had in ma∣king the Mulberry ground entirely affranchised. For prouiding that certain hūdreds of trees may be graf∣ted, it sufficeth once for all, without constraint to returne backe againe; so that the nursery be alwaies kept full; the which is done by planting the bran∣ches comming frō the grafts, of the which so many trees wil grow vp, as there are braunches couched in the ground, and of those afterwards others com∣ming forth, are of the same planted infinitely; from which, the trees comming of them for euer are fur∣nisht with excellent leaues, sweet and great: and by consequent exempt from all wildnesse; exquisite
and abundant in nourishment. See what places and trees you are to chuse for your Mulberry yardes, to the end to haue abundance of good silke. To gather the leaues for to be giuen to the Wormes. For the order which one is to hold in gathering the mulberry leaues, for the victuales of these creatures, consisteth the second article of this work, for to make the trees of a perpetuall seruice. It is to be noted, that to plucke off the leaues bringes great damage to al trees, oftentimes euen causing them to dye: but seeing that the Mulberry is destined to that, it naturally supporteth such tempest better then a∣ny other plant: yet neuerthelesse you must goe to it very retentiuely, for to disleaue the Mulberrie inconsideratlie is the way to scorch them, for euer, to cause them miserably to die in languishment. Euery one confesseth that to gather the leaues with both hands, leafe after leafe, without touching the shoote, is the most assured way for conseruation of the trees; but yet the most expensiue, because of the great number of necessarie persons for such worke. For to spare cost, the vulgar proceedes in an other sort, which is in stripping of the leaues by handfuls, the which cannot be done but that often the bran∣ches are barked and sliued, whereby at the length the trees perish. And also this gathering corrupts and soyles the leaues, to the detriment of the Wormes, when in taking them after the fashion, as they vse to milke kine, one crushes them, as though one would make the ioyce come forth: and most oftentimes with vncleane handes, causing them to haue an ill smell and sauour. These losses may be preuented, if after the vses of
In cutting them off with sheeres. certaine places in Spaine, the leaues be gathered, by shearing of them from the trees with great taylers sheeres: the which cutting many stalkes at once, and that falling vpon sheetes spreed vnder the treee, the expence being moderate, as by being directly car∣ried to the little beasts, without any sorting, as neces∣sarily it behoueth to do before to imploy them, in separating that which is spoyled, from the good, and the young springs with it, which for their ten∣dernesse are hurtfull to the Wormes, seeing that in vsing the sheeres one spares the toppes of the trees, taking none but the well qualified leaues. Of this inuention one cannot indifferently be furnished e∣uery where, but only where the situation of the trees fauours the worke, fitly to spread the sheetes, recep∣tacles of the leaues, nor likewise in windy nor rayny times; the which is committed to the discretion of the worke-master, for to imploy it finding the commoditie. For want of which clipping one may draw the leaues the most gently that one can, and with the smallest detrimēt of the trees that may It behoueth their hands be washed be∣fore they ga∣ther the leaves.be possible; the gatherers of the leaues shall wash their hands before they touch them, and shall repose them in very cleane sackes, to the ende they may be preserued from all soyle. The trees suffer lesse when one clipes them, than The danger of the leaues which are not wel gouernedwhē one disleaues them otherwise: neuerthelesse al∣though one goes to it very vigilātly, it is alwaies with their losse, whereby at last they perish, pulling euery yeere the value of their leaues vnmeasurably, that their vigor decayes. The which is the principall cause that the keeping of the Wormes is not alwaies
of like yeelding, the one as others, seeing other then good leaues cannot succesfully nourish these crea∣tures. For that cannot bee good which comes of a tree ill gouerned in taking of the leaues, but on∣ly that tree which hauing been well handled du∣ring the precedent yeeres, remaineth vigorous. For so those deceiue themselues, which without taking neere heede to this, sinke themselues in this busines. From thence proceedes the most frequent defaults of this foode, and not of the nature of the worke as scrupulouslie, nay superstitiouslie and fanta∣stiquely many of the vulgar ignorants hold, that they cannot meete well two yeeres together for some hidden imperfection, that they hold to bee in this creature, that some giues without any rea∣son, taking for their lodging no heede to the things It shal be good to disleaue the trees but once in two yeeres.aforesaid. To the end therefore to assure this busi∣nes, for one which ought to haue preeminence, you shall aduise touching the Mulberries, in placing and gouerning them as I haue said. And going on farther, to haue so great a quantitie of these trees, if it be possible, that the only halfe may suffice for your foode, which shall bee disleaued while the o∣ther will make ready for the next yeere following. After the imitation of arable landes, enter changing euery yeere, the Mulberrie-yard diuided in two parts shall serue, and rest; whereby the trees will bee maintained in perfect state, abundantly to furnish with good leaues for many generations, as well for the trees not to be so much tormented in their bran∣ches as by this resting, there rootes will haue to bee tilled without expence, for that the cost of plowing
will arise from the corne which one sowes in that part of the resting ground (remayning from the an∣noyance of the Mulberries) the which onely one shall sow with corne, leauing the other vnsowen the yere of disleauing your Mulberries, so much the more easie to gather the leaues of the trees, without laying the corne; as without such order one should doe in treading it downe, by this meanes drawing the worthie yeelding both of the trees and ground.  which comes of it.Ouer and besides this notable commoditie there is ioyned, that then when by luckie foode the leaues ordained for the Wormes, want, as some times that happens with great displeasure and sorrow to see them perish through famine, the Wormes are hap∣pily succoured with the leaues which one takes of the trees that rest, here & there, in many trees and in diuers places, without damaging them in such quan∣tity as is requisit for the perfection of the enter∣prise: and also that vnder the Mulberries all sort of seedes can hardly thriue, for the hinderance of the rootes and branches of these trees, as hath been said; yet so it is that the losse will bee lesse, the lesse the corne being there is troden downe; as freed from such tempest, it will remaine which there shall be sowne in the manner aforesaid, the yeelding of which, although it be but little, will defray the til∣lage, whereby in this place you shall do that which you desire, that is, you shall keepe in good temper the rootes of your trees. What seed to sow vnder the Mulberries with smallest losse. Of all graines those which most constantly en∣dure the detriment of the Mulberries, are, oates and field pease, although one be constrained to tread
them down, for the gathering of the leaues, yet can∣not one doe them great hurt, by reason that the blades of these graines wil be then backwards, when the trees shall be disleaued, hauing not yet much growne, which also somewhat helps them, hauing pressed them to the earth; a thing which cannot be donne to wheate, rie, nor barley, by reason whereof one cannot sow them cōueniently in the Mulberry∣yard but by constraint. But to sow nothing at all in the Mulberrie-yard, and yet lesse, not to till the grounde, for the good of the Mulberries, would bee too expensiue; which will bee spared by the way a∣foresaid. To soyle these trees is likewise requisit; it is To soyle the Mulberries.to be vnderstood of those which by the leannesse of the ground remaine in languishment, the which by such handling, are helped to continue their seruice, the want of doing the which will cause them to faile The leaues of the old Mul∣berries are ve∣ry good.before their time. Experience shewes that the leaues of the old Mulberries, are more profitable & health∣full for the Wormes, than those of the young ones; prouided that they be not fallē into extreame decay, but retayning their ancient vigour, hauing yet some remainders of strength; communicating such quali∣tie with the Vine, which brings better wine, old, When the leaues of the young ones are good.then young. And as the Vine begins to beare good wine after the seauen or eight first yeeres of his plan∣ting; so likewise the Mulberries in the same age▪ open the gate to their assured reuenew, so that from thence euer after, one shall not faile to draw from them their hoped-for seruice. Many neuerthelesse at this day do not tarry till this terme; vsing without delay all sorts of leaues, euen of the youngest Mul∣berries,
being yet in the nurserie, before their replan∣ting. But it is with more vncertainty of a good issue than of that growing on trees already growen to perfection, according to the more common vsage. When and how to prune the trees. So soone after you shall haue bared the trees, of their leaues, you shall cause them to bee pru∣ned, in cutting off all that shall bee found broken and writhed with tempest of disleauing, to the end they may put foorth to shoote afresh, the which without that, they will neuer doe well, but languishingly. The last gatherers of the leaues shall bee then followed foote by foote, with a cou∣ple of men that shall so dresse the Mulberries, the which shall cut the dead wood, the disbarked bran∣ches writhed and shiuered: likewise the tops of all the others, in what part of the tree soeuer they be, a∣boue, or on the sides; for to constraine the trees to cloath themselues afresh, and of this new shoote to bring forth for the next yeere after abundance of leaues, tender and delicate. And whether it be in ga∣thering the leaues, or in pruning the trees, it beho∣ueth you to be carefull to bare them entirely, with∣out leauing them any leaues: for feare to turne back their liberall new spring an obseruation; that practise hath taught a little while since, against the custome, which was, not to touch the shoote, thinking by that to giue growth to the trees; but the effect is seene cleane contrary. Vsing such order, they will not tar∣ry to spring out most vigorously, so that they will leafe againe in such sort, that within one moneth af∣ter, one will say there hath not been a leafe touched, and this shall bee done equally, that they may new
apparrell themselues againe without any deformity, that neuer agreeing with the old leaues. But with much more efficacie if the groūds be watered in this time then, for tempering the heate of the season with water to releeue the trees, and giue them new force, whereby it happens, that of their springing againe of leaues, neerly compared to their after crop, one may make a second nourishment of the Wormes with successe, as some fortunately haue attempted; the which neuerthelesse is not approued, not so much for to be very incertaine, such food happening in the greatest heates of the sommer, contrary to this crea∣ture; as for the assured losse of the trees, being not a∣ble to suffer double disleauing in one season. For be∣sides that our Wormes are neuer well disposed, fed with leaues growing in a waterish place, as I haue re∣lated, a distinction shall be made of the times of wa∣tering the Mulberries; to the end not to make them drinke, but after they are disleaued, not before; wher∣by, without doubt of naughtinesse, the leaues will yeeld themselues well qualified. Vnder such consi∣deration you shall employ the benefit of the water during sommer, by that causing so much succour to your trees, after their great trauaile, as in the drought all sorts of plants finde comfortable the opportune watering, a particular obseruation for the South countries, not for others which neuer almost water. The meanes to gather the leaues, the raine falling on hem or threatnng. The raines happening on the course of this food, strangely hinder the Wormes, as if they chance to∣wards the end of their life, then when they are in the greatest force of deuouring: for that the wette leaues do breed them dangerous diseases. The most
common remedie for that, is to make prouision of leaues for two or three daies, perceiuing the time to be giuent to rayne, for it is as well kept good, proui∣ded that one laies it in a neate place, fresh ayred, and for to preserue it from getting of heates, oftentimes a day turning it vpside downe. And although that the rayne presse not, yet what faire weather euer be, one ought neuer to remaine without leaues: not so much for feare to haue need, as for the quality of the victual, in so much that it is better being a little kept, as twelue or fifteene houres before it bee gi∣uen to the creature, cōming directly from the trees. If the rayne pressing driues you backe from gathe∣ring so many leaues as you neede, make recourse to this short way, which is, to cut the branches of the Mulberries that you destine to bee dissheaded the next yeere: the which with all their boughes, you shall make to be carried into the house, where han∣ged as raisons vnder the bearers, planchers or other couertures in an ayrie place, as in barnes and hay∣lofts, being then almost emptie, their leaues will drie well and quickly; yea in the one and the other you shall find much more perfection, then by any other way whatsoeuer. For neither to winnow them with cloathes, nor to drie them at the fire, are not of such efficacie as is this meanes: by the which, besides that it winnes much time, because there needs nothing but certaine strokes with a hatchet, for to take all the leaues of a tree. Do not doubt that that will discou∣rage the Mulberries, but that on the contrary doth reioyce them, so quickly putting them to shoote forth more strongly, whereby they winne time; for
the ensuing yeere, such hastie cutting causing their great encrease of branches. In the which, although it seemeth that the hot season is cōtrary for such work, yet so it is, that experience manifests daily the nature of the Mulberries, yea of many other trees, to endure to be cut in the sommer. For the which commodity ioyned the sauing in this busines, resolue you not to cause to be gathered the leaues of your Mulberries in any other fashion that you shall deliberate to pole the first, keeping them for the raynie daies, as hath been said, or the time remaining faire, for the end of the food. The same reason hath place for the trees which you are resolued to prune, thē disbranching their superfluous boughes, when you shall see there is need of leaues, the time being raynie or not, as one does to dishead them. A thing which you shall find to come to good purpose, for the great spoyle of leaues that the Wormes make in that time, being then their greatest deuouring, attending that with moderate labour, and much facilitie, abundance of victual is furnisht for them. The winning of time is adioyned to this busines, because that the morning bestowed to this disleauing, (otherwise lost by rea∣son of the dewes, during the which, it is forbidden to touch the leaues,) for that the branches of the Mul∣berries cut with their boughes, being the after∣noone before carried into the house, are disleaued very earely the morning following, the which one bestowes in the worke, and that is done in tarrying till that by the Sun, or windes, the dewes be cleared from off the trees. To dishead the Mulber∣ries. All the iniurie that one can do to the Mulberries,
in disleauing them, is holpen by the cutting off their branches, (a remedie seruing almost for all the ma∣ladies In the 7. book 27. of husban∣drie.of the trees, as is said of the fruit trees) that is to be vnderstood, taking from them all vniuersally, pouling them or cutting off their heads, as one does willowes, wherby in small time they renew againe: for their branches grow great and strong, to serue as afore. Wherfore it is at the end of a certain time, that one lops the Mulberries, which is then when one sees them to consume by too much trauaile. The terme is not restrained to certaine yeeres, the only facultie of the earth ordaining these things, making them to put out, and bring forth againe more wood in one place than in another. Neuerthelesse one may say that almost euery where, from ten to ten, or from twelue to twelue yeeres, that wil be reasonable to practise, for the good of this affaire: and by this meanes, to loppe the Mulberrie-yard euery yeere of the tenth, or twelfth part of his trees. In dishedding the Mulberries, one shall leaue them long snagges, ouer-growing certaine feete of the forkednes of the trees, or otherwise, as it shall best accord with their capacitie: seruing themselues in this place with ve∣ry sharpe instruments, to the ende not to disbarke nor shatter the trees, and to make the cut very right, which shall bee aslope to cast off the annoyance of the raine. The time of this busines is euen as the lopping of other trees, that is, the winter to be pas∣sed, the sap beginning to enter (not before for the reasons alleadged elsewhere.) In a faire day, not in a windie, mistie, nor rainy; for the Mulberries shoo∣ting in like manner as other trees, yea so vigorouslie
as any other plant haue commonly the season of felling. When to lay the bill to them. But because in the Mulberries is considerable the lease, the chiefest of their reuenue, it is requisit to be vigilant to lose nothing, if it bee possible, the which one shall come vnto in delaying to cut them vntill May, or in the beginning of Iune, then when it behoueth to imploy the leaues: By this meanes, one hath seruice of the leaues the same yeere of the cutting of the trees: the which one cannot doe with∣out this backwardnesse. And although that for the disbranching of them in such season, the trees bring not forth that same yeere so great branches, as if one lopped them in the moneths of February or March, the time being a little shortned of their growing, it inportes not, seeing there is as much gotten for the yeere after: in the which such branches though they be but little, yet hauing won the aduantage, grow great merueilouslie, whereby the trees in a small time are amplie spread againe: yet that against the precepts of arte, constrained by necessitie, that one cuttes the trees in rainie weather and without regar∣ding the Moone, as is fit, they are of so free and good a disposition. What time of the Moone is to be obser∣ued. Touching the age of the moone it is handled di∣uersely according to the diuersitie of the groundes that gouernes such actions. By the heauenly influ∣ence the Mulberries pouled in the encrease of the moone, bringes forth their younge shootes long without spreading branches, and in the waine, short; with many little branches crossing the principalles. For to compose the things, (hauing election of the
time without constraint) we will dishead those of our Mulberries, being in a leane ground in the new Moone, and in the last quarter, planted in a fat ground. So those there will be furnished with new shootes, as long as the feeblenes of the groundes will permit them; and these here, through the force of the grounds, will conueniently regaine that, which to purpose they would not cut in the encrease, by reason that their spirie branches being not kept back by the little shoots, will lengthen too much, where∣by bending downe they will deforme the trees; those remaining emptie in the midst after the maner of palme trees, that being not to bee feared in the rest by reason of the leanenesse of the groundes, which neuer causeth thē to shoot out too abundant¦ly. By this meanes they will put themselues in wood againe, neuerthelesse some more then others, accor∣ding to the goodnes of the soile: but not any so slowlie, but that at the tenth yeere they will be capa∣ble to begin againe their accustomed seruice; pro∣uided It behooueth to plow the ground of the Mulberries.the grounds be tilled as appertaines. For in vaine one should trauaile exactly to entertaine the Mulberries by their branches if one makes not ac∣count of their rootes, whereby at the length they faile; as in such error those fall, which to spare the tillage, plante their Mulberries in meadowes, where they impaire. In which they deceiue themselues, because they consider not that the Mulberries left in vntilled grounds, cannot bring so many nor so good ieaues as those which are tilled. And although there are seene many faire Mulberrie trees in meadowes, the answer is, that the earth is fat, & in ensuing, if not
contrary, yet at the least, not at all good for the Wormes: or being leane, the trees will not dure long through lacke of tilling. The assured meanes In the vi. chapter the xxvii. booke of husbandrie.that there is to dresse a Mulberrie-yard, thick spread with boughes, and to keepe it without expence, vn∣till a reasonable greatnes to serue well, is represented hereafter in the discourse of the fruite trees; that is in planting the Mulberries in rankes by line and le∣uel, from foure to foure, or from fiue to fiue fathams; and in the same rankes to plant Vines amongst them, low, or propped according to the vsage of the countrey: the which by labour will bring their fruit without alteration, fifteene, or twentie yeeres; when being oppressed vnder the shaddow of the trees, they wil fal vnder the burthē: then one shal pul them vp, to leaue the place free for the trees, which will onely occupie it; and so one shall find to haue brought them vp for nothing. The which shall be to finish the discourse of the victuall of our little beast, for to make them their lodging. The lodging of the Silk∣wormes. It behoueth also to dresse a lodging for our Wormes with such commoditie, that they may ea∣sily▪ doe their worke, for to yeeld vs abundance of good silke. The which one should hope in vaine, lodging them in a place vnproper and contrarie to their nature: for as they cannot be deceiued in their foode, without manifest losse; no more can they suf∣fer an ill habitation. And as one must not enterprise to plant the vine, if he bee not forthwith prouided of cellers and vessels for the wine: so this would bee to no purpose, if one should plant the Mulberrie∣yard, without afterward, to giue quarter and place
to the Wormes. All such like habitation desire they, as men, that is, spacious, pleasant, wholesome, far from ill sents, dampes and humidities, warme in the cold time, and fresh in the hot; neere the founda∣tion, nor vnder the lathings of the couerings neere the tyles, one must not lodge the Silke-worme, be∣cause of the intemperatenes of these two cōtrarie si∣tuations, whereby the one may be too moyst, & the other too windie: too hot, & too cold, according to the seasons. Neuerthelesse that is to be borne withal, so that one can erect the lodging of the Wormes on one only stage neere the ground, prouided that the plot-forme be erected three or foure feete, for to a∣uoid dampes, and ouer that that there bee boords close ioyned, to the end the creatures may be kept aloofe from the tyles, the approch and neerenesse of which is alwaies hurtful vnto them, because that the windes and colds pierce through them, & the heate of the Sunne is there insupportable, when it lights The recko∣ning vp of the fitnes of the lodging for the Wormes.vpon them in his force. If for the capacity of your house, you can commodiously be fitted for roome to feede them in, it will be great ease to you, and you shall spare the cost to build new lodgings expressely for this: making your account that the Worms com∣ming of ten ounces of seede, will be nourisht at ease, within a haule of seuen fadomesin length, three in breadth & two in height; vpō which aduice you may groūd, for to dispose your house to such vse; or being to build it new, you may amplifie your edifice with some members: the which by this meanes will bee very wel represented, and wil be so much more con∣uenient, as for the little beasts you shall haue more
augemented it: when after hauing occupied it some small time, it will remaine free to you the rest of the yeere, to entertaine and receiue company. Their disposi∣tions. But let it bee within or without the house of the master, which desireth to nourish these creatures in, it is very requisite their chambers and haules be to be opened on both sides, opopsite one against ano∣ther, of the East to the West, or of the North to the South: to the intent, that the ayre and winds hauing free passage through them, may refresh the Worms, that then being ready to perfect their worke are vp∣on point to stifle, through the silke wherewith they are filled, and the great heate of the season. Taking heede neuerthelesse, that the windowes bee so well glased, or papered, that one may shut them in any o∣ther time, so properly and so well, that the coldes cannot enter, being as preiudiciall to the Wormes in their beginning, as the heates in their ending. These creatures also desiring to be in a light place, willingly not suffering the darke, from which they creep away seeking the light, the inner part of their lodging shall be pargeted and entirely whited, that the Rats may not eate through the slippery walles, leauing not there any chinckes, creuesses, nor holes, for Mise, Rats, Creckets nor other vermine, enemies to our Silk-wormes. The haules or chambers shall be Their moue∣ables.proportioned with tables necessary to rest on these creatures, the which one shall make of all sorts of wood; the best whereof is the most light, for his ea∣sie handling. Some preferre before boordes of any wood whatsoeuer, the tables made of reedes or canes, cleft or whole: not only for the ease of their
lightnesse, but also for the health of the cattel, which are fed vpon these canes, or hurdles made of them, so that there is a certain aire piercing through them, keeping them cheerefully and without offensiue heate. Vpon which it behoueth to distinguish pru∣dently, such ayre being not alwaies proper to the Wormes, but onely to be chosen at the end of their life for refreshing them. To that purpose also the wilde reedes and bulrishes of marish places and pooles may serue, yea rie straw, which is got for a How to set vp the skaffold to hold the Wormes.small price. In like manner, linnen, stretched with little tackes vpon light wood, is vsed with ease in this steed. Many pillers of carpenters work, directly squa∣red shal be perpendicularly erected frō the ground to the seeling to support the tables, bearers of our Wormes, the which shall bee set vpon little ioysts crossing the pillers, planted of equall distance on these pillers sixteene or eighteene inches one from another. The tables being so ranked in such mea∣sure, the Wormes wil be fitly serued. But the boords shall not bee of equall breadth, but one shall exceed the other foure fingers; the lowest next the floore, being the most largest; and the highest approach∣ing the seeling, the most narrowest, whereby the skaffold which shall bee composed of all to∣gether will bee made in the fashion of a pyramidis, to the great aduantage of the wormes, the which by such disposition shall bee preserued from ruine, when wandering by the edges of the tables, from one end of the skaffolds to the other, seeking a fit place to vomit their silke, they fall from aboue, downe vpon the floore, where they squat in peeces.
A losse which one neede not feare, the tables being in such sorte sitted, for each to reoeiue the Wormes, falling from his higher next to it, the which are not offēded at all through the little distance of one table to another. The breadth of the most lowest table, shall be limited euen to this proportion, that easily of one side a man with his hand may reach to the middle, for to tend the Wormes. As for the others, their deminishing will make easie the seruing them, by measure as one shall goe vp on high, and shall ap∣proach neer the seeling. Many of such skaffolds shall be erected in euery part, hall or chamber, after his capacitie, and in such manner, that any touch not the walles, for feare of rats: and likewise for to be able of all sides to giue victuals commodiouslie to the crea∣tures: betweene the which skaffolds one shall leaue way large enough, easily there to passe and repasse. One shall also take carefull heed, to make verie firme the skaffolds; to the ende that the Wormes growing great doe not cause some part to fall, (as heretofore that hath chaunced me with losse,) and that they doe not shake by the weight of the ladders which are set against them, going to visit the crea∣tures, but shall remaine assuredly firme vnto the end, for that cause sparing neither wood nor Iron. There are diuers sorts of ladders which are made for this seruice according to fansie. Some make boords about the skaffoldes, vpon the which one goes as by galleries, for to tend the Wormes, making them round about: one goes vp to them by little staires, appropriated to this. Others make high formes and long of light wood, so much the more easie to bee
remoued, as neede shall require. Others doe not vse any other touching this, but a common ladder. But what ladders, or mountings so euer they be, all are good; prouided, that they serue to this businesse, so that without too much paine, by them one may fitly goe to feede and visit the creatures. The graine of Silk-wormes. The end of these prouisions, is the silke, the which so much the better, and more abundant you shall haue, as the seede shall be better chosen. A common consideration with all sorts of sowings for the diffe∣rence that there is of seede, to seede. For what ought you to expect of bastard graine, but bastard silke, what good leaues soeuer that you haue, each thing bringing forth his like? With great curiositie thē let vs search the most profitable graine, reiecting that, the worth whereof is suspected; In the proofe consisteth the most sure knowledge of this seede, though there bee many directions to discerne the good, from the il. Amongst al the seeds of Wormes, whereof wee haue knowledge, till now, wee haue held that of Spaine, for the best, fructifying very well, through all the prouinces of this Realme, where they make a trade of this feeding. That of Calabria, since certaine yeeres, hath woon the repute, not so much for the goodnesse of the silke that it brings forth, as for the abundance that comes of the cod which is great, in respect of that of Spaine. And al∣though they both be hard, an assured signe of abun∣dance of matter, and by such reason one is to bee preferred before the other: the qualitie winning the prize, the seede of Spaine shall be held in the first rancke, in expecting that by reiterated proofes, wee
cannot reasonably set it behind any other. As for the graine which of long time is naturalized in the pro∣uinces of Languedoc, and those neighbouring parts, one must make no great account of it, neither for the finenes nor for the quantity of silke that it makes: for how exquisit soeuer the seede of silke Wormes is, transported from far in to such quarters, it doth not continue long in goodnesse, but degenerates at the end of certaine yeeres: the graine which is directlie brought from Spaine, the first yeere it doth not so well, as the three or foure yeeres following: the which being passed, it beginneth to decline in his goodnesse. In the graine it selfe, is also knowne of the changing by the time, and in his body, and in his colour. For comming directly from Spaine, it is little, of a darke tawny colour; and kept, waxeth great, and growes bright, till then, that at the terme of certaine yeeres, it becomes gray, as gray cloth. The graine of Silk-wormes of they Seuenes of Lan∣guedoc is so qualified, the which as well for their pro∣per natures, as for being feed with the leaues of blacke Mulberries, brings forth cods or bottoms great, and soft, by consequent smally furnisht with silke, of an orenge colour, or gold yellow, ma∣nifesting the grossenesse of the silke from the diffe∣rence of the fine comming of the Spanish seede, the Wormes of which haue been nourished with the leaues of white Mulberries, and the most part of bottoms are white, incarnadines, of the co∣lour of flesh. Behold the iudgement, that one can make of the knowledge of the goodnesse, of the seede of Spaine: the best of which will bee the
smallest and most darke of colour; prouided it be a∣liue and not child with cold: the which is proued on the naile, in all seedes of the Silk-wormes: ac∣coumpting for good, that which breaks in cracking, casting forth humor and moisture. The littlenesse of the graine of Spaine makes the number of Wormes, the which ioyned with the hardnesse of the bottoms cannot chuse but make abundance of silke, which for his finenes is of great request. Indif∣ferently all seede comming directly from Spaine is not such as you shall desire, there being countries in that kingdome better for this, some then other: and that the more honestly to make it vp, there go rather trusty, then deceitfull persons. Of the which parti∣cularities you shall take heede, to the end so much the more profitably to ende your feeding, as with Euery foure yeeres to change the seede.more art you shall haue begun it. Wherefore this article is notable, that after the imitation of good husbandmen, it is necessarie to change the seede e∣uery foure yeeres, or from other terme to other, ac∣cording to the reason of experienes. And for to doe that with lesse hazard, it shall bee fit to haue euery yeere, some ounces of new seed of Spaine, the which set apart, you shall conserue carefully, and so long as you shall finde, for the proouing, his worth to me∣rit. By which resolution your feeding will keepe a good course, and without confusion, maintained al∣waies in good order and estate. You must not fur∣nish your selfe with old seede for his infertilitie, that being of no worth which passes one yeere. And though that the keeping of the seede, of this creature be difficult, because that naturally of it selfe it hatch∣eth
in his season, yet so it is, that auarice hath so much gottē, that by deceitful inuentiō certaine impostures forcing nature, conserue the seed a long time with∣out hatching: when they cannot sell it in time they keep thē in little bottels of glasse, in a coole place, as within deepe wells, hung downe with cordes neere the water, during the great heates, so keeping them more then a yeere, to the losse of those which by it. Some before they put to hatch the graine of Silk-wormes, steepe them in the most exquisite wine To imbibe the seed in wine before you put them to hatch.they can get, Malmsie or other, finding by such proofe, that the good, as the most heauy, goes tothe bottome, and the naughtie for his lightnesse swimes aboue, by reason whereof it is reiected. After the good is taken out of the wine, it is set to drie in the sunne, or before the fire, laid vpon very cleane pa∣per, couered with white linnen, or smooth paper, to the end that too much heate hurt it not; after it is put to hatch. And not only serues such steeping to distinguish the good graine from the naughtie, but also to legitimate and fortifie the good, to make the Wormes come forth free and strong, and for to cause them to hatch almost all at once; according to the practise of hens egges, which for the same cause are plunged in water a little before that one puts them to hatch. A commoditie which one cannot hope for of the light graine, but to hatch late (or not at all) whereby the Wormes continue slow to all their workes, to hatch, to feede, to spin: yea sub∣iect to diseases, being not able to suffer any ac∣cident; but almost alwaies languishing, not onely dye they by little occasion, but infect the best qua∣lified
of their next neighbors. To which daunger he exposeth himselfe, that without distinctions min∣gles together the good seede with the ill. How to hatch the graine. To hatch this graine vnder the arme-pits, or be∣tweene womens paps, is not a profitable thing; not so much for feare of their floures as some thinke, as for the shaking it to and fro: which they cannot do withall, carrying the seed about them, but that they tumble and mingle it; happening at euery minute that the Wormes willing to come foorth of their egges, are misturned by one pase or step of them which carry the seed about them, ouerwhelming all one vpon another, to the losse of the creatures which are stifled in the throng, though but with their like. Setting this article the farthest off, it is most requi∣site to keepe curiously the seed during all the yeere, preparing in good time, easily to hatch them in the season. Hauing recouered them, either of your own, or elsewhere, you shall lodge them within boxes of wood well ioyned, garnished within with paper on the creasts, to the end that through them no seed go out; nor any dust, vermine, nor other offensiue thing enter in the box; but that the graine may remaine there neately. You shall put these boxes within chests, or elsewhere amongst cloathes, except lin∣nen, which because of the moystnes of such matter, is hurtfull to these, there to remaine vntill the season for to imploy them; and to the end that they feele not any molesting dampe, nor cold during such re∣maining, it is requisite continuing winter, to make fire in the chamber where these chests shall be: for being more hot then cold, the graine is there prepa∣red
afore-hād, as you desire; which it would not do, if after the order of some, one should keep it within viols of glasse, the coldnesse of which substance makes them to hatch late. These necessary obserua∣tions haue learned vs neuer to expose the seed of these Wormes (no more then the Wormes them∣selues) to the mercy of the colds: but to reserue it so together as one can from the humidity and frosts. For to do this effectually chancing to send for it in∣to Spaine, or elsewhere, it shall be done during sum∣mer: by this meanes, shunning the incommodities of Autumne and winter, it wil come to you wel qua∣lified, and very good if it be brought by land; by sea the thing being not without hazard, because of the foggie dampes, and other ill qualities that it hath, contrary for such seed, so as the losse of many, (with reason) makes vs to feare such danger. The long kee∣ping of the seed with you, helpes to naturalize it in your ayre, whereby it hatcheth better and rather then hauing not at all abid with you: wherefore it is requisite to furnish your selfe of seede imme∣diately after the gathering of the silke, if it may bee done, to doe it without any delaying; you must abstaine from visiting too often the graine of Wormes, especially the spring approaching, for feare that by such curiosity, one treades not a∣wrie to his losse. The time to put to hatch this graine cannot bee directly ascertaind, for that the season being forward or backward, entirely gouerns the worke; causing the shooting forth, or stay of the Mulberries, the only victual of these creatures. This In what time.shall be then the true point, that then when the Mul∣berries
begin to budde, not before, to the end the little cattle at their hatching may find meat readie to liue on, and of their owne age, (as the child of the milke of his mother) and not to be troubled through want of Mulberrie leaues; fearing to let them die for famine you shall feede them with the buddes of nettles, with young lettice, or with the leaues of ro∣ses, & like druggeries. But being fallen into such ne∣cessitie, the best shal be to serue them with the leaues of Elme, somewhat edable by the Wormes, by which they receiue succour, for some sympathy that it hath with that of the Mulberrie. Foreseeing which trouble afarre off, it shall be requisit to plant a certaine small number of Mulberries in the hottest place of a garden against some sunny bancke, and there by good dressing, dunging, and watering, to hast them to budde quickly, by such artificialnesse hastening his slow nature. And this shall bee for to shunne the losse of the little beasts, when being new∣ly hatched, the leaues of the Mulberries are vniuer∣sally spoyled by frostes or mistes happening vna∣wares (as that was seene in Languedoc, Prouence, and in those bordering places, these yeeres past) if one keepes such Mulberrie trees, purposely to this parti∣cular seruice, sheltred against the peruerse time, after the maner that the prudent gardner keepes his pre∣cious plants: the which Mulberrie trees preserued from such tempests will feede the small cattell, in attending while the others haue sprung forth. The danger of too hasty or slow hatching the egges. And as by too much hasting one falles into this danger and in consequence by famine in perill to lose the little beasts in their beginning, likewise to
delay the hatching of the Wormes, puts them to hazard of death in their ending, when by such backwardnesse their climing happens in a very hot time, contrarie to their nature, because that being then heated, through the silke wherwith they are fil∣led, they desire nothing but refreshing, easily to end their taske. Such difficulties are prouided for by the meanes of the hastened Mulberries, aboue mentio∣ned, the which furnishing timely leaues you shall in like maner hasten to hatch the Wormes, which they repay at the ende of their life, whereby they will re∣maine so much more assured, as you shall lesse feare their comming in the time of the great heates. The remaining colds of the winter being not so vnseaso∣nable at the beginning of the life of these Wormes, as the heates at the end of the same: for that in the coldes there is some remedy for the succoring of the Wormes, which is in keeping them in a very close place and warmed with embres, during the sinister times of cold; but against the heats other is not found than the fitnesse of the lodging, the one∣ly meanes to safegard these creatures from such an∣noyance. What time of the moone is proper for it. The course of the moone is also obserueable in this action; the Wormes desire to hatch & spin their silke during the increase of the Moone; for that they find themselues more able; than in her waine. But that cannot accord euery where nor in euery time, for the diuersities of regions, and seasons, hotter or colder, some then others, lengthening or abridging the life of these creatures. If you are in a place where the Wormes are eight weekes ere they worke, as
commonly they do in a place more cold then hot, or in a time extraordinarie chill, the thing will so fall out, that in like time of the Moone as they hatch, they will also spinne. Wherefore comming at the first quarter, they will be then spinning: but where through the benefit of the climat, their nourishmēt is more forwarded, as towards Auignon, & through∣out all her neighboring partes, being not farther re∣mote then fortie, or fiue and fortie daies: it is im∣possible so to dispose this affaire, for the inequalitie of the daies. Wherefore leauing the successe of the end in the hand of God, their nourishing shall be∣gin in the encrease of the Moone (if neuerthelesse the leaues of the Mulberries will permit it, which laies the foundation of this busines) for that the Wormes fortified in their beginning, by the influ∣ence of such a Planet, forthwith goe cheerefully on in augmenting it, ma king them to come fromthe second or third, vntill the fift or sixt day of the new Moone, the cluing of these creatures according to the last computation will happen towards the be∣ginning of the waine of the Moone, certaine daies after her ful, which hauing then force enough, com∣municates it sufficiently to the Wormes. To prepare the boxes be∣fore to hatch the Wormes. For to hatch the graine at the time named, you must remoue them from their first vessell, into boxes of wood, lined within with cotton or with fine tow pasted to them; after that the said cotton shall be co∣uered with a white paper, to the end to conteine the seede warmely and without losse: on the top of the seede one shall put a little bed of tow, and ouer that a paper thick pierced as a sieue, with little holes, eue∣rie
one capable for a graine of millet onely to passe through. Through the tow, and the pierced pa∣per the Wormes comming forth of their egges shal goe, afterwards hauing left the shels vnder the tow, they go to fasten at the leaues of the Mulberry, set to this purpose ouer the pierced paper, from whence being taken they are transported and lodged else∣where as shall be demonstrated. To keepe the boxes warme with the seed in them, and to visit them often to with∣draw the hat∣ched Worms. And to the end that that come so to passe as apper∣tayneth, it shall behoue you to helpe the Wormes to hatch in adding to their naturall heate this deuice of arte. One shall keepe continually the boxes within a bed, the curtaines close drawne betweene two fea∣therbeds, moderately heated with a warming pan euery two houres, without sparing the night, one shall visit them, for to withdraw the Wormes, by quantitie as they come. Such frequent visiting is necessarie, as well for that cause, as also to renue the heate of the bed, in warming it oftentimes, to the end To lodge thē in sieues and to keepe them warmely.to keepe the seed equally hot, for feare that by sloth∣fulnes, leauing thē there too chill, they should catch cold, to the ruine of the Wormes. From the boxes one shall take the new Wormes, for to ranke them in sieues, with paper at the bottoms, or other vessels appropriated to receiue them in their beginning, and for feare to hurt thē in remouing, asto that their tendernesse subiects them, one shall touch nothing but the leafe to which the Wormes being fastened They shall be vsed to the ayre by little and little.with that they shall be lifted vp & lodged in vessels. There they shall be held during certaine daies, whi∣lest which you shall by little and little accustome them to the aire, to the ende the violence of the
chaunge cause them not to perish. As on the con∣trarie they will by too much heate, if one aduises not to temper them by reason, going from degree to de∣gree, keeping them lesse warme one day then ano∣ther, by measure as they aduance in time, without re∣trograding, that is to say, not to bring them neerer to the heate, hauing begun to keepe them aloofe, for feare to parch or stifle them, vntill that age discharge They shal rest vpon beds, the curtaines be∣ing close drawne for certain daies.their gouernor of such paine. The sieues, great boxes or other receptacles, couered with linnen, garnisht at the bottoms with paper, shall bee put to rest vpon beds, with the curtaines drawne, for to shield these little creatures from the windes and coldes, till the foure or fiue first daies of their tender youth, from thence forward they shall be transported into a little chamber, hot and very close, out of the force of the winde, vpon perfect clean and neate tables couered Afterwards ta∣ken forth of the sieues in a warme cham∣ber laid vpon tables.with paper, there for to begin to hold their ranke. One shal lodge thē very neere one to another, to the end that so pressed with vnitie, they may conserue their naturall heate: that which they could not do, being a farre off in their beginning, vntill that, when they shall grow great, more ample lodging be giuen them. But it shall be vnder this necessarie obserua∣tion, Without con∣fusion of age or kind.not to mingle confusedly the wormes. It ra∣ther behooueth to distinguish them, by the times of their ages, for the importance of this foode, touching the ease, and the sparing. For if from the beginning this point hath been prouided with curiositie, as∣sembling the Wormes by the dayes of their com∣ming, without entermingling them together, one shall see them without disorder to agree together,
during their liues in all their workes: in eating, in sleeping, in spinning, with much pleasure, accompa∣nied with profit, for the abundance of silke which wil come of them, the aymeof this busines. Through want of which singularitie there will happen confu∣sion to your foode, the old Wormes neuer sorting with the young; the one desiring to sleepe while the other eate, and to eate when it is a question to spin: but with the aforesaid disposition the worke comes to a good issue. By such distinction the races are se∣paratly prescrued, as is most requisit; to furnish ones selfe with the sorts of this cattell, according to the o∣pinion, one shall take of their worth by the effect of their worke. In steed of sieues and great boxes, The Spanish Garbillos.which we vse in this turne, the Spaniards fits them∣selues with vessels which they call Garbillos, made of straw, osiers, rushes, or other light matter, which they plaster within with oxe dung, wherewith they make pargeting: which dried in the Sunne makes the ves∣selles to smell of a sauour agreeable to the Wormes, and sufficiently warme. The which qualities ioyned with the capacity of the vessels, makes them serue thē long enough. For that is till their third change, that they keep the Wormes there; framing these Garbillos so great, and furnishing themselues with such abun∣dant number, that it suffiseth to satisfie their purpose. A very fit lod∣ging for the Wormes in their first be∣ginning. For more ease, a lodging for the Wormes shall be expresly erected for to keep them ioynde together, neuerthelesse by distinct separations, vntill their se∣cond or third change, if one will: where they will be conserued warmely, & out of danger of Mice, Rats, dust and other iniuries, with more assurance than a∣ny where else. That is, after the manner of a great
presse or cubbord made with many stages distant one from another foure fingers, or halfe a foote, on which the little cattle shall be put, without any whit bruising them. These stages shall be as it were little planchers, composed either of light firre boords, or of some other proper for this, or of cleft reeds, or lōg straw, and set so fitly that one may separately draw them out and in at pleasure, in sliding them as tilles easily to visite & tend the small beasts. And they shal be pasted with oxe-dunge after the Spanish fashion, if one so desires it; seeing such curiosity hath been found profitable, to the end that nothing bee wan∣ting in the rearing vp of our Wormes. The lodging shall be compassed about with linnen cloath tackt to the doores, as paper windowes opening and shut∣ting of three sides; and before the formost doore a little window to giue vent shall be added; in shut∣ting of it at need to keep them so much the warmer, or in opening of it to giue them ayre as one will. So with much commodity the Wormes shal be lodged in their first time, which is then when they haue most need of it, passing in assurāce these gliding pa∣ses of their tender age, where many perish through want of good habitation: for being fortified with time, they shall be taken from thence, and remoued into more spacious lodging, as shall be shewed. To cause them to come with∣in few daies is necessary. It is to be desired that the Wormes come forth all within foure or fiue daies distance from the first hat∣ching vntill the last▪ those neuer lightly making good end which tarry longer, but miserable and slug∣gish end their life in languish oftentimes without profit. Wherefore it is, for that that one prouokes
the seed, warming it with curious diligence, as hath been shewed: vsing which order, little seed remaines vnhatched. You shall not then make any account of the graine which shal be remaining in the said boxes after the said terme, nor of the Wormes likewise that shall be so backward: but rather reiect all that as vn∣profitable. Such hatching of a company is one of the most notablest points of this busines, whereby final∣ly with sauing, the profit issues according to the pro∣iect, because that these creatures taking life almost in the same day, are more easily handled than if they were of diuers ages. I haue also said that they suffer This creature feares the cold and the heate.much by the colds, and by the heats in all their ages: for in their youth, the cold troubles them strangely, hauing great power ouer them, being the most weak and delicate cattell which is fed: and in age the heat killes them. When in their greatest force, you finde them bigge and vnwealdy, through the silke where∣with they are filled, which constraines them to seeke fresh ayre. By contrary remedies one prouides for The remedies.these things: but with lesse difficultie one dresses the Wormes in the cold, than in the heate, that is, in holing them straightly in the beginning, and large∣ly at the end, by little and little according to their age inlarging them; finally to put them for altoge∣ther at their ease on the skaffolds. In the meane while imploying to purpose according to accidents, the warmings by the ayde of the fire, and the re∣freshings by opening of the windowes of the house. They haue foure naturall and ordinary diseases. The Silk-wormes during their life change foure times their skins, (as Serpēts do once a yeere) which
causeth them so many maladies; during which, they eate not at all, but vnmoueable they do nothing but sleepe, passing so their ill. These diseases, (for these reasons called of the Spaniards Dormilles,) are com∣parable to these of young children, as small pockes, measles, shingles, & other that in necessity they haue in their youth, of which they are helped being well looked to. So by good gouerning our Wormes are saued from these necessary mischiefes, shunning the danger of death: neuerthelesse with more difficultie in the latter, then in the first, through age in being more oppressed old then young, as it happens to men, which hauing not had in season the diseases of youth, being strucken more late, more dangerous is They haue al∣so accidentall diseases.also the issue. Besides these ordinary diseases, the Wormes haue accidentall diseases comming of the time, the meat, the lodging, and of the gouernment: the which one helpes vsing particular remedies, as shall bee shewed. In the care of the ordinary ones there is no point of skill, you must only abstaine from giuing them to eate, when they refuse their meate, and to giue them moderately, their appetite being come againe; alwaies to feed them with good leaues, and to keepe them neately. The first maladie, (being diuersly called) as a change, a drowsines, or a benumming, happens at the eighth or tenth day of their comming forth: the eight or ten daies fol∣lowing them one after another, more or lesse, accor∣ding to the climat & quality of the season, of which the heate shortens the distance of these termes. To which also serues the goodnesse of victuals, and di∣ligent care; for so much more as one giues to these
creatures of leaues well quallified (if so be they will eate them,) so much more shorter will their life be. How to know their diseases. The sicknes of these wormes is knowne first of all by the head, which swelles then, when they will chaunge, insomuch that in that part their skinne be∣gins to peele, but more apparantly in their last be∣nummings then in those that follow, not being able almost in the first to discerne what it is for the little∣nesse of the creature. While their drousinesse hath seased them you must refraine to giue them meate, (for that would bee but lost labour) onely one shall cast them some pittance to sustaine those amongst the drowsie ones, which wake; the which by this meanes discerned shal be separated from the others, for to be assembled with those which are of equall age. Each disease holdes them two daies, at the third beginning to get their health againe: the which one knowes by their feeding which comes to them with much appetite; then one shall giue them victuals againe, but sparingly, to the ende not to fill them to quickly, augmenting their ordinary day by day as one shall find them affectioned to eat. Their diet li∣mited. Twice a day, morning and euening, at certaine houres one shall serue the Wormes with meat, from their hatching, till their second change or drousines, so limiting their repast. Frō the second to the fourth and last, thrice a day: & from that till the end of their life, foure, fiue, or sixe times a day: (and in some,) so much as you please, and that you shall see the crea∣tures can eate. For then you must spare no foode, but rather cloying them, to fill and satiate their appe∣tite, hasting them by much eating to perfect their
taske. And as the vessell wil neuer run ouer, except it be ful; so these Wormes will neuer vomit their silke, till their bodies be satisfied: the which engendring of the leafe of the Mulberrie, all is as soone found ready to be sponne, as the quantitie of the leaues de∣stinde by nature to such worke, shall be dissolued. By such carefulnes there is no more leaues wasted, then if one distributed thē skarselie: for that within eight daies, the Wormes will eate neere as much, by little and little, as within foure giuen them liberally. Then this is without occasion that one should feare the expence, seeing that on the contrarie by such li∣beralitie (besides all well compted, it expendes no∣thing more) comes this sparing, which winning The qualities of the leaues very conside∣rable.time, the cost of the feeding falles out lesse. Af∣terwardes one shall marke very curiously the qua∣lities of the leaues, as an article bearing sway in this foode. For all leaues are not proper for this, though they be producted by Mulberries without fault: happening sometimes, that by extremitie of drought, or moysture, meldew, heate droppes, and other intemperatures of the time, all the leaues, or most part of the trees become yelowish, spotted, or speckled, a signe of vnholsome and perniciouse foode. Of such one must make no account, no more, then of that growing out of the Sunne, within the the interior parts of thicke treees, or in shadow val∣lies, nor of that which is wet, by raines or dewes; but rather it behoueth to reiect them, as infected, not vsing them at al, for feare of killing the Wormes. The leaues of the second spring, one shall put in the same predicament, that is to say, those which shoote
afresh, on the trees alreadie disleaued, which the ig∣norāt imploy for want of other: but with too much hazard, because of their maligne substance, contrarie to the creatures, happening through the inegualli∣tie of their ages. For there needes but one repaste to be giuen them, to make them all perish of the flix, that such new leaues, will bring them; because that by their tendernesse the little beasts, eates them with so auidous and greedy an affection, that they fill themselues till they burst. Wherefore this shall be for a maxime, that the Silk-wormes shall be alwaies A notable maxime.fedde with leaues of their owne age, to the end that by good correspondencie, the leaues be as tender, and hard, as the creatures shall be feeble, and strong, according to the time of their ordinarie commings. The faulte of the wet leaues, is corrected by pati∣ence; for one must but tarrie till the raines be past and the dewes dried vp, to gather the leaues, going to worke after the Sunne shall haue shonne certaine houres on the trees; neuer before. But for the o∣thers which are ill qualified there is no meanes to correct them, from which, as pernicious food, you shall abstaine. One shall not neede to take care for the expence of these precious creatures, during the first three weekes, because of their youth, and little∣nesse of bodies which makes them bee contented with a little, & yet that little taken in the lost parts of the trees, as of the body, of the succers amongst the good branches, and elsewhere, from whence for the profit of the trees, also one should cut them. At the beginning, one must goe to the leaues with hand∣kerchers, afterwards with little baskets, then with
great ones, and finally one employes, for this victua∣ling both maunds and fackes, encreasing their food, by measure as the grow in age. The gouer∣nour of the Wormes shall keep himselfe neately. Shall drinke wine before to come neere his flocke. I haue shewne how necessarie it is for the leaues to be handled with cleane hands, for the danger of foulenesse▪ Of this point the gouernour of these magnificent creatures shall beware, for himselfe to be an example of neatenesse, to all those which hee hath vnder his charge, to the end that any of them, approch not otherwise, then apperteineth. The go∣uernour shall not forget to drinke a little wine earlie in the morning before he goes to worke, for that in communicating the smell of such licour to the Wormes, it preserues them from all stench, specially from the naughtie breath of folkes (more strong be∣ing fasting, then after eating) which these admirable The Wormes shall not be vi∣sited with ma∣ny folke.beasts feare much. Wherefore the entring of their lodging is not to be indifferētly permitted to al sorts of persons, by that shunning the harme that too free frequenting brings to the creatures; which the su∣persticious vulgar, sottishly attribute to the eye, be∣leeuing that there are people with by their lookes brings ill lucke to the Wormes; but it rather is, nay, assuredly, the breathing of the ill breath which cau∣seth Their lodging shall be kept neatly, it shall be perfumed sometimes.them, indispositions. For which considerati∣ons, the lodging shall be swept euery day, and to keepe them sweet you shal often sprinckle the floore with vineger, after to strew it with some herbes of a good smell, as with lauander, spike, rosmarie, time, sauorie, pennie royall, and such like: adding some times, perfumes, made with frankencense, beniewin, storax, & other odoriferous drougues, which shall be
burnt on coales in the halles and chambers. The ta∣bles The tables of∣ten made cleane.in like manner, of the Wormes, shall bee of∣ten made cleane not suffring the cattell to rest long vpon the litter, the which one shall take away e∣uery third day, or euery fourth, after the second chaunge, or benumming, for to keepe them especi∣ally sweet and cleane, then when as the soultrie heats approach, whereby they are pestered: vntill that time, being not requisit to goe to it so curiou∣sly, for the litter during the coldes, is rather profita∣ble then any waies hurtfull to the Wormes, keeping them warme amongst it; foreseeing also, that one deceiues not himselfe with such sluggishnes, in lea∣uing there to much. Remedies a∣gainst vnex∣pected coldes. Vnawares somtimes violent blasts of after stormes returnes, against the attempt, and course of the sea∣son, very offensiue to our Wormes. These accidents are remidied, by keeping curiously shut all the open partes of the lodging dores and windowes euen to the least: and in warming it within, with whot coles in diuse places. The slouth of the gouernour hath laid this taxation on our Wormes, that they are e∣steemed stincking, wherefore many abhorres them; Those are the casting of their skinnes, and their dead carcasses, intermingled with the litter, made with the residue of the leaues which the Wormes smelles of, from whence proceeds al the stincke which one findes in the chambers: not of these noble creatures, the which of themselues smels nothing at all, no not their very dung, no more then sand, hauing natural∣ly in as great detestation filth & infectiō, as they loue sweete and good smelles, vsing the order afore men∣tioned,
one shall not onely gouerne these delectable cattell with profit, but their habitation made plea∣sant, and sweete smelling as the shop of a perfumer shall be found a place agreeable for good conditio∣ned folkes. So will it be for Ladies and Gentlemen, for whom these excellent creatures trauaill. Necessarie maximes. That then the gouernour of our Wormes striue to be diligent in his charge; that he suffer not incon∣siderately his cattell to bee visited of all commers, with too much libertie, for feare that by fraud, some mischance happen them: that he keepe the lodging cleane; that he spare not perfumes, for to bestow them fitly; that he be scrupulous of the leaues, not to distribute them to the Wormes, but such as bee per∣fectly good; for this cause that hee giue commande to the gatherers neuer to goe to worke before they haue washed their handes, and that he haue an eye vnto it: that he suffers, rather his little beasts to be a hungerd, then by impatience, to feede them with leaues ill qualified. The requisite order to re∣moue the cat∣tell. In taking away the litter all at once, the ttell is remoued from one place to another, to their great contentment. For to do that commodiously, at one end of each skaffold shall be left an emptie place for to put the Wormes on, that one shall take adioyning to that; in as much of the breadth of the table, the which by this meanes being emptie, will receiue the Wormes of the neighbouring part, and so of those that follow, wherby all the continuance, in the skaf∣fold wil be vncouered, and couerd againe, course af∣ter course by portions; after the manner of drying hay in meddowes, ouerturning it; the full part filling
the emptie. So without carrying the cattell far, they shall be gently put neere their lying; and this will be without touching them at all, for feare to offend thē, because of their delicatenes; if at the instant that one would change them, from one place to another, one giues them meat; for it behoueth not but to take the leaues, at which so soone as euer the Wormes shall be fastened, to lift them vp, & without resting them in any place, to lodge them all at once where one de∣sireth. It will be needfull to dispose the tables in such a fashion, that without shaking by seperated pieces, one may easily take them all out, and put them on the skaffolds againe, to make them easilie cleane. For by this meanes, pulled out of the skaffolds as draw∣ing tilles one after another, one shall strike them a∣gainst the floure, to the end to discharge them of filth: afterwards one shall sweepe and brush them perfectly well. So much the more longer that the Wormes liue, so much the more space it behoues to giue them, and to rub the ta∣bles with wine &c. In measure that by age the Wormes increase and grow great, they go frō day to day occupying more place; wherefore it is necessary to keepe ready fresh tables, to the end to receiue those, which you shall se∣perate from the throng, and to put them all at their ease, for to fructifie very well together. For it is a thing well experimented, that a few Wormes fedde at large, makes more silke then a great number at a straite. You shall cause the tables to be rubbed with vineger, or with wine before they bee put on, and with sweet herbes to encourage them. As also they are delighted with the smell of leekes, garlicke, or onyons, if you accustome them to it in their youth; against the opinion of those which hold that these
strong smels hurt, hauing not wel experimented thē, this doubt being sufficiently cleared by proofe; and you shall not only reioyce your Wormes by agreea∣ble smelles; but you shall succor them in the most part of their malladies. Touching which wee will The causes of the maladies of the Worms and their re∣medies.speake of their diseases, and of their remedies. The extremities of the colds and heates, the too much or too little feeding; and the feeding them with naughty leaues, are the principall causes of the extraordinary malladies of these creatures. If they be annoyed by reason of cold, one shall succor them by warmeth in shutting the lodging, as before in perfu∣ming it with frankincense and other sweete matters: to the which perfume some addes lard and sausages cut in little slices, the smell also of good wine, stronge vineger, and Aqua-uitae comfort these crea∣tures hauing caught cold. If on the contrarie they are ouercharged with heate, you shall recouer them with fresh breath in opening the doores and win∣dowes, for to giue entrance to the ayre and windes, passing through the chambers and halles, breathing the inward parts to the great contentment of the Wormes, setting them in good liking by this only and little remedie. The lodging being not so well disposed as is necessary, the Wormes shall be caried by tables forth into the ayre, to make them gather breath, halfe an houre before Sunne rising. The diet is the true means to heale those, which by too much feeding are become diseased; one shall giue them nothing for two daies together, the which being past, they shall be fed very moderately, and a little at once: As also little and often it behoueth to giue thē
meate, which through famine are become langui∣shed, for to restore and satisfie them, without ouer∣gorging A very dange∣rous disease, andthem. The disease is much more difficult to cure, of those which haue bin fed with ill leaues, as with yellow, spotted, or too young. For oftētimes of this, as first hath bin said, there happens the flixe, and of the latter the plague most assuredly. Of this disease the Wormes becomes all yellow and spotted with blacke brusings; which you perceiuing neuer so lit∣tle, faile not to remoue them diligently into another chamber and separated tables, for to assay to saue them by good handling, or at the least to shunne the contagion from the rest of the flocke. But hold for This heere in∣curable.desperate the healing of those which with the markes aforesaid, you shall see to be bathed on the belly, by a certaine humor flowing in that part of their bodies, which you shall take from the rest, as meate for poultry. As perfumes helpe to cure all the maladies of these creatures, so to remoue them from one chamber to another, is generally healthfull for them, by such change being restored to wonted vi∣gor. The Wormes will not fall into any or few of The profit of curious dili∣gence.these diseases, if their gouernour handles them with skill and diligence aforesaid; in which besides the hazard of losing all, is spared the trouble: being much more easie to preuent these maladies by fore∣sight, then to cure them by medicines. At which one shall first leuell, to the end that by negligence, one be not depriued of the hoped-for benefit of this food. Carefulnes being most requisite in the managing of these notable cattell, which constraineth them that haue them in charge, not only to be neere them all
the day, but to bestow a good part of the night, to succour them at all occasions, the which curiouslie To driue a∣way Rats, the destroyers of our Wormes.one shall endeuour. The Mice, Rats and Cats, doe great spoile to the troope of our Wormes, when they can come by them, eating them with great ap∣petite as most exquisite delicates. Against such tem∣pests, for a singular remedie, one keepes lights du∣ring the night about the Wormes, whereby the inner part of the lodging being lightned, the rattes and cattes goe not but with feare. And are at the last chased and feared away, by the sound of little bells, which one rings there. Both with the one and the other one shal be fitted, disposing the lampes in the places requisit, in diuers partes: also the bells and other engins making noise, put in a place easie to remoue them. But all that is but in vaine if often times in the night one goes not round about the cat∣tell; to which purpose the lights will serue, which lightning the roome, will be a meanes to goe and come easily through all. In the meane time, you That no oyle touch the Wormes.shal beware that any oyle fal not vpon the Wormes. For there needes but a drop, to offend them much, through the maladies that the oyle engenders them. Preuenting the which, one shall not vse any oyle to watch with, but in lampes fastned against the walles: and for portable light to tend the creatures, tallow, or waxe candels, or of other substance accor∣ding to the countries. To make rea∣dy the matter, for to spinne on their silke. By such managing, both of the foode, and hand, within seuen or eight daies following, after the last casting their skinnes, or drowsines, your Wormes will dispose themselues to pay the expence of their
diet. The which foreseeing in fit time, you shal cause to be prepared necessarie rods, for the climing vp of the Wormes, to vomit their silke, fastning their webs vnto thē. To assemble the Worms (so called in such worke) many things are good, but not any greene bowes, for danger to offend the cattell, they waxing fresh, placed in the worke, as they will doe, the time being giuen to raine. The most proper matters, are Rosemary, Kneeholme, cuttings of Vines, Broome, shoots of Chestnut trees, of Okes, Osiers, Salowes, Elmes, Ashes; & in summe, of all other trees or flexi∣ble shrubs, hauing not ill smelles. In application of the rods, one goes to work diuersly, according to the sundrie aduises of men. After hauing euened the foot of the rods or branches, to the end so much the lesse to trouble the place, one shal ranke them direct∣ly, as rankes of columnes equally distant a foote and a quarter, little more or lesse, crossing the tables from one side to other. The feet of the twigs shal ioyne to the tables beneath, and the heades shall meete the ta∣bles aboue, vnder which, their length shall bee ben∣ded, wherby wil be fashioned the arches. By such dis∣position, the stages will resemble, like galleries made of arches, with many stages surpassing one ano∣ther, as Amphitheaters a thing very pleasant to be∣hold. The emptie place, betweene the two arches ioyning to the table aboue, shall bee filled with the sprigs of lauender, spike, thyme, and the like sweete smelling shrubbes; according to the commoditie of the countrie, for to serue doubly. For in this inter∣mixing of twigges, the Wormes shall haue choise of place, firmely to fasten their rich matter, as to that
they are very difficult, going to it fantastickly, and there they are as it were perfumed by the agreeable sent of the shrubbes, whereby they trauaile freely in such place to the profit of the worke. At the seuenth or eight day then, that your Wormes shall bee come forth of their last change or disease (such a disease being verie properlie called a chaunge, through the great sicknes they then en∣dure, more vehemently then in any other, often∣times to die) you shall remoue them to the tables, so furnished with twigges without looking to shift their places or litter any more. There you shall feed them as accustomedly, that is to say, with all abun∣dance, without denibiting them till then, that you shal see the most lustiest Wormes to enter the roods, which is when they take their course to get vp; which perceiued by their extraordinarie counte∣nance wandring through the troope, in skattering, without making account of the meate, and a little after you shall see them to clime by the feete of the twigges, forsaking their foode, going to vomit, or rather to spinne their silke. From that time you shall begin to diminish their ordinary, day by day, in the end for to giue them nothing at all; when they shall haue vnited and grafted with the twigges, all the troope will haue forsaken the table, or few will faile, none remaining behind but the latter and idle ones. In this time is knowne those which were long a hatching, by climing vp the last: being a necessary cōsequence, that the first comming forth, are the first spinning. And as there is no great reckoning to bee made of the hatching later; no more behoues it to
make account of the idle Wormes that clime not. Wherefore at the ende of three or foure daies, that the first shall haue taken the twigges, you shall take To gather the idle ones to∣gether.away the rest from al the tables, for to assemble them in one, and so to nourish them till their end. So the forward and the backward Wormes will spinne their silke: the which they cannot doe fitly when without such distinction the latter should cast them∣selues on the worke of the formost, with great losse, and this apparent daunger, that before these had en∣ded their work, the Butterflies of the formost by such How long time they be∣stow to spinne their silke.longnesse, alreadie formed in the codde, should not come forth to the detriment of the enterprise. Two or three dayes the Wormes haue to perfect their coddes, bladders, or bottoms, (diuersly named ac∣cording to the places) at the end of which they are vtterly finished, as one shal know in curiously appro∣ching neere thē with the eare; For as these creatures make some little and pleasing noyse in feeding, so likewise doe they make a sound in fashioning their coddes; the which noise they giue ouer, ending their worke. Behold the silke made, this is not for all that the end of the labour of the Wormes; for it is by the graine that they end to worke and to liue, finishing their life by their deere seede which they leaue vs, for to renue themselues by euery yeere, and by this meanes to conserue for vs the possession of the silke as to their heires. Miracle of nature, A Worme to be shut vp in his bottom of silke, is there transformed into a Butterflie! He imployes ten dayes to that, at the end of other ten dayes he comes forth through a
hole for this effect piersing the cod, from whēce dis∣imprisoning himself, he returnes to the view of mē, but that is in his new figure of a Butterflie: males and females accouple themselues ioynt together, the femall layes her egges or graine; ending so their labour with their liues. And that which augments the wonder, is the long abstinence of this creature, liuing twentie three daies without taking any suste∣nance, also depriued of the light, for the time which hee remaines within his bladder, as in a close pri∣son. An admirable creature. But to enter into discourses on the qualities of this animall, to the which are manifestly wanting, flesh, blood, bones, veines, arteries, sinewes, bowells, teeth, eies, eares, skailes, back bones, prickes, feathers, haires, except on the feete a little fine thrum, resem∣bling downe, and other things common almost to euery earthly, waterie, & airie creature: it would be too much to philosophise, such contemplation ra∣uishing humane vnderstanding, euen in this, that this Worme one of the abiects creatures of the world is ordeined of God to clothe Kings and Prin∣ces: in which is found, sufficient argument to hum∣ble themselues. And this same one particularitie is to be marked, that shee yeelds the rich silke all spun, readie to be wounded off, vomiting quite made, the thread; whereof shee composeth her bottom, with extreame care and affenctionate labour. The which is not communicated neither to wooll, cotten, hempe, nor flax, wherewith men apparrell them∣selues; but with skill they must prepare them for to bring them to the point to be spunne.
A strange meane to be provided of Silk-wormes without seede. Heere it is to purpose to shew the subtill arte that man hath inuēted, for to repaire the defect of graine and seed of Silk-wormes, happening that it should be lost. A thing drawne from the secrets of nature, and found out with great curiositie, like to the pro∣duction of Bees; whereof the Auncients haue writ∣ten (as heretofore I haue said.) In the spring-time a young calfe is shut vp in a little darke stable, & there fed only with the leaues of Mulberries twenty daies, without drinking at all, or eating any other thing during this time; at the end of which, it is killed, and put in a tub there to rot. Of the corruptiō of his bo∣dy comes forth abundāce of Silk-worms, which one takes with the leaues of Mulberries, they fastening vno them: the which fed, and handled according to arte and common fashion, bring forth in their times, both silke and seed as others do. Some making short the expence and the way of such an inuention, haue drawne this heere. Of the legge of a sucking calfe, a slice waying seuen or eight pounds, and laid to pu∣trifie in a fresh celler, within a vessell of wood, a∣mongst the leaues of Mulberries, to which the Silke-wormes comming forth of this flesh, take hold on: from whence being taken, they are handled as a fore∣said. I offer you these things vnder the credit of ano∣ther, in attending that the proofe giues me matter to assure you that which it is: Complayning my self in this place of our predecessors, with Pliny, as he did of his, in this which they said, that a vessell of Iuy could not containe wine, and not one of them had experienced it. I represent you these things, I say, for that such creation of Silk-wormes happening to be
true, and thereby finding the aduantage we may be freed from the trouble to send to seeke the seede in Spaine and elsewhere, renuing the care to prouide it euery yeere. If there be question to discourse there∣upon, I shall say that such engendering of Silke-Wormes is not incredible, seeing that all corruption is the beginning of generation. We see daily, that of putrified things issue diuers vermines, according to the diuers qualities of the matters. Of the Bull, and, according to writing, of the Lion, is engendred the Bee: of the Horse, Hornets: and of humane flesh, the Serpent. The Auncients hold, that two sundrie sorts of Waspes are engendred of the Horse and of the Mule; through the diuersitie of these two crea∣tures, as I haue said in the precedent chapter, and of Asses, Drones. And whether they be meats, cloathes, houshold stuffes, euen vnto woods, euery where in the land, in the water, and in the ayre, in moist places and drie, one findes that nature creates little beastes, wormes, and gnats, with so much admiration, as the Creator is admirable. The know∣ledge of the maturity of the Wormes. Some few daies before the Wormes begin to clime the twigges, to vomit the silke, they manifest their purpose by the brightnes of their bodies, which becomes shining and translucent, as grapes waxing Of what co∣lour the silke shall be. The distincti∣on of the sex of this crea∣ture.ripe: by which point one knowes somewhat after the colour of their bodies, the colour of the silke, which they wil make. Then one marks the Wormes to be diuersly coloured, neuerthelesse distinctly, with yellow, orange, carnation, white and greene, which are the fiue colours of the silke. Likewise one dis∣cernes the males from the females; the pretended
eyes of the Wormes will satisfie to such curiositie: for the colouring of those of the males, is more ap∣parent to black, than that of the females, the which in that part haue but very small markes, & fine streakes. As for the colour of their bodies, according to the The Wormes are of diuers colours.climats one is to be preferred before another. The most part of the seede of Spaine brings forth white Wormes: and such graine being more worthy than any other in these climates, we prise also the whitest more then the blacke, or gray, or any other. To withdraw the silke from the twigges and when. After, with the same diligence whereby we haue managed our silke; finally we must reape, seeing that this last action cannot suffer delay without nota∣ble losse, no more thē any other haruest of the yeere. The refuse silke is the first matter which the Worms vomit, of which they make the foundation of their building. They fasten it firmely with much art be∣tweene the roddes, which loden with these rich coddes resemble exquisit trees, garnisht with Apri∣cockes, sommer Paires, and other precious fruites. There one takes the bottoms in perfect ripenes, which is marked by the directions already giuen. To tarry longer then seuen or eight daies, to pull them from the twigges, would bee to put them to hazard, to conuert the silke into sleaue, for the lea∣sure that one should giue the Butterflie to pierce his codde, to the end to go about his seed. Wherefore the most assured shall be, to begin within the sixt day af∣ter the climing vp of the Wormes. One shall take them off gently, without crushing the creature which is within, by that preuenting the spots of the bottomes, which happen by their broken bodies,
cōuerting thē into so gluie a humor, that afterwards it is impossible to diuide and winde off all the silke. The graine for seed. Prouiding for the time to come, one shall aduise to furnish himself with seed for the conseruation of the brood. I haue shewen the scope of this Worme to be, after hauing weaued the silke, to goe to laye her egges, to perpetualize her selfe amongst vs. For which it behoueth, to limit & bound his natural af∣fection, for feare that leauing it to do at pleasure, in∣steed of silke, which wee haue of this busines, wee should haue nothing but sleaue. Because that the Worme being conuerted into a Butterflie to laye the egges, as I haue said, comes forth of the bottom, andwhich for such cause he pierseth. Being thus bored the threeds of the silke are found broken, by conse∣quent indeuidable, and not to be wonde off, wher∣by one is constrained to carde such matter as wooll, afterwards for to spinne it: which by this meanes losing his glosse wherein consisteth the chiefest bewtie of the silke, wanting the same is turned into sleaue. For to preuent the which losse, and also not to haue need of so much seede, as the nature of the The signes of the worth of the bottoms.Wormes would furnish vs withall; of one part of the coddes or bottoms, we will serue our turnes for graine or seede, leauing the other for the win∣ding of the silke, as hereafter shall bee showne: As for to haue faire corne one chuseth the best eares to sow; so we will chuse for seede, the best qualified coddes, without fearing so much the present losse of piercing the bottoms, as to desire the ensuing pro∣fit. For such cause let vs select, of the clues or bot∣toms, the chiefest, the greatest, the hardest, the
weightiest, the sharpest pointed: of carnation or flesh colour, tokens of value. In such quantitie as one shall desire, according to this reckoning, that an ounce of seede commonly issues from a hundred females, seldome more, by the accoupling of the like number of males. By curious finding out some hold that eue∣ry femall laies a hundred egges or graines; and therefore an ounce of seede to conteine tenne thou∣sand graines: but for the inequalitie of the seedes and waights, that cannot euery where agree, nor in euery sort of grain. Some for sparing, put two femals to one male, beleeuing that it sufficeth: but because of the incertentie of the successe, and the great care∣fulnesse requisit in this place, for to couple them to∣gether, from time to time, the best shall be to rest vpon that which experience hath authorised for good, that is, in putting to so many males, as females. Of their sex.The coddes inclosing the male Butterflies, are slen∣der, and long; those whereout the females come, are thicke and great in the midst: and both of them more sharpe in one place then in the other, agreeing to the figure of an egge. The mossie ones at both endes, hauing not any point, or very little, are not to be desired; but rather the race to perish, for the diffi∣cultie that one findes to wind off the silke, it being not possible, how one should handle them, to wind all the silke out of the cawthern, by reason of cer∣tain snarlings which happens in the bottoms which are of this shape, (not in others) hindring them to diuide, a thing very considerable, both for the quan∣titie of the silke, and qualitie: for neither so much silke, nor so faire will it yeeld, being mingled with
such bottoms as if it came only of the pointed ones. The meane to gather the seed. The coddes so chosen, shall bee thredded, not in piersing thē a crosse, for feare to let them take wind, and consequētly to make thē vnprofitable, but one∣lie in passing the needle, through the first downe, cal∣led sleaue; of which shal be made little chaines, each composed of so many males as femals: One shall hang them on wodden pinnes, in a chamber, more coole then hot, neuerthelesse drie, for the Butterflies at their ease to come forth of their coddes, to engen∣der together males and females, and there in dying for company, to lay their egges; so ending their liues. It is necessarie to helpe a little to the further∣ance of these Wormes, being then vpon the period of their age, to the end to manage the seede well, o∣therwise much of it would be lost. By quantitie that one shall see the Butterflies come forth of the bot∣tomes, one shall accouple them, male and femall, if already they bee not of themselues, to which they shew themselues very diligent; and being ioyned together, they shall for the last time, be set to rest on Wal-nut leaues, readie spread vpon a table vnder the coddes, there for to end their worke, the femall lay∣ing her egges or grain, on the leaues of Wal-nuts: frō whence afterwardes, although they bee firmely an∣nexed vnto them, yet are they easily taken off; for that the leaues being well dried, are easily betweene the handes rubbed to powder, and that blowne a∣way with the wind, the seede remaines cleane as one desires. Some with great reason, spread not Wal-nut leaues vpon a table; but make little bundles, which they hang adioyning to the chaines of coddes; see∣ing
that the femals lay their seede more easie being hanged ouer the males, then laine flat vpon a table. For to make the Butterflies empty their graine vpon paper according to the vsage of some, is not the pro∣fit of the work, because one cānot take off the graine but in scraping it with a knife, whereby much of it is broken. But yet also those goe more ill to worke, which put their Butterflies vpon linnen; for so much, that the seed fastening it selfe to it very firme∣ly, cannot be taken away, but with losse; which for to shunne, one is constrained to keepe such linnen, til the spring time, & then in warming it to make the graine to hatch, and from that same to take the Wormes. By such order one cannot vse the proofe, of wine, nor peise the egges to know what quantitie of Wormes you will charge your selfe with; by which, confusion may happen in the feeding them. Neither the leaues of Wal-nut, nor paper, nor lin∣nen, are not so proper to receiue the graine com∣ming from the creature, as chamblet, or burato, for that, that vpon stuffes, (the graine is assuredlie fast∣ned) so is it in like sort taken away without any vio∣lence or losse: for it is only done in rubbing gentlie the chamblet, or burato, betweene the handes, by which meanes it is easily taken off. Sleaue. The bottoms which shall haue serued for seede, cannot afterwardes be vsed, but in sleaue; not be∣cause of the substance which alwaies remaines one; but for the breaking of the thred which hath been cut by the Worme, in making there a hole, to haue passage out of the prison, as hath been said. Of which the Spaniards taking heede sparing the best qualified
coddes, for to be wonde off, employ for seede the double, and triple ones, without great losse of silke, if otherwise they bee of good marke. So can they not very well wind them off, because of the multiplicitie of creatures; the which spinning their silke in com∣mon, make the worke very confused; whereby they are put in the ranke of the pierced ones for sleaue. The double and triple ones.The being double or triple is not the fault of the Worme, but rather of lustinesse, and supplenesse. Sometimes also it happens by default of the place, which being too much thronged, constraines these creatures, in vomiting their silke to heape it one vp∣on an other, confusedly assembling two or three Wormes, and more, in one bottome without distin∣ction of male or femall; though that ignorantlie some say, that a double cod cānot cōteine two crea∣tures of a diuers sex. The negligence of the gouer∣nour causeth oftentimes such disorder, when taking not neere heede at the beginning of the climing of the Wormes, he leaues them to wander where they wil: to which he shal looke to, in guiding thē conue∣niently; The short and idle Wormes.and likewise shall relieue them which fall to the ground: he shall put the short and idle ones into little cornets or coffines of paper, thereby to fa∣cilitate their work, guiding them to perfect their bot∣tom: without which diligent curiositie, many Wormes are lost, bee it in smothering, or in vomi∣ting their silke to ill purpose, amongst their litter. Of euery double, or triple bottome, comes forth but one Butterflie, though it haue many within, inso∣much that being not able to bee all ripe at once, the first, which comes forth in piercing the cod by
his issue, giues vent to the other Butterflies; by which catching colde, they remaine imperfect and die, or when that by their meeting together, their common ripenesse and issue happens in the same point and moment, the which is not seene but very rarely. The winding of the silke would not be delayed. For the abundance and goodnesse of the silke, it is to be desired, that the bottoms bee cast into the ba∣son, for to winde them immediately hauing pulled them from the roddes, without any stay, seeing that so freshly taken, all the silke comes off easily, & with∣out violēce or any losse; the which one cannot hope for of the bottoms kept some time, because that the gumme wherewith the Worme fastens her threeds one against another, being dried doth so harden the bottome, that one cannot winde it but with great difficultie and losse, whereby some portion of the silke rests in the bason, and neuer remaines so faire And wherfor▪as that which is newly and easily wonde vp. Besides by such festination, is spared the feare that the But∣terflies should spoile the worke, there being not gi∣uen them the leasure to bore the coddes for to come forth. But because that within seuen or eight daies, one can very hardly winde off all the silke of a reasonable feeding, for the great number of worke men that for that one should employ, one shall keep both the one and the other of these two waies, that is, in setting themselues a work to winde off the bot∣tomes, so soone as euer one shall perceiue to bee a number of perfect ones, casting them directly from the twigges into the basen, hauing first pilled and bared them of their sleaue, without other delay. And
to kill the Butterflies of the rest which one is con∣strained to keepe, to the intent that the creatures be∣ing dead within, the coddes remaine exempt from feare to bee bored, and by consequent reserued for good silke, may attēd the leasure of the winder. That The means to kill the Butter∣flies in the coddes.is done in exposing and laying the coddes in the sunne, the heate of which stifles the creature in his proper worke: but you must vse a meane, for feare of burning the silke. Three or foure times in sundrie daies the coddes shal be set in the sun, & at each time they shall remaine two houres before noone, and as much after, to the end that the great heate of that part of the day may readily stifle the Wormes, be∣fore they be metaphorised or changed into Butter∣flies: which will come to passe in spreading the bot∣toms vpon sheetes, and oftentimes remouing them to make them all feele it, without excepting any from the heate of the sunne: neuerthelesse to take heed to the charge, that by too rude handling one bruises not the Wormes within the coddes, for feare of stayning the silke with the matter of their bodies; the which (as hath been said) doth so glue together the silke, that it is impossible afterwards to winde it off. Therefore very softly oftentimes a day one shall remoue them from one side to another, afterwards they shal be heaped warmely together, and wrapped vp in the sheets, and so carried into a fresh chamber, not into a danke celler, as to il purpose some do. The sunne failing (as often times it comes to passe, that the skie is clouded) you shall vse an ouen moderate∣ly heated, as it shall be two houres after the drawing of bread; within the which by sackfuls, one shall
put the coddes, which shall be laid vpon boords, for feare that the stones of the ouens bottom should burne them. There they shall remaine an houre, or an houre and a halfe, in reiterating the manner, till that you shall know the creatures to bee certainely dead, the which you shall be resolued without great losse, in rēding one of the most suspectedst bottoms, for to see the inner part. In the meane time you shall take heed, not to burne your silke by too vehement heate, foreseeing which, the most sure way shall bee to heate the ouen a little at once, and to returne so much the oftener, then too much, and so hasting lose all the worke. This smothering of the Wormes, or Butterflies already formed, is of great import, for go∣ing to it either ignorantly, or retchlessely, not ta∣king heed whether that the Butterflies should come forth of the coddes, according to their nature, or not being able at all to take the ayre, should remaine in the way, after to be forced to passe further, nibbling the inner part of the coddes: of the which little silke can come afterwards, and that yet not very wel qua∣lified. Ill comparable to that of the Rats in this point differing, that the Rats gnaw the exterior of the cods, for to eate vp the creature which is there inclo∣sed; and the Butterflies the interior to free them∣selues. The bottoms so prepared shall attend the lea∣sure of the winder. But this shall be no longer then that without delay you may conserue the silke in his naturall beautie, without losse of waight: in the one and in the other, being so much the more defrauded of it, as more longer the coddes shall bee kept. For that euery day the hardnes of the bottoms augmen∣ting.
In like manner is augmented the difficultie of winding it off; wherby the silke breaks with dimini∣shing the quantitie: and by long keeping, the qua∣litie is empaired. To these losses, diligence remedies, so that there be not giuen too much time to the bot∣toms to ouer-harden, the silke wil be wonde off well enough: the winding whereof shall be continued, without diuerting to other vses, vntill the last bot∣tome. So shall you entirely gather from this food both silkes and sleaues, without any losse. To sort curi∣ously the cods, for to winde off the silke. This done, the bottoms shall be sorted, setting a∣part the pierced and spotted ones, on one side, for to make faire sleaue, as being of the most fine sub∣stance: and of the other side, the entire, simple, and cleane ones to wind off the most faire and pure silke; of all the which, for a foregoing, one shall draw off all the downe in pulling off the out-side of the bot∣toms, of which one shall make course sleaue, for that this is the reffuse and skumme, which the creature vomits at the beginning of his worke. Of tooles and engines for winding off, and other ob∣seruations. Of the fashion of the furnaces, basens, wheeles or Rices, named at Paris deuidors; & at Tours, winders∣vp: but how one ought to turne them, if it shall bee by the hand, by the foot, or by the water, for the win∣ding off, there is no need to speake of in this place: the work-men almost neuer agreeing together, eue∣ry one hauing his particular practise. Only I will say, that the basens of lead makes the silke more pure, than those of copper; because of the rust that this mettall is subiect vnto, though water remaines in it but a little while, from which the lead is vtterly ex∣empt. That the wheeles ought to bee great for the
forwarding of the worke, the which shall be made to winde off two skeanes at once. That the fire of the furnace be of char-coales, or at the least of very drie wood; to the end that the fire bee without smoake, as well for the commodity of the winder, as for the bewty of the silke, the which through his de∣licatenes is easily blacked in the smoak. So is it in the libertie of the work-man, to winde diuerslie the silke according to the workes wherein one will vse it. But in so much that the master of the worke principally desires it, for to sell and conuert it into money, the best shall be to do it the fairest that one can, hauing regard to the facultie of the matter, and the desire of the buyers. The taske of the winder. Of the bottoms come of Wormes of a good race, and fed with the leaues of white Mulberries, it shall suffice that the work-man winds off a pound and a halfe by day Paris weight, little lesse, for by such limit it will be small enough to be appropriated to all vses, and for that more vendable, than being grosser. This same shall be wonde of the single and best bottoms, according to the sorting aforesaid, reseruing the double and spotted ones (if one will not mingle thē with the pierced ones, for sleaue,) to make certaine separated skeanes, that the Merchants take at the same price as they do the fine silke, such course stuffe To distinguish the silkes.being profitable to them in some workes. But this would bee to intermingle all the silke, and by conse∣quent to debase the price, if without distinction one should wind off al the bottoms together. The which the Merchants fearing, at the sight of the grosse skeanes, buy willingly all the silke, by that assuring
themselues not to be any intermixed confusion, nor fraudulent mingling, in the winding vp. The dou∣ble and soyled ones, are very hard to wind vp, and yet howsoeuer one takes them, they yeeld but course silke: the tufted ones being also in the same predica∣ment, as hath bin said, which by reason of that you may mingle together. The difficulty of their win∣ding vp shall be asswaged by sope, put in the bason of water with the bottoms; sope also helpes to wind off the old coddes, hardened by time, in mollifying the natural gumme, which holds glued together the threeds of silke, the which by this remedy are easie enough to manage. The work-man shall make two skeanes of silke by day, or foure, if to that his wheele and his other skill be appropriated; for that the silke shewes fairer in little skeans, or skarfes, than in great ones; as that by bestowing more fastenings thā they do breakings of the silke, but in one only skeane: by this meanes they sell it for as much as the other; see∣ing that it is the commodity of the Merchāts, which put it in worke, being more proper to be giuen to be wonde in a little, than in a great volume. The remainder of the winding which cannot be wonde with the skeanes, as the breakings off of the silke, and that which will not bee got off, resting in the bason, shall be husbanded for to be wrought in tapistries, for Carpets, Chaires, Beds, and such like moueables of the house; intermingling these mat∣ters with wooll, hempe, flaxe, cotton &c. As also of good sleaues, with fine silke, shall bee made stuffes, faire and profitable to serue for the vse of the house. This is the manner to gather the silke, vnknowne
of our Auncestors, through want of enquiring it out: hauing of long time beleeued, as from the fa∣ther to the sonne, that this creature could not liue elsewhere, but in the countries of his originall. But time, the master of Arts, hath shewen how much the reasonable seeking of honest things is worth: frō such curiositie, being growen the true science to go∣uerne this cattel, which at this day are managed with as little hazard, as the grounds are sowed, and Vines plāted, for to haue corne and wine. So often times it comes to passe, to finde that which one seekes; God blessing the labour and trauaile of those which em∣ploie their wits, not only for themselues, but also for the publike benefit. Such is the beginning of the Silk-worme, such his gouernment, such the effect and issue of his feeding, a creature most admirable for many causes, whereby not a little is giuen to the conseruation of his race; when with no expence and small care it is kept during the yeere, as a dead thing, in his season for to take againe a new life.
THE PREPARATION OF THE BARKE OF THE White Mulberrie, for to make linnen cloath on, and other workes. THe reuenue of the white Mul∣berrie, consists not only in the leafe for to haue silke, but also in the bark, for to make ropes, course cloaths, mean, fine, and thinne, as they will, preparing the barke so, as shall be shewen hereafter; by which commo∣dities the white Mulberrie manifests it selfe, to be the richest plant, and of most exquisite vse, whereof we yet haue had knowledge. Of the leafe of the white Mulberrie, of his profit, of his handling, & the man∣ner of gathering the silke, hath been heretofore dis∣coursed at large. Heere shall be presented the barke of the branches of such a tree, whereby I will repre∣sent you the facultie, since it hath pleased the King to command me to giue to the publique, the inuen∣tion to conuert it into cords and linnen, according to the proofes which I haue shewen his Maiestie. And although we be not constrained to beg cloaths of our neighbours, (as till now we haue done silke) in hauing enough for our prouision, yet for that the
master shall not leaue to imploy this benefit, which God so liberally offers him, the same being in the Prouinces of this kingdome, where Flax & Hempe are so rare, as of such there is more than of the other, it will be found so much the more commodious, as the constraint will be lesse to disburst money, for the buying of so necessary furnishments. Many exquisite and rare knowledges are come to light by accident. The Lute an excellent instrument of Musicke, is come of the curiosity of a Physition, which making the Anatomy of a Tortoise, for to see the interior, and placing of his parts, handling of it dried, touched vnawares some sinewes stretched within it, the which making an agreeable sound, by meanes of the hollownes of the shell, resolued by that occasion to make a new instrument, since called in Latin Testudo, of the name of the creature. The al∣most miraculous science to graft fruit trees, is pro∣ceeded of a shepheard, when setting vp his bower, he thrust without thinking of it, a little liue braunch of a tree within the body of another freshly cut neere the ground, where it taking shewed the admi∣rable marriage of these two diuers plants afterwards so sought for, and refined by new additions. So it happened to me touching the knowledge of the fa∣cultie of the barke of the white Mulberrie. For by the easie separation frō his wood, being in sappe, in hauing caused to be made cords▪ (after the imitation of those of the rinde of Tillet, which they make in France, euen at the Louure in Paris) and put to drie at the top of my house, were by the windes throwne into the ditch, afterwards were taken forth of the
muddie water, hauing remained there foure daies, and washed in faire water, and then vntwisted, and dried, I saw appeare the downe or thrum, the matter of linnen, like to silke or fine flax. I made these barkes to bee beaten with mallets, to separate the sheds, which going to dust, left the gentle and soft sub∣stance remaining: the which barke, hetcheld and combde after the manner of hempe and flaxe, was made proper to spinne; and in ensuing, hath been wouen and reduced into cloath. More then thirtie yeers afore I employed the barke of the tēder shoots of whit Mulberries, to bind graffes in the skutchion, in steede of hempe, which they commonly vse in such delectable busines. Behold the first proofe of the value of the barke of the white Mulberrie: the which accident, brought into art, is not to be doubted, but to draw good ser∣uice from such inuentiō, the white Mulberrie being repleat with so many cōmodities, to the great profit of his possessor. The barke of Tillet besides that it serues to make ropes, as hath been said, is somewhat tractable to be made in clothes: but that is in very grosse work, as for to serue in wind-mill sayles, and such like things. The nettle yeelds an exquisit mat∣ter, wherof is made fine & delicate cloths: but there is so little of it that they cannot make other recko∣ning of it then for curiositie. There are also certaine other herbes and shrubbes yelding thrum or downe, but some so weake, others in so small a quantitie, some so grosse, and with so great difficultie to bee drawne off, that it is not possible to vse them to any profit, or to very little. It is not so of the white Mul∣berrie,
whereby the abundance of branching, the facilitie of disbarking, the goodnes of Thrumme or Downe proceeding from that, makes this businesse most assured: yea verily with very small expence the master shall draw infinit commodities from this rich tree. The worth whereof vnknowne to our an∣cestors hath remained interred & buried vntil now, as by the eyes of vnderstanding it shall be knowne, yet better by experiences. But to the end that they may make this busines durable, that is to say, to draw off the barke of the Mulberrie, without offen∣ding it, this here shall be noted; that for the good of the silke, it is necessarie to prune, to cut, and dishead the Mulberries, immediatly after hauing gathered the leaues for the foode of the Wormes; neuerthe∣lesse according to requisit distinction, as I haue de∣monstrated; whence the branches comming of such cuttings, shall serue for our intention: for that, that being then in sap (as in other time you must neuer put the bil to the trees) they will very easily disbark: and this shall bee to make profit of a lost thing, for else they should be cast into the fire. Likewise the same cuttings cannot but serue well; if they loue them no better, for the first, to vse them in fen∣sings of gardens, Vines &c. where such branches are very proper, for their hard snagges, being drie and of long seruice, through which durablenesse they rot not in a great time; from whence finally taken, for their last profit shall be burnt in the kitchen. And because that the diuers qualities of the bran∣ches diuersifie the value of their barkes, whence the most fine proceeds frō the tender tops of the trees, the grosse ones from the great braunches alreadie
hardned, the meane ones from those which are be∣tweene both. Then when they shall cut the trees, be it in pruning them, disbranching or disheading them, the branches shall bee sorted, setting apart in bundels euery sort, to the end that without confused mingling all the barks may be drawne off, and hand∣led according to their particular properties. With∣out delay the said rindes shall be separated from the branches vsing the fauour of the sap, which passeth quickly, without which they cannot worke in this busines. And hauing bundled vp the barkes, of all the three sortes a sunder, they shall be laide in cleane or foule water, as shal be fit three or foure daies more or lesse according to their qualities and places where they are, the trials whereof shall limit the terme, but in what part soeuer they bee, the tender and small would be lesse steeped, than the big and great ones; being taken forth of the water, at the approch of e∣uening they shall bee spread vpon the grasse in a meadow, if conueniently you may, or elsewhere, ex∣posed to the the aire, hauing vntide their fardels, for to remaine there all the night, to the end to drink vp the dewes of the morning; then before the Sunne lightes vpon them, they shall be heapte together, till the returne of the euening; then put againe in the dew, and taken from thence at Sun rising, as afore, continuing that ten or twelue daies, after the maner of flaxe, (and in sum) vntil then, that you shall know all the stuffe to be sufficiently watered, by the proofe that you shal make in drying, and beating a handfull of each of the three sorts of the barks, laying those a∣gaine in the dew which shall not be ready enough,
and withdrawing the rest, as you shal find by the eie. It hath been recited here before, that for to haue profit of feeding the Silk-wormes, with lesse then two or three thousand trees, the Mulberrie-yarde ought not to be enterprised; and that well for to go∣uerne them, to the purpose to haue long seruice of them, it is requisit, that there be lopped euery yeere, the tenth or twelfth part, so by that there may be di∣sheaded, euery yeere, from two hundred and fiftie, to three hundred Mulberries, which will alwaies yeeld betweene three or foure hundred burthens of wood & more. To which quātity, adding that which they take off from the trees immediatly after their disleauing in pruning & topping them, there will be abundance of braunches, and by consequent abun∣dance of barke euery yeere, frō which wil arise much worke of diuers sorts, according to requisit sortings. But yet the master of our worke shall not rest here but shall plant woodes of white Mulberries, to cut low the moitie of them euery yeere; for such pur∣pose diuiding them into two partes, from whence he shall haue braunches delicat and young, the barke whereof will bee proper to make fine and exquisit linnen. And the said woodes will not be onely pro∣fitable to furnish euery yeere, abundance of new barke, but also faggoting to burne; and poles for arbors in gardens, and to make hoopes for tubbes and barrels, chusing for this the greatest branches. Also to giue the leaues for to feede Silk-wormes, ga∣thering them in the best aired and sunniest parts of the trees. And for the augmenting of good husban∣drie, The 12. chap∣ter in the book of Husbandry.to feede an infinit number of connies, prouided
that the woodes bee inclosed for a warren after the manner before described. So there will be foure notable commodities, which the master shall reape from these woodes: which for the spoyle that the connies may do in disbarking the feet of the trees in winter, as they doe all sorts of plants, a few excepted, he shal not leaue himselfe vnfurnisht of so profitable a beast. Wherefore somewhat to amend such a fault, helping the connies to meate, it behoueth not but to sowe oates in certaine places and great allies, which for such purpose shall bee left emptie in the woods, where the connies may feede during the coldes, by so much sparing the Mulberries: for the succoring of which, besides, you shall cause to bee throwne to the connies, the outcasts of your garden, hay, cuttings of Vines, and other druggeries in winter, then when the snowes constraines these cat∣tell to goe to the trees, for want of other foode. Yet for the fifth commoditie, I will adde here, that the leaues of Mulberries, in what place soeuer they bee planted, falling of themselues to the ground in the end of summer, put together in some separated loft, taken from thence day by day, and giuen boyled to swine, keepes them in good state, beginning to put them into flesh: the which comes to them, when in ensuing, there fals a good mast, whereby they grow to the superlatiue degree of fatnesse. I would couch here for the sixth commodity the Mulberries fruite of these trees, so much loued of poultrie, for their exceeding sweetnesse, if the gathe∣ring of the Mulberrie leafe for the Wormes, were not the meanes for vs to make profit: the which
puld from the trees with the leaues, yet greene, long before their maturitie, remaine nothing worth, whereby no certaine account can be made. All the which things, bringes to light the worth of the Mulberrie, a tree filled with the blessing of God, which in this only plant giues to all sortes of men, and estates, these excellent matters, for to fur∣nish and apparrell thē, according to their affections. The soyle proper for the Mulberrie to beare agreea∣ble foode for the Wormes, is that same which the Vine desireth. Wine is healthfull for the Wormes, fortifying, preseruing and curing their diseases. And as the Vine beginnes to bring forth good wine, in his fifth or sixt yeere, so in like age the Mulberrie be∣gins to beare leaues, very good to nourish the crea∣ture, an obseruation heretofore alreadie marked. Hauing made these two excellent plants here to march in companie, it shall not be to ill purpose in continuing to represent their sympathies, to say, that the spirit of wine, by distillation, is conuerted into water of life: So the quint-essence of the Mulber∣rie yeelded in the leafe, is from thence extracted by the Worme, which turnes it into silke, the earthly matter remaining in the wood, of the which, yet the most digested part, yeeldes in the bark, from whence it is taken, as hath been seene. But to enter fur∣ther into the consideration of such secrets of na∣ture, that would bee to surpasse the limits of my de∣liberation, which is not to treate in this place but of the barke of the white Mulberrie, for to gather the riches which therein is hidden. So my discour∣ses not diuing to the Center, shall rest themselues at the Superficiall.
By this figure is shewed the order, to ranke the tables on the skaffolds, for to lay the leaues on, to feed the Wormes there.
By this figure is shewed the manner to place the rods between the tables, for the Wormes to clime vp and spinne their silke.
TO wind off the Silke from the cods you shal pro∣ceed in this fashion, that is, to set a cawthern in a furnace filled with faire water, the neatest & cleerest is best, which shal be heated til such a degree, that the water becomes bubbled, as though there were smal pearles in the middle, casting vp a little white skum, which it wil do when it is ready to seeth; & then you shall cast in your cods or bottoms, which you shal re∣moue and stir vp and downe with a little broome, or small bushes; & if they will not wind easily, you shall augment your fire, and being begun to wind, if you see that they wind easily, you shall slacken it. The bottoms winding, the threeds wil catch hold at the said broome, or bushes, which you shall draw out with your fingers the length of halfe a yard and more, till that all the grossenesse of the cods bee wond off, which you shal cut off & lay aside, holding alwaies with one hand all the threeds of your bot∣toms ioyned, & vnited to one threed, & then accor∣ding to the silke that you desire to make, you shal take of the threeds of the bottoms; that is, if you wil make Organcin, you shal take the threeds of six bottoms, or if you will make Verone, you shall take twelue or fif∣teene cods, & hauing ioyned & vnited them in one threed, you shal put it first of all through a wyer ring, appointed for to rank the threeds, which must be fa∣stened against the fore-part of a peece of wood, set directly vpon the forme, before the round or circle which wee call a bobbin, for that in the top of that peece of wood in a little space that there is, are faste∣ned two bobbins distant one from another two fin∣gers; from the said ring you shall draw your threed,
and shall crosse it vpon the said bobbins, which are fastened there, to no other end, but to twist the silke, and from the bobbins you shall put thorough the said threed aboue in a ring, which is fastened in the middest of a staffe, which goes to & fro as the Turne goes, called a lincet, set a crosse beneath the wheele, and from that ring you shall draw and fasten the said threed vpon the wheele, which you shal alwaies turne till your skeane of silke be wonde vp. It is re∣presented in this next figure. You must note also that according to the number of threeds of bottoms, which you haue taken to compose your threed, you shall continue the said quantitie of cods for your threed, and shall alwaies furnish the like number, when any one shall be quite wonde off, or their threed broken, which you shall perceiue by the mouing of the bottoms, when the full number stirs not, and you shal continue that vn∣till your skeane be made. You shall also be curious to cut the knots which wil be at your bottoms, or threed, to make your silke more pure and stronge. In the winding of the silke, some put Gumme Ara∣bick in the water, where they cast the cods to winde off the silke, (which they say) they doe to the end to make it more pure and glossie; but it is for meere deceit, of purpose to make it weigh.
By this figure is shewed the fashion of the Engine, how to wind off the silke from the cods, with the furnaces and cawtherns for that purpose.
By this figure is shewed the portraits of the cods, and the Butterflies comne forth of them, to engender and lay their egs vpon black Serge, Chamb∣let, Tammey or such like stuffes as hath been said.
