24363 S108032 99843722 8474
A new Dialogue VVHEREIN IS CONTEY∣ned the examination of the Messe, and of that kynde of Preisthode, whych is ordeined to say messe: and to offer vp for remyssyon of synne, the bodye and bloude of Christe agayne. Beleue not euery spirite, but trye the spirites, whether they be of God or no: for many false pro∣phetes are gone into the worlde.
The names of the speakers in thys Dialogue. Mastres Missa Master Knowlege Master Fremouthe Master iustice of Peace Peter preco the ry Palemon the Iudge Doctor Prophyri Syr Phillyp Philargyry
VVYLLYAM TVR∣NER VNTO THE READER. ALTHOVGHE IT BE not belōgyng vnto my pro∣fessyō to dispute of maters of diuinite, whyche am a Phisitian: yet extreme ne∣cessite requirīg I am cōpelled to do in thys kynde of war, as coblers, shoma¦kers, masons, carpēters, & al other mē of handy occupations are compelled to doo, when theyr cytie is beseged, to take wepens in theyr handes and be∣come warriers, whych haue had lytle or no experiēce of war before, when as theyr cytie is beseged. Whych: yf that (when a cyty is beseged) euery mā that is a faythfull citizen oughte to do the beste that he can, to defende hys cytye, and to ouercū the enemies of the same: who wyll blame me, which am no pro∣fessor of diuinitie, when as the cyty of God, whereof I am a sworne Citizen,
is beseged, wyth so great hostes of po∣pyshe warriers: yf I play in this tyme of nede, the diuine warryer, to defēde the forsayd cyty, and endeuore my selfe to ouercome the enemyes of the same. The enemies of our city, ar they, whi∣che take by violēce away ye godly and necessarie ordinaūces of our cyty and would by force thurst into our cyty, la∣wes of theyr awn makīg, cōttary vnto the lawes of our lawmaker which buil¦ded our city, & dyed for ye liberty of the same. Suche enemyes, ar the Byshop of Rome, and all Popyshe Prelates and preistes, whyche mangle and my∣nishe, yea, rob and many wayes deface the mooste comfortable cōmon seale of our saluation and redemptiō: the holy Sacramēt of Christes body & bloude, and in ye stede of the same, set in a mere mannes inuention, a certayne Popish playe, whych they call the meritorius Messe, bearyng vs in hande that, that they can doo wyth it as muche as our redemer Christ coulde do wt hys most
blessed passiō, which thyng I iudge to be greatly to the dyshonour of Christ, that is that our most cōfortable cōmō seal of our lybertie, and redemption, should be māgled and robbed, and for the moste parte of the hole yere, taken from vs, and that the worke of a man should be made equall with the worke of our Lorde and lawmaker whych is both God and mā: I could do no lesse, but wryte thys booke, to defende the blessed ordynaunce of our Lorde and redemer, and wrastle a lytle wyth the wycked mannes ordynaūces, to helpe to dryue them out of the churche oure cytie, and to restore the ordynaunce of our sauyour into the church agayn. I know that many wyll be offended, and take it very greuously, that I shoulde wryts of thys matter, and I loke for none other, but some shal cal me knaue and heretyke for my laboure taken in thys matter. Some wyll there be also of Sathans syde, whyche neuer can be satiate wyth bloud, whych wyll de∣syre
to haue my bloude, as dyuers in Englande, at thys daye, yet lyuynge haue done, God forgiue them. And the same, yf that theyr crueltyes were not repressed and holden downe wyth the hyer powers, whych ar manteyners of al truth and honesty, would not leaue alyue in thys realme one of my iuge∣ment: ye vse ether to wryte or to preach agaynst such mānes inuencions, as at thys tyme, I do wryte agaynst: but I care not for these horsleches, trustynge that he that hath so ofte delyuered me frō the handes of myne enemies, wyll either saue me from them at this tyme also, or elles, yf it be hys pleasure that I shal lose my lyfe for his names sake, I shall be sure to fynde it agayn. But yf there be any man that of a conscien∣ce had agaynste me and thynke that I holde any false opinions in thys boke or any other booke and woulde haue the amendement of me and not my de∣struction yf they be learned, let them wryte agaynste me, and I shal answer
them or elles yf I can not, recante it that I haue wrytten. In the meane season I woulde desyre the vnlearned whyche erre by reason of ignoraunce and not of malyce, that they woulde cease from raylynge agaynste me, tyll that theyr chefe champions haue con∣futed my booke, and haue perceyued that I wyll not recante. Thys would I also requyre of learned mē yf it coul¦de be obteyned. I answered wythin these seuen yeres a certayne learned man of Englande and confuted as well as I could, hys boke but he con∣trary vnto all honestie and learnyng, perceyuynge that he was not able to answere to my booke, in euery booke that he wrote afterwardes agaynst o∣ther men rayled and scoffed agaynste me by name. Should learned mē play suche partes in a chrysten kingdom? I thinke that it were mete that he that is learned & opēly in wrytīg or in pulpit speaketh agaīst any mā shuld ether be
com∣pelled to confute hys opinions that he rayleth agaynst, or elles should be cō∣pelled openly to cry hym mercy, whom he hathe sklaundered. Yf thys were brought to passe, we shold haue fewer raylers in Englande then we haue. Therfore haue I sette my name vnto thys boke that yf thou thynke that I haue wrytten herein, any thynge a∣gaynst God or hys word, thou mayest knowe to whome thou shouldeste wryte. Almyghty God graunte to the ignorante, knowlege, and to them that haue knowledge, to lyue thereafter. Amen.
Mastres Missa. I Am credible informed by the reporte of my faythful and vnfayned frēdes, that there ar nowadayes many rash & vngodly mē, which vtterly despice me, & set me at nought. saiynge, that I am not she that I am takē for, & that I am ye Popis dough∣ter, and haue dryuen out of the church, the supper of oure Lorde, and haue set vp my selfe, in the stede of it: and that I am ye greatest blasphemy, that euer was vnto Christes death and passion, wyth many other spitefull lyes & slan∣ders, wherwyth they woulde kyll me, yf they coulde. But, ye good catho∣lyke and Christen people, knowe well enoughe, what I am and from whēce I came? Ye wote that I came from Christe and hys Apostles, and that I am allowed & approued wyth mo, then an hundreth holy fathers Byshoppes of Rome, and I haue bene more, then these .CCCCC. yeres approued by
the hole churche. And because manye newe fangled fellowes, would that I shoulde be remoued oute of the way, that Chrystes supper, (as they call it) myghte haue place in the Churche, as an holosmmer thyng and more profy∣table for mannes soule then I am: I wyll at thys tyme (compelled by ne∣cessytie,) compare my selfe wyth theyr supper, and proue my selfe more wor∣thy of place in Christes churche, then it is. The Supper that these fellowes speake af, euen after theyr awne cōfes∣syon, is but a memoryall of Chrystes death, of a gyuyng of thankes, for the benefit of mans saluatiō wherby mās fayth is strengthened, and theyr loue is in creased. These are the chefest pro∣perties, that these new gospellers doo gyue vnto theyr so greatly cōmended supper. But harke now what I both do and cā do. I deliuer the sely soules that haue bene long pituossly punish∣ed in purgatory, frō theyr paynes and
tormentes. Where fynde you in al the hole Scrypture, that the supper of oure Lorde, can doo so muche? I can make fayre wether, and rayne: I can heale all Sycknesses, and brynge dampned soules oute of Hell: I can purchasse remyssyon of synnes, by the offerynge vp agayne, of Chrystes bo∣dy and bloude. I can wyth fyue wor∣des, make bothe God and man. Why∣che thynge, seynge that God can not doo: can not I do more, then God can doo? Nowe lette these newe fellowes tell, whether the supper of our Lordes, can do so much or no. Yet for all this, yf nede requyre, I saye, that I am the supper of our Lord: and my great frē∣des, Prophiry my patrō doctor of the Canō law, & syr Phillip Philargiry, doctor of diuinite, haue taught me to call my selfe so: yf that my other name, shoulde be at any tyme to odyous. Ite missa est: fare ye wel, tyl ye nexte tyme yt we mete again. Knouule. here ye not, as this womā speketh so blasphemoussly
agaynste God and his worde? Marke ye not, as she preferreth her selfe be∣fore the supper of our lord Iesu christ and yet she is the Popis doughter? Fremouth. I heare her talke very wel howbeit I perceyue not the haynous∣nes of the matter, as ye doo: therfore, shew me it playnly & I shall not spare to lay it to her charge. Knouulege. fyrst when she is but ye creature of mā, she sayeth, that she can take synne awaye, by the offerynge vp of Christes bodye and bloude: wherein, she maketh her selfe equall wyth our sauyour Christ. And wher as she sayeth yt she cā make rayn & fayre wether, & heale all maner of dyseases, she makethe her selfe god: Where as she sayeth, that she cā make wyth .v. wordes, bothe God and man, she maketh her selfe myghtyer thē god for seyng that god is euerlastyng, and hath no begynnynge, he can not make hym selfe then wher as she sayeth, that she maketh God she makethe her selfe myghtier thē god. Yf this be not blas∣phemy,
what shall we call blasphemy? Fremouth. Syr, these are intollerable blasphemies in dede, therfore, she hal not scape wyth them thus, How Gen∣telwoman tary a lytle, and heare what shallbe sayde vnto you. Here master Iustice before al thys worshypful cō∣pany, in God and the Kynges name I charge you wyth thys womā, that she may be furthcūmyng, to answer vnto such crymes of heresy and blasphemy, as shallbe layde vnto her charge. Master Iustice. Wotest thou, ye lewed fellow what thou sayest & doest? wylt thou rayle agaynste the holy & blessed messe, and accuse her of heresy & blas∣phemy? lay hādes on this felow, for he speaketh against the syxe articles, and agaynst the Sacramente of the altar. I take wytnes of you neyghboures, what thys fellowe sayeth. knouulege. Soft syr and be not so hasty, yf that ye put thys man in pryson, and refuse to execute it, that he hathe charged you wyth all saye not but ye be warned ye
wyl be throw your selfe. Ye ar begiled master Iustice, the worlde is not now as ye thinke it is. The time of persecu∣ting the professors of the truth (thākes be vnto God) beginneth now to weare away, ye haue persecuted long enough already in tyme past, & a lytle to longe. The kynges intent & purpos, is nowe at the beginning of his reygne to pur∣ge and clense the churche of al abuses and enormites, & to examine and try with the touch stone of goddes word, all sacrifices & ceremonyes, whych are in the church: whether thei ar agreing wyth the word of God or no: that they that do agre, may be allowed & holden styl, and yt thei, that ar disagreing, may be taken away. Then seyng that thys is the Kynges mooste godly purpose, when as ye wyll not suffer men to cite abuses & such thynges, as at thought to be abuses, to come to examination, mē may gather playnly, that ye entēde to resyst ye kinges most godly purpos. Which yf ye doo, ye ar not his frende.
Yf the messe, after dew examinatiō be found to be good & godly she shal haue no harme, but yf she be sounde to be of anticstrih & but a fained thyng, to wyn money wc, to the ydle prestes tht cā not preach: why may not ye kingaes hygh∣nes as well put her down, & dryue her out of the church, as the popes wilines set her vp, and broughte her into the church? Therfore I wil aduyse you, to leaue of your troblynge of thys honest man, & be contet, to execute his resona∣ble request. Master Iustic. Syr, at your instaūce, I wyll let this man go, & wyl also se, that thys womā shall be furth∣cūming, to answer vnto such thynges as shal be layde vnto her charge. kno∣uuleg. Farewel master Iustice. M. Iust. farewell syr. Palemon the Iudge. In∣quere Peter, yf there be any man that hathe any actyon, or matter, to be in∣treated of thys daye in thys Courte, lette hym brynge it in, and entre it and he shall be hearde. Peter Preco. Yf there be anye, that hath any mater
in thys courte, let him entre hys actiō: for my Lord iudge is redy to heate it. M. Fremouth. Here is a woman (my Lorde) whyche defendeth open heresy, and commytteth blasphemy agaynste God & his holy word. Palemon. What sayest thou womā, is it so, as thys mā hathe reported of thee? Missa. I deny, that I spake any heresy, or commytted any blasphemy in al my life. Fremouth Dyddest thou not saye, that yu cameste frō Christ and the Apostles: that thou couldest delyuer soules out of purga¦tory, yea, and dampned soules oute of hel, and couldest purchesse forgiuenes of synnes, wyth the offerynge vp of Christes body and bloude agayn, and that thou couldest do more thē Christ can do? are not these saiynges ful of heresy and blasphemy? Missa I graūte I sayd all the saiynges whych ye haue rehersed sauinge the last whych I vt¦terly deny that I euer said or though in all my lyfe tyme. Fremouth. I shall proue my Lorde) er I go hence, by her
awn hāde wrytyng, that she taketh in hande to doo, that God neuer toke in hande, that is, to make God, whych yf I cā shew, I shall proue, that she hol∣deth, that she can do more then Christ can do. Palemon. Thē ye deny not, but that ye tayde all the reste, whereof ye are accused. Missa. I sayde them, and wyll say them agayne. knouulege. And those saiynges shall I, by the helpe of God proue false, Hereticall and blas∣phemous. Porphir{us} and Philargir{us}. We desyre you (my Lorde) that ye wyll ad∣myt vs to be defenders and aduocates vnto thys innocent woman. Palemon. I am well content, defende her as well as ye can. Prophiry. Euen as it is ney∣ther semynge nor godly that the holy scripture should be called to examina∣tion and tryal, whether it be scripture or no, & they that holde that scrypture is no scripture ought streyght wayes to be taken for Heretikes and infide∣les: so the blessed and holy Messe why¦che is as true as the scripture is and
came frō God, as well as the scripture came, ought not to be suffered to com vnto any examination or tryal: and a they yt doubt or holde agaynst it, ough by and by to be takē for Heretikes and infideles. The blessed messe is such a hygh and inscrutable mistery, that n lay man ought to reson or dispute of i And though ther were any abuse crep into the Misse (as no man is hable to proue that there is any at all) it should belong only vnto the Byshoppes and vnto the clergy, to medle wyth suche matters, and not to suche lay and vn∣learned fellowes, as these be. Whych as it dothe appere by theyr apparell haue neyther taken any degre in diui∣nite, neyther in the Cannon law. Cat the wyse man sayeth to suche. Mitte ar∣chana dei: let the secretes of God alon And Salomon sayeth: He that is th sercher of Goddes maiesty, shall be ouerthrowen wyth hys glorye. Ther∣fore it is not lawfull that these fello¦uee should mydle wyth any such mat∣ters,
as the messe is. Moreouer, yf these nēs accustiō should be allowed, ther is no suche holy ceremonie in the hole church, whiche shoulde not come into great ieoperdy of destructiō sone after. Let al mē beware, that they breake not a good ordre. Now is the churche in a ight good ordre, which yf it were ones brokē, the church should come in great eoperdy. Take but one staffe out of a būdel, ar not al the rest loose & ready to all out? the ceremonies of the church, ar knyt in such an ordre, yt yf ye take one away, that al the rest shal be in ieo{per}dy of fallynge into destruction. Further∣more, ye know also that the multitude of thys realme, hath the messe in suche reuerēce, and taketh it for such a godly thynge (as they are bounde to doo no lesse) yf they shoulde ones perceyue that the Messe shoulde be handeled as a thefe and a robber, that is, yf she shoulde be openlye accused befo∣re the face of the Courte, the rude people woulde make an insurrectyon,
and so should all thys realme come in great ieoperdy, by the breakyng of the inwarde peace, of oure foren enemies. Therfore it were beste to refuse these mennes accusation, & not to admyt it, but to punysh them for theyr bolde in∣terpryse: But yf ye wyll nedes admyt theyr accusation, by your pacience, my lord, seing that thys is a spiritual ma∣ter: it shoulde be hearde before a spiri∣tual iudge: for as aristotel saieth euery man can iudge well in that thyng that he knoweth: then he that knoweth not the matter, can neuer iudge well in it. Wherfore is were beste that eyther ye should (my Lorde) reiect these mennes accusation or elles suffer the matter to be deuolued vnto som spiritual iudge Palemon the saiynges alleged oute of Cato and Salomon forbyd not Chri∣sten men to searche the secretes of thyr fathers testament and wyll, whych he hath left in wrytyng, that they should knowe but only suche secretes, as god hath not opened in hys holy word and
testamente, and are not necessarye for man to know: then these mē may reade and searche out al the secretes, that are cōteyned in the scripture, & for the vn∣derstandyng of it, may wyth sobrenes and discretion resō and confer of anye place of scrypture. And yf any thynge be taken for a parte of goddes wyll or commaundemēt, whych they doubt of, whether it be cōteined in theyr fathers wyll or no: why maye not they haue a recourse thyther, to se whither it is cō∣teyned ther, or no? Yf that onely Prei∣stes shoulde be suffered to come vnto the readyng of our fathers testament, yf they sayde that the Pope were heed of Christes churche, and all our good∣des yt are laymē were theyres at theyr pleasure: yf we myght not be suffered, to searche our fathers wyll and testa∣mēt, whether it were so or no: we shold haue shortly many rāke & rich papistes in thys realme, as we haue all redy a great dele to many. And yf they would haue our wyues and doughters also,
and sayd, that it were goddes wyl, that we shoulde let them haue them, yf we myght not searche the testament, whe∣ther it were so or no, in what case were we in then? As for these men, whme ye iudge by theyr apparell to be vnlear∣ned, because they seme not too be doc∣tors of diuinite, and of the Canō law, and therfore not worthy to accuse any abuse, that it may be put away, ye fo∣low very lytle the scripture, whyche ye eyther know or ought to know: Nolite iudicare secundum aspectum. &c. Iudge not accordyng vnto the outwarde ap∣perance, but iudge after ryght iudge∣ment. The one of these mē is a master of arte of Cambrige, and the other is a master of arte of Oxforde, and haue in theyr youth studyed diuinite. Muste they nowe be vnlearned, because they ar no preistes? we shall haue a tryal of theyr learnyng hereafter. And though they were as vnlearned as a man is possyble: no man can hyndre them to accuse thē of heresy & blasphemy, whō they heare speakyng playn blasphemy
and heresy. Therfore I wil allow their accusation, & iudge as I shall se euy∣dence gyuen. As for yt ye feate, yt yf the messe should be suffered to be ones ac∣cused, yt al the ceremonies of the church shoulde sone after decaye and come to nought, it is but a folysh feare. Yf the messe be foūde fauty & the ceremonies be founde to be of the same sorte, that the messe is, why should they not be al taken away togyther? for thei that are ioyned togyther in ye myscheous dede, ought not to be separated in ye punish∣mentent. Your thondre boltes of vpro¦tes of the people, whereby ye meane that great bloud should be shede wtin this realme, yf ye messe should be accu¦sed of heresy & blasphemy, ar but vain for ye kinges most louing subiectes, ar more godly and wyser, then they wyll disturbe the cōmon wealth for the exa∣minatiō of a mā or a womā. What say you: yf Baals image were here in En∣lande, whiche god commaūded expres∣sedly to be destroyed, and ye knowe certaynly that there shoulde aryse an
vprore and the puttyng down of thys Idole: whether were it better to suffre the Idol to stande styll wyth the hygh displeasure and indygnation of God whych threatned subuersion vnto the lande, where Baal were worshypped, or to burne Baal wyth an vprore, and so to auoyde the indignation of God? I trust to almyghty god, that we shal haue no vprores at all. Where as ye would haue the matter deuolued vn∣to some spirituall iudge, thynkynge that I am not able to iudge of thys mater, for lacke of knowlege and lear∣nyng in matters of religion, I would not that ye should reken me to be vn∣learned in Goddes law, because I am no Bishop: as though only bishoppes and prelates were spirituall men, and none elles. Qui non habet spiritum dei, hic non est eius: He that hath not the spirite of God, he is not hys: But all true Christen men haue the spirite of God, then are al Christen men spiritu∣al mē. Thē must ye eyther take me for
no Christen man, or elles graunt, that I am a spiritual iuge. As for my kno∣welege in the holy scripture, thoughe many of my predecessors haue bene to theyr greate shame shamefully igno∣raūt in ye scripture: I would ye should knowe, that I haue bene brought vp in humanitie, Logike, and diuinitie. n the vniuersite of Cambryge, tyll I was .xxii. yeres olde, and that sēce that tyme, though the cōmon law hath ben my chefe study, I haue diligently read the scriptures from the begynnyng to the ende, wherby, thankes be vnto the Lorde, thus muche knowlege haue I gotten, that I can discerne true religi∣n from superstytyon, and knowe my hepherdes voyce, from a straungers. Thys saiyng of Dauid: Et nunc reges intelligite, & crudimini iudices terre: Get you vnderstandyng ye kynges and be you learned ye iudges of ye earth. This sentēce made me reade the scriptures, sence I was a iudge, more hedefully and attentely, then euer I dyd before,
Therfore ye shall not nede to haue the matter deuolued vnto an other iudge. Now yf ye haue any thynge agaynste this woman, speake, and ye shal haue audience. Knouuleg. holde ye your opi∣nion styll that ye are ordeyned of all∣myghty god, and I pray you in what place of the Bible dyd God order you mastres missa? Porphir. Christ ordined the blessed messe in the .xxvi. of Math. the .xiiii: of Marke ye .xxii. of Luke and in ye .xi. of the former epistel to the Co∣rinthians,. knouulege. there is no men∣tion of the messe in any of these places Porphiry. What maketh mater, whe∣ther the name be ther or no, yf the thing be there. We ought rather to seke for the thynge it selfe alwayes more, then for the name of it. knouulege. How do men discerne and knowe thynges, but by theyr names? then seynge that ther is no mētiō made of the messe, in these places rehersed, howe shall we knowe that Christe ordeyned the messe there▪ Porphiry. ye shall knowe, that Christ
ordeyned the Messe by Christes wor∣des, wherwyth he ordeyned that thyn∣ge, that we call the messe. knowlege. Reherse the wordes I pray you, wher∣wyth Christe institued the messe. Por∣phyry. these they be: Dominus Iesus in a nocte, qua traditus est. etc. The Lorde Iesus in ye ntght, that he was betrayed toke breade and after that he had gy∣uen thākes he brake it and sayd: Ta∣ke, eate, thys is my bodye whyche is broken for you: doo this in the remem∣braūce of me. After the same maner, to ehe the cup, after the supper was don, and sayd, This cup is ye new testamēt in my bloude, doo ye thys as oft as ye shall drynke, in the remembraunce of me. By these wordes, dyd Christe in∣stytute and ordeyne the Messe. knouu∣lege. And wyth the same wordes he instituted the Lordes suppe, then is the Messe and the Lordes supper all one thynge. Porphyry. They are all one thynge in verye dede, therfore, they that rayle agaynste the blessed
Messe, rayll also agaynste the supper of our Lorde. Knouuleg. Yf the Messe and the supper of the Lorde be all one thyng, the ryghtes, the housell, the sa∣crament of Christes body and bloud, and the supper of the Lorde are al one thynge: then the messe, the housell, the rightes, the sacramēt of Christes bo∣dy and bloude, and the supper of the Lorde, ar all one thyng. Wherof it fo∣loweth, that whosoeuer may celebrate or do any of these: may also celebrate or doo all the rest: But all the lay men in Englande may celebrate the supper of the Lord, and may receiue theyr rygh∣tes or housell, as well as preistes, ther∣fore they may all celebrate or do messe as well as preistes may. Yf the supper of the Lord or houstyng and the messe be all one thyng: whatsoeuer then be∣longeth vnto the one, belongethe also vnto the other: and what soeuer is re∣quyred to the celebratynge of the one, is also requyred to the celebratyng of the other: But a shauen croune, a prei∣es
goun, an albe, a stole, a vestiment, confiteor, misereatur, collectes, sequē∣ces, secretes, canon, memento, eleuatiō of the sacramente, remembraunce of ayntes departed, offering vp of christ for remissyon of synnes, breakynge of breade in .iii, partes: one for them that ar in Purgatory, an other for thē that are in heauen, the thyrde for them that are alyue, washynge of a mannes fyn∣gers, myxynge of water and wyne to∣gyther, ar necessarily requyred of him hat shall saye messe, then yf it be true that ye say, that the messe and Christes supper, whych the common people cal, theyr housell or ryghtes, are all one hyng, then is it requyred, that all mē whych shall celebrate the Lordes sup∣per or receyue theyr howsel, must haue shauē crounes, prestes gownes, albes, stoles and vestimentes vpō theyr bac∣kes: they must say secretes, and sequē∣ces, collectes & canō: they must breake the hooste in .iii. partes, and offer vp of freashe, Christes body for remissyō
of synne, wyth all the other superstiti∣ons toyes and bables aboue rehersed: But these ar not requyred of hym that shal celebrate the supper of the Lorde, and yet are requyred of him that shall celebrate messe: it foloweth therfore that the supper of Christ and the mess are not all one. More ouer yf the sup¦per of the Lorde and the messe were al one: when as a lay man maye as wel receyue the supper of the Lorde for  preist as a preist can do for a lay man then might a layman as wel say mess for a preiste, as a preist can do for a la mā. But I do not doubt, but ye think that to be an incōuenience, and cōtrar to your ofte commended order, then  it not conueniente, that the supper o Christe and the messe, shoulde be rek¦ned all one. Philargyrus. Me thynk that ye spake of late wonderous v discretly and vnreuerently, and othe wyse thē it becommed a Christen ma to doo: where as ye called the holy v stimentes whyche the preiste weare
the honoure of Christe, who is pre∣sent at the messe, superstitious toyes and bables, seyng that they were con∣secrated to holy vses by holy prayers, nd by the inuocatiō of goddes name. When ye go to speake with a great mā o ye not wel to put on the best clothes hat ye haue? shall a preiste then doo misse when he putteth on better clo∣hes thē ye cōmon people wereth whē he ot only speaketh wt, but also toucheth he king of heauēye must not therfore  rashly dispise the hallowed vestimē es & other suche lyke outward semely eremonies, which serue for a good or∣r. knouulege. I perceyue well, when s ye can not answerere to the reso∣es, whyche I haue made vnto youre llowe, ye would drawe me craftelye te of the matter in to an other newe matter. But leaste I shoulde seme to be vnable to answere vnto youre re∣sones, I saye, the vestymentes for all the Bysshoppes bablynge are no holyer, then Tom Tynkers taberd
is, and ye name of God is abused, whē it is called vpon, to sanctify thynges that God neuer cōmaunded to be san∣ctifyed or hallowed. Christes naturall body is not now honoured wt outward garmentes, and he wyl not be honou∣red otherwise, then he hath commaun∣ded: for he hath gyuen no cōmaunde∣munte so to be honoured. And as for hys godhede, because it is a spyrite, i muste be spyrytually worshypped in sprite and in truth, and not in outward vestimētes. Yf ye wyll worshyp Chri∣stes bodye, as ye oughte to doo, gyue good newe clothes vnto the naked or to the poore, that haue nede of clothes and then doo ye honour Christe as ye shoulde do. But to returne vnto oure purpose agayne, I axe of you, whether a lay man when he taketh hys rygtes at Easter in loue and charite wyth a christiā faith, celebrateth the hole sup∣per or no? Philargy. I graunt that h celebrateth the hose supper. knouulege but the same celebrateth not the hol¦nesse
and the supper of the Lorde are not all one. Porphiry. As a naked man now wythin this houre clothed, dyffe∣reth not in substāce from hym selfe be∣cause he is clothed: so the messe, dyffe∣reth not from the supper of the Lorde, because it hath decent apparell nowe, semely for such a mystery, whyche per∣chāce it had not in ye primatiue church or elles there is no difference at al, be∣twene the Messe and the supper of our Lorde: for there is in the messe before the consecration, breade and wyne, and after the cōsecration, the body & bloud of Christ, and these are in the supper of our Lorde, and also in the messe, ther∣fore the messe and the Supper of oure Lorde are al one. knouulege. Ye say be∣cause there is breade and wyne in the messe before the consecration, and the body and bloude of Christ after the cō∣secration, and these ar both in the sup∣er, and also in the messe, therfore, that the supper of the Lorde and the messe are all one. Fyrst ye doo suppose to be
true which is playn false, that is wher soeuer breaed and wyne is, & the bodye and bloude of Christe is, that there is Christes supper. At the maryage in the Cane of Galile, was breade and wyne, and the body and bloud of Christ more truly, then they are now in your messe: yet was not Christes supper there. In the Supper also of the Corynthyans, which they eate before the Lordes sup∣per, was breade and wyne, and (yf it be true, that the sacramētaries hold, that Christes body is in euery place,) there was Christes body and bloude, but for all that, that supper was not Christes supper, because it was not done in the remembraunce of Christes deathe, but onely to fyll the belly, and not to fede the soule. Porphiry. thys is not a lyke case, for neyther in the Cane of Galile, neyther in the Corynthyans Supper was, the wordes of consecration sayd and therfore was there no supper of oure Lorde. knowelege. Then yf the wodes of consecration had bene sayd
in the Corynthyans supper, thoughe the Corynthyans hadde not intended to haue remembred Chrystes deathe, theyr former supper shoulde haue bene christes supper, and now by your resō, when and where soeuer a preiste sayth the wordes of consecratyon, as ye call them, ouer breade and wyne, there is Chrystes supper, as thoughe in these it. thynges alone to haue breade wyne and certayne wordes sayd ouer the sa∣me, shoulde consyste Christes supper: whyche opynion I wyll take in hande to proue false by the autorite of goddes word. Luke in the .xxii. chap. describing the Lordes supper & al such thinges as belōge vnto it, in these wordes: do this in ye remēbraūce of me, teacheth vs plaī¦ly, ye one of the chefe pointes that belō∣geth vnto ye lordes supper is to call to remēbraūce ye passiō of christ. And paul in ye .xi. chap. of the former epistle to the corīthiās writeth of christes sup{per} thus Take ye eat ye this is my body which is brokē for you: do this in ye remēbraūce of
me. After the same maner also, he toke the cuppe, when supper was done and sayd: thys cup is the new testament in my bloude, do thys (as oft as ye shall drinke it) in the remēbraunce of me, for as oft as ye shal eat of thys bread, and drynke of thys cup, ye shall declare the death of the lord vntyl he come. These are the wordes of saynt Paule and the vndoubted scripture: wherevpon I gather, that it belongeth as muche to Christes supper to receyue the breade and wyne in the remēbraūce of Christ, and to declare and shew hys death, as it belongethe to reherse these wordes, thys is my bodye, yea and more to: for sainte Paule sayeth, as oft as ye shall eate thys breade and drynke thys cup, ye shall declare and set furth the death of the Lord vntyll he come. He sayeth not. as oft as ye shal eate thys breade and drynke thys cup, ye shall say these wordes ouer the breade and wyne, this is my bodye and thys is my bloude. Then doth not onely breade and wym
and the wordes of consecration sayde by a prest, make the supper of the lord, excepte the remembraunce of Christes death, & the presēce of Christes church be annexed also therunto. Then doo I gather this argument, the messe is not done in the remembraunce of Christe, as oft as it is done therfore: the messe is not the supper of the lord. Further∣more, that the messe and the supper of the Lorde, dyffer no more one from an other, then a naked man and a clothed man do: thys argumente shall suffici∣ently declare. Whose operationes and endes doo differ, and are dyuerse, they are also dyuerse thynges, and dyffer, and can not be all one: But the opera∣tiōs and endes of Christes supper and the messe are dyuerse, and dyffer one from an other: therfore the supper of Christ and the messe do dyffer, and are diuerse thinges, and can not be al one. The operation and ende of the Messe are these to purchasse remission of syn by offerynge vp of Christe agayne to
make fayre wether and rayne, to heale sycke horses, meseld swyne, & the french pox, to bryng soules to rest that are in tormente and payne, to delyuer soules out of hel. The messe is sayd and done in the remembraunce and honoure of men. Thys is also an operation at the messe, to purge synnes, and to take thē awaye, and to brynge the kyngdome of heauen, by the receyuyng of breade and wyne. The fyrst ende or intēt of ye messe whereof I made mention, is declared in this secret. Satisfaciat tibi domine etc. We beseche thee Lord tha the offering vp of thys presente sacrifyce, maye be a satisfactiō for the soule of thy seruaūt. It is also declared in this prayer which is sayde at the ende of euery messe. Pla∣ceat tibi sancta Trinitas. etc. O holy Trinite, let thys obedyente seruyce of my seruytude please thee, that thys sa∣crifice which I vnworthy haue offered vnto the eyes of thy maiesty, maye be vnto thee acceptable, and thou hauing
pytie, may be propiciable and purche∣ser of mercy. The same intent is decla∣red in thys secrete whych is conteyned in the messe, whych is sayde on the .xv. Sonday after Trinite sondaye: Con∣cede nobis domine quesumus, ut hec ob∣latio salutaris, et nostrorum fiat purgatio peccatorum, et tuae propitiatio pietatis. Lorde graunte vs we beseche thee, that thys holsom oblation may be the pur∣gation and clensyng of our synnes. &c. Also in the secrete of saynte Richarde, the intēt and ende of the messe is vtte∣red playnly in these wordes. Cōcede que sumus misericors deus. etc. Graunte vs mercyfull god, that by the intercessyon of saynte Richarde thy confessor and Byshoppe, thys rewarde offered to the eyes of thy maiesty, may both purchase vs grace to lyue well, and get vs euer∣lasting glori. Also that the purpose and inter of the messe is to saue both ye body & the soule: The secret in S. Romanes messe doth euidētly testifi in these wor∣des: Sacrifitiū deuotiōis ie. we besech ye
almyghty god, loke mekeky to, and re∣garde the sacrifice of our deuotiō, and of thy benygnite at the intercessyon of thy confessor & byshop Romane graūt thorow thys, health of bothe body and soule. Now by these wordes of ye messe here rehersed, it is euidēt, that the ende and intent of the messe is to make sa∣tisfaction for mānes soule, to purches mercy, to purge synne awaye by offe∣rynge vp of sacryfyce, and to obtayne euerlastyng glory. Hath the supper of the Lorde I pray you any such opera∣tion, intent, purpose and ende, as these be? Neuer one Another ende and ope∣tion of the messe, is to make fayre we∣ther & rayne. These titles in the mes∣sal: Missa pro serenitate aeris. Missa pro pluuia, doo sufficiently testify. Thys doth also testify the secret of the messe sayde for rayne. O blat is domine placare muneribus. etc. Lorde, be thou swaged by the rewardes offered vp: and gyue vs the helpe of sufficient rayne in dew seasō. Hath the lordes supper any such
operation or intente? That an other operation and ende of the Messe is to heale sycke horses, meseled swyne, and al other diseases, both of men and bea∣stes, these titles beare sufficiently wit∣nes: Missa {pro} peste an imaliū: A messe for the mortē or pestifero{us} syknesses of be∣stes. Missa Raphaelis archāgeli pro om∣nibus infirmit atibus, A messe or Rapha¦ell the archangel, for all sycknesses. Is Christes supper cōmaunded to be re∣ceyued for any suche purpose? that the messe is also sayd to delyuer soules out of payne and torment, the messe of, Re∣quiem, in these wordes beareth recorde Pro quorum memoria. etc. Lorde, gyue them euerlastynge rest, for whose me∣mory, the body of Christe is receyued. And in this, Post communionem, after theyr communion. Annue nobis do∣mine per hoc sacrificium quod sumpsim{us} etc. graunt vs Lord by thys sacrifice, whych we haue receyued yt the soules of thy seruaūtes may deserue to rece forgiuenes of theyr synnes. Wher did
Christe ordene that his supper shoulde be taken to delyuer soules oute of tor∣mente? That an other operation and ende of the messe is to delyuer soules out of hell, thys place red in the messe of, Requiem. doth beaer sufficient wyt∣nes. Hostias & preces tibi domine offe∣rimus. etc. Lorde we offer vp vnto the oblatyons and prayers, receyue thou them Lorde, for those soules, whom we remembre thys daye, make them Lord to passeouer from deathe to lyfe. And in thys prayer: Domine Iesu Christe rex gloriae. etc. is playne mention mayde of delyueraunce from hell, wythoute any figure or trope. Lord Iesu Christ king of glory delyuer the soules of al fayth∣full dede men frome the hande of Hell and from the depe lake. And in the pra∣yer of Gregories Trentalle thys is the ende of the Messe to delyuer sou∣les oute of the handes of deuelles. Iustorum animae in man dei sunt nec noct eis tormentum malitiae. The
ryghteouse mennes soules are in God∣des handes neyther shall any tormente of malyce vex them. Then it dothe ap∣pere, that the Messe goeth aboute to delyuer euell and dampned mennes soules from the place, where they are, that is, from Hell and from the han∣des of the deuell. Where tormentethe any Deuell any soules departed, sa∣uynge onely in hell? therfore the intent of the Messe is to delyuer foules oute of hall. The wordes of the Trentall messe are these. Deus summa spes no∣strae redemptionis qui in terra promissi∣onis. et cetera. God the chefe hope of pure redemptyon whyche haste chosen before all other landes to be borne in the lande of Promyse, and sufferedest death in the same place: Delyuer mer∣cyfully the Soule of thy seruaunte, frome the handes of Deuelles. Loo, here maye ye se, that the operation of the Messe, is too delyuer Soules frome the handes of Deuylles. Dyd Chryste ordeyne hys Supper to de∣lyuer
soules from the handes of de∣uelles? suerly theyr is no mētiō made of any such mater in the institution of Christes supper. That the messe is a memorial of ded mē, and yt it is done in the honoure of sayntes, the wordes of the messe, hereafter folowyng, do ma∣nifestlye declare. Pro quorum memo∣ria corpus Christi sumitur. etc. Lord gy∣ue them euerlastynge rest, in whose re∣membraunce the body of Christ is re∣ceyued. This is sayd in an other messe Assume quesumus omnipotens deus in honore. etc. We beseche the Lorde al∣myghty, take thes oblatiōs offered vp vnto thee, in the honour of saynt Eu∣stach, and hys fellowes. And it is sayd in an other messe. Hostias tibi domine pro commemoratione sancti Lamberti. Lorde, we offer vp vnto thee, oblatiōs for the remembraunce of saynt Lābert thy martyr and bishop. Was Christes supper ordeyned for the remembraūce only of christes passiō? Or is was also ordeyned for the remembraunce of mē,
whych at but his seruauntes? That ye messe intendeth to take synnes awaye by the offerynge of breade and wyne vnconsecrated, this secrete with an. C. no doth testify. Feria quarta post letare Supplices te rogamus omnipotens deus ut his sacrificiis peccata nostra munden∣tur quia tunc. etc. Almyghtye God we humbly beseche thee, that oure synnes maye be clensed by these sacrifices: for then thou gyueste the true health both of body and soule. These wordes sayth the preist before the sacring onely, hol∣dynge vnconsecrated wyne in the cha∣lyce, and vnconsecrated breade liynge vpon the chalice. Now haue I proued by the very wordes of the messe, that the ende of the messe is to purchase re∣mission, by offeryng of breade & wyne, to deserue euerlastynge lyfe by recey∣uynge and offeryng of Christes body, to make fayre wether & rayne to heale all sycknesses to bringe soules frō hel, and to delyuer them from tormentes, to honour sayntes, and to make a me∣moriall
of sayntes deathes, and nati∣uites, of the receyuyng of Christes bo∣dy and bloud, and otherwhyles to ma∣ke the same of the offerynge of breade and wyne. These are the operations, intentes, and endes of the messe, and the same are not the endes and operations of the supper of the Lorde, for the ende of christis supper is to remēber christes death, to gyue thākes for our redēptiō and to remēbre, that we all are mēbres of one body, and ought therfore one to loue an other. Therfor the endes of the messe & the operations of the same, and the ende and intent of Christes supper are diuerse, and differ much one frō an¦other: whereupon it foloweth, that the messe and Chrystes supper doo dyffer, and ar not al one. Then can ye not say, that the messe was ordeyned of God, in the xxvi. of Mathew and that the messe is the supper of ye lorde decked & semely appoynted with decēt apparell for such a mistery. Palemon. Yf ye haue no other places of scrypture, to proue hat the
messe was ordeyned of god, thē ye haue hyther to brought, furthe she muste be dryuē out of Christes church, as a mere inuētiō of mā. Therfor yf ye haue any mo places, bryng them furth. Philargy. The messe is good, & all goodnes is of god, as S. Iames sayeth: euery good gyft, and euery perfect gyft is from a∣boue, descendynge from the father of lyght: ergo the messe is of god. More∣ouer Christ sayeth in the .xiiii. of Iohn That cōforter, which is the holy ghost, whom the father shal send in my name, he shall teach you all thinges what so∣euer I shall speake vnto you. Loo, here Christe promyseth that the holy Ghost shal teach the Apostles and the church all thynges, that he shall speake af∣ter hys Ascension. Then dyd Christe doubtles tell the Churche many thyn∣ges after hys Ascensyon, whyche the holy Ghoste taught a greate whyle af∣ter, and emonge those thynges, that were onely taught after the ascention, was the messe. Also Iohn. xvi. Chap:
Christe sayeth, I haue many thynges to say vnto you, whych ye cā not beare now, but when he shall come whych is the spirite of truthe, he shall lede you into all truth: Beholde here, how that Christe dyfferred to shew the Apostles certayne verites, tyll that he was ascē∣ded vp into heauen. They was there some truthes tolde to the churche after that Christe was ascended, which was not tolde of Christe, before hys ascen∣cion: of and thē is no mentiō made in the .iiii. Euangelistes. And surely, as I haue sayde, the messe is one of them whyche was not iaught before the as∣cention, but aftet it, as our mother the holy churche beleueth, whose doctrine I wyll rather folowe then all the Lu∣therans in Germany, though therwer CCCCC. tymes as many mo, then now are. Magis enim credendū est Marie veraci{que} iudeorum turbae fallaci. Saye not nowe but that ye haue now scrip∣ture alleged you, to proue yt the messe is of God. Knouuleg. Ye make a reasō,
and brynge furthe scripture, to proue that the Messe is of God: But howe strong your reason is, and how rightly ye haue alleged the scrypture, I shall shortly declare. Where as ye reasō the messe is good, & al goodnes is of God, ergo the messe is of God: ye commyt a fallacy or a deceytful dryft of sophistry whych is called of the Logiciās, which hate such sophisticall deceytes, Petitio principii, that is when a mā wyl proue a thynge to be true, by the same thinge, or wyth an other, that is as doubtfull as that is, which is called into questiō. The chefe matter that we go aboute in thys accusation, is too proue that the messe is vngodly & full of blasphemy, and therfore ought to be put out of the church. And yet ye very wyttely allege thys for a prynciple, and out of al con∣trouersy, that the messe is good, and cō∣clude that therfore it is of God. No no syr, ye cā not bleare my eyes so. Proue ye fyrst that the messe is good and then shal I graunt you your conclusiō, that
it is of God. To the place whych ye al∣lege out of the .xiiii. of Iohn: wherwith ye would proue that Christ taught the Apostles & the church certayn doctrine that he taught not before his ascentiō, wherof ye saye that the messe is one: I answere, that ye allege the scrypture false: for it is not in the text as yon al∣lege it, he shall teache you what soeuer I shall saye vnto you, but what soeuer I haue said vnto you. I take to witnes both Erasmus translation & the Greke text which is thus. Ekinosymas didaxi panta kai ypomnesi ymas panta osa eipon ymin: that is to say, he shall teache you all thynges & put you in remembraūce of al thynges whatsoeuer I haue sayd vnto you. And here may all mē se, how crafte ye and vnfaythfully ye cite the scrypture, allegynge one tence for an other, and leauynge out the pryncipall part of the sentence. As touchynge the place whiche ye allege oute of the .xvi. of Iohn: in these wordes: I haue many hinges to, say vnto you, but ye cā not
beare thē now. But whē he shall come which is the spriet of truth, he shal lede you into all truth. I answer, that ye cā not proue by this place, yt the holy gost taught the church any doctrine, which the Apostles & Euangelistes haue not left behinde thē en theyr wrytinges. Yf ye say that they could not abide diuers thinges before Christes ascentiō: I say that they could abyde ye same after hys ascentiō. Yf ye would apply in this sē∣tēce this (word) you, only vnto ye church after ye apostles tyme, & not to the apo∣stles, ye do the apostles playn wrōg, for Christ sayd these wordes vnto thē. Thē what can ye gather of this place? Christ promised the apostles yt the holy ghost should lead thē into all truth, dyd he so or no? yf he performed his promise, the knew the apostles all truth & no parte of ye truth was vnknowē vnto thē. The apostles also was eyther vnfaithfull & disobediēt seruaūtes vnto christ, or thei were faithfull & obedient. Yf they were faithful & obediēt, thei kept thes his cō∣mādemētes
Speake that in the lyghte, whyche I spake in darkenes, and speake ye that openly, that ye haue hearde pryuely. But Christe taught by the holy ghost the Apostles, all truthe, then were they eyther disobedient seruauntes or elles they taughte in theyr wryttynges all truth. Yf they taught al truth in theyr wryttinges, & yet taught not the messe ther in, it foloweth that it is no partt of the trueth, & so not of god. Because that ye thynke, that Christ taught the churche some holsome doctrine, that he taught not the Apostles: I praye you whether shewed god the father, his son Christ, al truth and all doctrine neces∣sary for a Christē man to knowe or no? yf he dyd: then the Apostles learned of Christe all truthe, and euery necessary doctrine for a christen man, For Christ sayeth Iohn. xv. I haue shewed you al thynges whyche I haue hearde of my father. Yf that Christ hath not taught them al thynges necessary for a Christi man to know, then were they vnperfit
Christen men, and in an euell case: Yf Christ haue taught thē all truthe, and they woulde not teache vs that agayn in theyr Epistles and Gosples, they were both vnkind vnto vs, & disobedi∣ent persones to Christ, whych cōmaun∣ded them to teache vs all such thinges as he taught thē before: but they were both kynde vnto vs, and obedient vn∣to theyr mayster Christe: Therefore, they taughte in theyr wryttynges, that s, in the Epistles and Gospels, al hol∣som doctrine and necessary, for a Chri∣sten man to know. Therfore the .ii. pla∣ces which ye haue alleged out of Iohn make nothyng for the messe, and suche other vnwrytten vanytes, but declare the weakenes and imperfytnes of the Apostles whych wyth out the helpe of the holy ghost, could neyther remēbre, nor vnderstande, after Christes resur∣rection, such thinges as he had taught them before his passion. But for a fur∣ther tryall of the matter, put the case that christ had taught the church after
the apostles deathes, certayn holsū do∣ctrines, whyche he had not taught the apostles in theyr tyme: (which thynge no christen mā wyl graunt) yet it folo∣weth not, yt the messe should be that hol¦som & necessary doctrine, for it is cōtra∣ry vnto the nature of God, in whō fal∣leth no vnconstancy, to teach a cōtrary doctrine, after his ascension vnto that, which he taught before his passiō. But the messe is clene cōtrary vnto the doc¦trine, which he taught before his passiō and specially vnto thys. Nemo uenit ad patrem nisi per me. Nomā commeth vnto the father but throw me, therfore Christ neuer taught the messe, neyther before his ascēsiō, nor after. And where as ye allege, that the church beleueth, that the holy ghost reueled vnto ye holy fathers, ye messe after the apostles time, what churche meane ye of: the Popes churche, or of Christes true church? Yf ye meane of the Popes church we, wote howe muche credence oughte to be gy∣uen vnto the Popes lemman. Yf ye
meane of Christes true churche, when ye: saye that the true churche of Christe beleueth, that the holy ghoste reueled the messe vnto the fathers, and not to the Apostles, eyther ye take violently away the Apostles from Christes true churche, or elles lye shamfully, in sai∣ynge that Christes churche beleueth a thynge, when as the pryncipall mem∣bres of Christes churche neyther doo, nor dyd at any time beleue it. Now ha∣ue I sufficiently proued, that al that ye could hytherto bryng furth, could not proue that the messe had any foūdatiō or ground of goddes word. Nowe my lord iudge, I reporte me vnto you, whe∣ther the places, which this mā hath re∣hersed, be sufficiēt, or no, to proue that the messe is of god. Palemon. your pla∣ces alleged out of Iohn, make as much for the messe as thei do for the popes su∣premecy, pilgrimage, pardons, purga∣tory, & any other such thing, wherof is no mentiō made in holy scriptur. Ther¦fore ye must ether brīg furth someother scripture, for your purpose, or els graūt
that the messe is not of God. Porphiry. We are not so sklenderly prouided but that we haue yet both scripture, & also reason, wherewyth we shall be able to proue, that the messe is of God. Fyrste vnto you masters, whyche accuse the messe, I axe of you, whether almyghty God requyreth in thys cōmaundemēt, honor thy father and mother, as well obedience of subiectes, vnto magistra∣tes and ruelers, as he requyreth obe∣dience of chyldren, to theyr fathers and mothers? knoweleg. yes al a lyke. Por∣phyry. Then ar subiectes as wel boūde to obey the rulers commaundemētes, as chyldren are bounde too obey theyr fathers and mothers commaūdemen∣tes. knouueleg. That do I graunt also. Porphyry. But the rulers haue cōmaū∣ded all vs, that be theyr subiectes, to beleue that the Messe is of God, and therfore to come vnto it: therfore all mē are bounde in payne of dampnatiō, to beleue that the messe is goddes ordy∣naunce, and to come to it. But least ye
shoulde doubte, that any magistrate hath commaunded the messe to be takē as the ordinaunce of God, ye haue sene the daye youre selfe, wyth in these .viii. yeres, that he that woulde haue spokē agaynst the blessed messe, should haue ben burned, as a traytor to god, bafe∣lon to the kyng: whych they would not haue done, yf that they would not hauē had the messe to be taken, for the very ordinaūce of God. And I am sure, that there are in Englande, many inferior magistrates, whyche are of that same mynde styll, and commaunde at thys houre their inferiours, to come to messe and commaunde them to beleue that it is of God. How many Bishoppes and iustices of Peace are ther now in Eng∣lande, whyche are not suche, as I haue rehersed? Therfore yf we be bounde to obey our polytike fathers, we muste be¦leue that the messe is of god. knouulege Wythin these .xx. yeres there haue ben some magistrates, whyche haue com∣maunded theyr subyectes in peyne of
death to beleue that the bishop of rome, was heede of the churche. Is not thys the cōmaundemēt euen now of the Em∣perour & also of the Frenche kynge cō∣maunde not these .ii. magistrates in payne of burning, all mē to beleue, that pilgrimag is good, worshyppīg of ima¦ges is an godly, mōkery is holy kinde of lyfe? Now I pray you, ar al these .ii. magistrates subiectes boūde in payne of dampnatiō, to beleue yt the bishop of Rome is heed of the churche? are they boūd to beleue ye pilgrimage & worshp¦ping of images ar good & gudli? ar thei boūde to beleue ye mōkery is a kinde of lyfe ye pleaseth god: are these subiectes bound to beleue any more thē is cōtey∣ned in ye crede, & in the expressed word of god? answer I pray you, ar al the Em∣perours subiectes, & the Frēche kinges subiectes boūde to beleue, yt the pope is the heed of the church, & that pardones pilgrimage, & mōkery be of god? Phil. They ar not boūde to beleue yt the pope is hed of ye church, neither ye pilgrimag
is of god. Kno. Thē ar not al subiectes, by the vertue of the fyrst cōmaūdemēt, boūde to beleue, what soeuer the rulers cōmaūde thē to beleue except it, yt they cōmaunde, be cōteyned in the expressed word of god: But ther is no mētiō ma∣de in the scripture of the messe, therfore though ye magistrate should cōmaūde¦mē to beleue, yt the messe were of god, yet they ar not boūd to obey thē in that case. Thus much haue we gottē of you by your awn confession. Now let vs se what we cā wyn of you by the scriptur. We graūt vnto you, yt we must obey the cōmaundemēt of the politike father, so far as he kepeth him selfe wt in his boū¦des, yt is, in all thinges, that are for the glory of God, or are profitable for the cōmon welthe, and not contrary vnto the worde of God. But yf he woulde goo beyonde hys boundes, that is, yf he woulde commaunde men to beleue, that thynge to be a worshyppynge of god, whych is eyther vnspokē of in the written worde of god, or contrary vnto
he same worde, or yf he shoulde forbyd thys worde, or any parte of it, we are not bounde to obeye hym in thys case. My auctoris saynt Paule, whyche, in the Epistle to the Galathians, sayeth, Yf that I, or an angell of heauen doo shew any Gospel besyde it, that I haue shewed you, accursed be he, & excūmuni¦cated frō God. And the same he sayeth vnto the Corinthiās: that that I haue receyued of the Lorde, that I haue de∣liuered vnto you. And in the Epistle to the Galathiās, he sayeth, that he recey∣ued the Gospel which he had preached, not of any man, but by the reuelation of Iesus Christe. Then the meanynge of saynt Paule is, that he woulde that euen hys awn selfe, or an Angel of hea∣uen should be accursed, yf eyther of thē should teache or commaunde to beleue any doctrine, that he hath not receyued of Christ: wherof I gather, that al ma∣gistrates, whyche commaunde to be taught & beleued any doctrine of glad∣tydynges, whych they haue not recey∣ued
of Christe, that they ar accursed by the doctrine of saynte Paule. Daniell obeyed hys kynge, so longe as he com∣maunded hym, not to doo any thynge, agaynst Goddes commaundemēt: but when hys master would haue had him to haue worshipped Bel & the dragō, he woulde not obeye hym. The .iii. Israe∣lites obeyed kyng Nabuchodonosor in al thinges, that perteyned vnto a king to requyre: but whē the kyng went be∣yonde hys boundes, and woulde haue had thē to haue worshypped hys yma∣ge, they woulde no longer obeye theyr polytike father. The Aopstles also in ciuile matters, obeyd the magistrates, and payde tribute, but when the rulers forbad the apostles to preach any more in Christes name, they would not obey thyr commaundement: but sayde. Me∣lius est obedire deo {quod} hominibus: It is better to obey God, then men. By these places ye may se playnly, that we ar not bound to obey the magistrates, yf they commaunde vs to beleue any thynge,
or do any thyng, that is contrary vnto scripture: but the Messe is contrarye vnto the scriptur, therfore, though the magistrate should cōmaūde vs to bele¦ue, yt it were of god, we ar not boūde to in this case obey thē. Howbeit, in other cases we ar boūde to obey thē, in payne of dampnation: for he that resisteth thē in any such matters, as they haue au∣ctorite of commaundement ouer, resy∣steth god and so purchasseth hym selfe the wrath of god. Porphi. He that is not agaynst me, is wyth me, sayeth Christ: but the messe, for al your saiynge, is not agaynst Christ and hys worde, ergo it is with Christ, and of christ. knoweleg. That the messe is contrary to Chryste and his holy worde, I shall be able too proue it wt wytnesses enough brought out of the scripture, and the Messe it selfe also. Thys is sayde in the Messe, for auoydyng of the Pestylence in the∣se wordes in a prayer, called a secrete. Subueniat nobis domine. etc. Lorde, we beseche thee, that the workynge of thys
present sacrifice, may helpe vs, whyche also may myghtely delyuer vs from al erroures, and saue vs from runnynge into all perditiō. Lo, here the working of a sacrifice offered vp by a preiste, is rekened and taken to haue as muche poure, as Christ hath, to helpe vs by his sacrifice: for Christe wyth his sacrifyce dyd no more but delyuer vs frō al erro∣res, & saued vs frō all perdition or de∣struition. Now I pray you, how doth thys agre with Paul, that an other sa∣crifice then Christ offered, shold saue vs whyche sayethe. Hebre .x. Wyth one oblatyon he hathe made perfyte for e∣uermore, all them, whyche are sancti∣fyed. Thys is sayde in the Canon of the Messe. Hec sacro sancta commixtio corporis et sanguinis domini. etc. Let thys mynglynge togyther of the body and bloude of oure Lorde Iesu Christ be vnto me and to all thē that receyue it, saluation of bothe bodye and soule to deserue euerlasting lyfe, & a prepa∣ring to helth to receiue it Behold as the
messe teacheth men to beleue that they may purchase euerlastynge lyfe by the worke, bothe ordeyned and done by a mā, that is, by the mynglyng together of the consecrated breade and wyne in the chalyce. Where dyd God cōmaūde any preist or minister to mingle the cō∣secrated breade and wyne togyther? in no place of the wrytten orde of God. Is it not contrary vnto the scripture I reporte me to you, that the worke of a synfull man, shall deserue euerlastyng lyfe? I suppose (sayth saynt Paul) Ro∣mano .iii. that a man is Iustyfyed by fayth, wythout ye workes of the law: yf that a man be not iustified by the wor∣kes, commaunded euen expressedly in Goddes law, shall a man be iustifyed and saued by a worke, neuer ones com∣maūded by god but inuēted by a super¦stitious man? Se nowe, howe prately the scripture & the messe do agre. The messe hath an other Prayer lyke vnto thys former, whyche begynneth thus. Domine sancte pater omnipotēs deus. etc.
Holy Lorde almyghty father euerla∣styng God, graunt me, that I maye so worthely receyue the body and bloude of thy son our lord Iesu Christ, that I maye deserue therby to receyue forgy∣uenes of al my sinnes, & to be fylled wt thy holy sprite and to haue thy peace. Marke here, how that it which is only giuē throw the merit of christes passiō and is only wrought by Christ, is cra∣ued blasphemously of ye worke wroght and done of a synful man. Is ther not here a swete agreyng wyth this prayer of the messe, & these textes of scripture? Domini est salus. Nec est in alio quo{quod} sa∣lus: Saluation is the Lordes, neyther is there saluation in any other. When ye haue done al thynges whych ar cō∣maunded you, say that ye were vnpro∣fitable seruauntes. The messe in ano∣ther place, cōtrary vnto the holy scrip∣ture, teacheth vs, that the offerynge vp of bread & wyne, may do the same, that Christe dyd on the crosse, that is, maye take away all our synnes & may bryng
helth to the lyuinge, and rest to the de∣parted. Porphiry. Your talke dothe te∣stify, that ye are a Sacramentary, and that ye do not beleue, that after the con¦secration, the breade and wyne are tur∣ned into the fleshe and bloud of Christ. When as the breade and wyne ar tur∣ned in to Christes fleshe and bloude, and of these two commethe furthe hole Christe, what synne is it, to craue for∣gyuenes of synnes by the offerynge vp of our sauioure Christe, whyche neuer cessethe frome takynge of the synnes of the worlde awaye? knouueleg. But what yf a man craue and axe the same thynge of the Offerynge vp of dreade and wyne, two poore creatures, as yet vnconsecrated. Porphyry. He shoulde make a God of breade and wyne and so commytte Idolatry: For that is to euery man a god, of whom he loketh to haue saluation. knouuelege. than is the messe an idolatresse, for she axeth the benefit of sa uation, of the of∣ferynge vp bare breade & wyne vncō∣secrated.
Porphiry. how can ye proue mē this that the messe axeth saluatiō of the offerynge of breade and wyne vnconse¦crated and not of Christe? knonuelege. I praye you in what place of the messe is the breade & wyne turned into Chri∣stes body & bloūd? Porphiry. Whē the∣se wordes ar spoken ouer the bread and wyne, thys is my body, and this is the cup of my bloud & of the new and euer¦lastyng testament. knouelge. And is the bread, bread styll, & the wyne, wyne styl tyll thes wordes be said ouer ye bread & the wine▪ Por. ye verely. knouu. But the wordes which I shall reherse, are sayd streight way after ye crede, a great while before the wordes of cōsecratiō be said & the ordinary rubrik giueth ye prestes this cōmaūdement, before they say the wordes yt I spake of. Let ye preist take the chalice in hys hāde, & set diligētly in a dew vpō the middes of the altare, and douke a lytle down, & lyfte vp the chalice wt both his hādes, offering the
sacrifice vnto ye lorde, saiyng this pra∣yer: Receyue holy trinite this offering, whiche I an vnworthy synner offer in the honour of the, of the blessed virgyn Mary, & of all sayntes, for my synnes and offences, for the helth of the lyuing and for the rest of thē, that ar departed. This prayer is sayd in euery messe, but now wyl I bring you diuerse secretes, peculiar & proper vnto diuerse messes, of lyke wickednes & impiete, wc it that I rehersed here before. This prayer is sayde in the messe of sayyte Grisgony. Lord, we besech the, receyue our rewar¦des wyth a pleasaūt cūtenaunce, that by the intercessiō of thy martyr blessed Grisgoni, they maye purge awaye all contagius infections of oure synnes. Thys is sayde in the Messe of the in∣ueutiō of saint Steuē, Lord, loke plea∣sauntly vpō this sacrifice offered with the vowes of thy faithful, that it, which hath brought vnto thy beloued martyr Steuen & his companions this dayes glory of theyr inuention, may profit vs
to redēption & grace. This is sayde in the messe of Marke and Marcelliane. Lord, we besech the, that thy grace may go before vs, & also come after, & take gentilly these oblatiōs, which we offer vp for our sinnes, to be cōsecrated vnto thy name, that by the intercessiō of thy martyres Marke & Marcelliane, they may be profytable to saluation for all men. This is sayde in the messe of Ni∣chomed is: Lord make holy the sacri∣fices & by the intercessiō of thy blessed martyr Nichomedis, clēse & purge vs by thē, from the spottes of our synnes. This is red in the messe of S. Richrad Graunt vs mercyful god by the inter∣cession of saint Richarde thy confessor and bishop, yt the rewarde offered vnto the eyes of thy maiesty, may get grace to lyue well, & purchasse euerlastynge glory. The sacrifices, oblations, & re∣wardes, which ar spokē of here in these prayers, ar nothing els but bare bread & bare wyne: for ye prayers wherin thei ar offered, are sayd longe before the sa∣crynge
& cōsecratiō. But the preiste at messe axeth of god, that the offering vp of the same bare bread & wine may take awaye synnes, purge the contagins in¦fection of synnes awaye, may profit to our redēption & to obtayne grace, may be profitable to saluatiō for al mē, may purge frō spottes of synnes, & may get grace and purches euerlastinge glory. Euery man beleueth yt he may obteyne that thing which he ernestly doth aske & craue, but the messe or the prest at messe axeth ernestly purgation & clensyng of synnes, & euerlastyng glory, to be gyuē of god by the offering vp of bread and wyne: ergo the messe beleueth, that sin∣nes maye be purged and euerlastynge glory may be obteyned by the offering vp of bread & wyne. But bread & wyne ar not god, neyther is the offeryng vp of bread & wyne any ordinaūce of god but only the ordinaunce of man: Then they that beleue to be saued & purged frō synne by bread & wyne, or by the of∣feryng vp of bread & wyne, thinke that
they may be saued by a thynge that is not God, and by a worke, that god ne∣uer cōmaūded. But as ye sayd of late, that is to euery man his god, by whom he loketh to be saued and redemed from synne: but the messe wyth her chaplay∣nes trust to be saued by the offerynge vp of breade & wyne, therfore the messe with her chaplaynes maketh a god of the offerynge vp of bread & wyne. But all they that doo so, are Idolaters: but the messe and her chaplaynes doo so, ergo they are Idolaters. Now seynge that the messe is an Idolatres, what Christen man wyl from hence take her for Goddes seruice? Who darre for the displeasure of God, come vnto her, or haue any cōpany or cōuersatiō wt her? Porphy. it is not such an hainus mater, as ye make it, to offer vp bread & wyne Dyd not the preistes of Moyses lawe, offer vp breade & wyne? Dyd not also Melchisedech a preiste before Moyses law, of whose order we ar of offer vp al so bred & wine? & yet wer nether Moses
Idolaters, nor yet Melchisedech. kno∣weleg. yf that the Preistes of Moyses lawe and Melchisedech had, wythout any commaundemente of God, offered vp breade and wyne, trustynge by the offerynge therof, to purchasse redemp∣cign and saluation, they had bene Ido¦laters in dede. But they neyther offred vp bread and wyne wythout commaū∣demente, neyther trusted they to be sa∣ued thorowe the offerynge vp of bread and wyne: therfore theyr examples wyl not excuse you from Idolatry. Where as ye saye, that ye are Preistes of the order of Melchisedech, and seme therby to haue auctorite to offer vp bread and wyne, as he dyd I shall brefely proue, that ye are not of hys order. Whosoe∣uer is a Preiste of the order of Mel∣chisedech, is a preiste for euer and nei∣ther hath begynnynge nor endynge of hys presthode: and therfore was Christ called a Preist after the order of Mel∣chisedech, because he was an euerla∣stynge preiste, and hys preisthode had
effecte and streyngth from the begyn∣nynge of the worlde, and shall haue vnto the ende of the worlde, not be∣cause he offered breade and wyne, for he offered vp neyther of bothe, but his body and bloude, whyche was sygny∣fied by the bread and the wyne: ye haue a begynnynge of youre preisthode, at xxiiii. yeares of your age, and an ende of it when ye dye, therfore ye are not Preistes of the order of Melchisedech. Are ye preistes of Moyses lawe? P phy∣largy. no. knouule. Yf that ye be neyther preistes of the order of Melchisedech, neyther of Aarons order, by what au∣ctorite take ye in hande, to stande at al∣tares, offerynge vp of outwarde sacri∣fices, when as in the new Testamente, it is neyther laufull to bylde altare, neyther to offer vpon it any outwarde sacrfeice, seynge, that by the sacryfyce, that Christe offered on the crosse, all altares and outwarde sacryfyces were abrogated, and laufully put downe. Porphyry. We haue altares in the new
te∣stamente, and outwarde Sacrifyces allowed also, euen of Christe in the .v. of Matthew in these wordes: When thou shalte offer vp thy rewarde at the altare, and shall there remembre that thy brother hath somethynge agaynst thee, leaue thy rewarde ther before the altare, and go and be fyrste broughte in fauoure wyth thy brother, and then come and offer thy rewarde. Lo, here oure master Christe maketh mention bothe of a rewarde and also of an al∣tare. Therfore in the newe Testament we maye bothe haue altares, and also outwarde offerynges. knouuelege. All they that haue any ryghte vnderstan∣dyng in scriptur cā tel that Christ sayd these wordes, whyche ye haue rehersed, vnto ye Ieues: which as yet, wer vnder the law & vsed outward sacrifices. The sacrifices & ceremonies of Moses law, dyd so longe indure, tyl yt Christes sa∣crifice, which was perfigured & sygni∣fied before by the Iewes outwarde sa∣crifice which was ones fynished and
offered. But as sone as Christe had of∣fered vp hys sacryfyce on the Crosse, whych was to him, as a certayn altare all outwarde sacryfyces, altares, and oblations was abrogated & put down Neuerthelesse vnto that tyme he for∣bad no Sacrifice or oblation ordened by Moyses to be offered. Christe a my∣nister of the newe testament before hys passion, was circūcised, he came to the tēple or Hierusalē and cate the Iewes Pascal lābe after the order of Moyses law: shal we therfore be circūcised? shal we come to the tēple of Hierusalē? shal we be boūd also to eat ye Ieues paschal lambe after the order of Moyses law? Therfore, ye place which ye haue reher? sed here before, maketh nothing for al∣tares & oblatiōs, to be had emong chri∣sten mē, after ye Christ hath suffred hys passiō: which was so perfyt a sacrifyce or oblation, yt ther neded neuer mo after yt, to be offred to take sines away. Ther fore your mestres missa & ye that wyll haue styll both altares and outwarde
sacrifices for synnes, are enemyes vn∣to Christes moste holy worde, whyche dothe in many places testify, that at a certayne tyme, all outwarde acryfyces shoulde haue an ende, and that the ty∣me was, when Christe offered him selfe a sufficiente sacrifice for the redemptiō of the whole worlde. To proue thys that I haue sayde to be true, fyrste I wyll shew by the scrypture, that the of∣feryng vp of sacryfyces, was no moral precepte, and therfore not euerlastyng but a temporall and ceremonyall, too serue the infancy and weakenes, of the Iewes a whyle, that is, to the tyme of perfectiō. Esaye in the fyrst chapter of his prophecy wryteth thus: What shal I do wyth your manyfolde sacryfyces sayeth the Lorde? The burnte sacrify∣ces of rammes, and the fat of the bea∣stes doo I lothe. I loue not the bloude yf oxen, lambes and gotes. When ye shal come to appere before me, who re∣quyreth it of your hāde, that ye should treade on my courutes? Brynge youre
rewarde nomōre in vayne. Ieremy al∣so wryteth thus in the fyrste Chapter: Wherfore bryngeste thou me Frankin∣cense oute of Stba, and calamus and ambre oute of a farre lande. Youre burned offerynges please me not, and youre Sacrifyces are not swete vn∣to me. God sayethe also in the .v. of Amos these wordes: I defye your holy dayes, neyther wyll I smell in youre Congregations, and when ye shall sa∣cryfyce vnto me burnt offerynges and sacryfyces of meate, they shall not be acceptable vnto me, and I wyl not lo∣ke vpon the offerynges of fattes. O house of Israell, haue ye offered in the wyldernes for the space of .xl. yeres of∣ferynges and sacrifyces vnto me? The same sentēce is wrytē in the .xl. Pslame The same matter is conteyned in the Li. Psalme in these wordes: Thou art not delyted in hostes or offerynges, or elles I would haue offred. Thou wylt haue no burnt sacryfyce and hostes to be offered, but thes sacrifices wylt thou
not dyspyse, a sorofull spyrite, a lowe brought harte & a contritt. Dauid ma∣keth mētion of the same mater in the .xl psalme: Thou louest not a sacrifice and an offeryng of meate, but yu hast bored thorow myn eares: thou hast not requi¦rey burnt sacrifice & hostes, to be offe∣red vp for syn, Paul also in the .x. chap. of the epistle to the Hebrewes wryteth thus, of the abrogation of ceremonies, sacrifices, and oblatiōs of the old law: The lawe hauynge a shaddow of good thinges of to come: & not beyng ye patrō it selfe, can neuer make thē that ar vn∣der it, perfit with thy oblations, which it offerethe the very same contynually euery yere, or els should offering haue bē left of because they which had offred vp sacryfyce, and had therby clensed & purifyed, shoulde haue had frō thēce∣furth nomore grudge of syn in theyr cō¦science. But in these is a remēbraūce of synnes yearly. For the bloud of bulles and gotes cā not take away syn. Wher¦fore, when he was obout to come in to
the world he sayd. Thou wouldest not haue sacryfyce and oblation, but thou haste made fyt a body to me, and thou haste not allowed burnte Sacryfyces for synne: Then sayde I, here come I, it is wrytten in the begynnynge of the booke of me, that I shoulde doo thy wyll (O God) When he sayeth before. thou wouldest not haue sacrifyce, obla¦tion, and burnte offerynges for syn∣nis, neyther dyddest thou allowe them that are offered after the maner of the Law: then sayd he, here am I (O god) to doo thy wyll. He taketh awaye the former, that he maye stablishe and sette vp the latter, by the whyche wyll, we are made holye and sanctyfyed, by the offerynge vp of the bodye of Iesus Chryste ones fynysshed and donne. Nowe oute of these places of scripture whych I haue rehersed, I gather, that all outwarde oblations, burnt offerin¦ges, sacryfyces and oblations both of beastes and of meat, as of bread & such lyke was quiet abrogated & put down
at that tyme, when oure sauioure Ie∣sus Christe offered vp on the Crosse hys moost blessed and perfyte sacry∣fyce, whyche was prefygured and sig∣nifyed before longe tyme, by the obla∣cions and sacryfices nowe put downe and abrogated. Yf that all kyndes of sacrifices of vestes and meates be ab∣rogated by Chrystes Sacryfyce, we oughte to haue nomore outwarde sa∣crifyces. Then ye mestres Missa wyth youre Chaplaynes, do amisse to set v that, whych Christ put downe: yea and thoughe Christe had not abrogated the offerynge vp of beastes & of bread, yet ye doo greuously offende God in set∣tynge vp a newe kynde of sacryfyce or wor wtyppynge of God whyche he ne∣uer cōmaunded. Sayeth not almighty God by Esay the prophete and cōptay∣neth, that he is falsely worshypped by the commayndementes of men? And God gyueth a playn commaundemēt  .xii. of Deuteronomy saiynge. Do hou onely that, whyche I com∣maunde
the: neyther shalte thou put any thynge to the commaundemente, neyther take any thinge from it. That God is sore displeased with offeringes inuented by man, the death of Nadab and Abiu Leuitici the .x. doth testifye, where as they bothe were burnte to deathe, for offerynge vp of strange fyre whyche was not commaunded them. Where haue ye any commaundemente of God that ye shoulde offer vp breade in the new Testament? surely, nowher in the new Testamente. Furthermore, mastres Missa ye and your Chaplay∣nes doo noughtlye, and contrary vnto the scriptures, to set vp outwarde al∣tares, when as all outwarde sacryfy∣ces ar abrogated. What should Chri∣stes temple doo wyth an outwarde al∣tare where there is no outwarde sacri∣fyce to be offered vpon it? The sacry∣fices that ar allowed only for Christen men to be offered, are these: The calues of oure lyppes prayers thankes pray∣syng of god, charitablenes, and mercy
and almes to the poore, oure awne bo∣dyes mortifyed, a contrite harte and a troubled spyrit. I pray you now, what shall we nede an outwarde and a stony altare to offer these sacrifices on? Thē when as we nede no suche altares it is euyll done of you to holde styll altares in the churche, where as Christes ta∣ble shoulde be. Now youre altares do none other good, but bere false wytnes agaynst Christ, that he hath not made perfyt all, that are sanctified, wyth his blessed sacrifice: for an outward altare presupposeth an outwarde Sacryfyce but another outward sacrifyce for syn, after Christes sacrifyce, presupposeth, that Christes sacrifyce was not suffici∣ent and perfyt inoughe: For Paule to the Hebrwes proueth, that the sacrifice that hath another succeding, is vnper∣fyt. But all such false wytnes and sig∣nifycations, whych sygnify any thyng agaynste Christe, oughte to be putte downe and destroyed: but it is nowe proued, that the altars whyche are in
the churche, presuppose and sygnyfy agaynst Christe, therfore they oughte to be broken downe and taken awaye. Then shall ye my masters that ar mis∣saryes, saye messe wythoute altares: yf ye wyll nedes saye Messe. I won∣der oftymes, where is nowe the zeale emonge Christen men, whyche was emonge the carnal and stubburne Ie∣wes. Yf we, whyche woulde be reke∣ned perfyte Christianes, hadde bene so elous for the kepynge of the new law as they wer for the olde, as soone as we had sene any altare set vp in the chur∣che, we woulde haue sayde vnto them that set it vp. What vnfaithfulnes is thys, that ye can not be contente wyth Chryste, and the lawe of the Gospell, but ye wyl nedes sette vp Altares and outwarde Sacryfyces after the ma∣ner of Moyses lawe? Why sette ye vp agayne Altares and Sacryfyces, whyche oure redemer and Sauioure Christ hath put down and abrogated? how cā ye for shame set vp altars, when
as the chyldren of Israell. Iosue .xxii. coulde not abyde, that the tribe of Ru∣ben, Gad and the halfe tribe of Ma∣nasses, should set vp an altare any whe¦re, to doo sacrifice on, sauynge only by the tabernacle? and yet they were boūd to offer vp sacrifyces, and to haue al∣tares by the tabernacle. Now haue I proued sufficiently that contrary vnto the scripture, ye offer vp bread, for syn and buylde altars in the temples of Christē men. Fremouth. thys do I also lay vnto this womans charge, that she wyth her chaplaynes, taketh in hande to offere vp Christ agayne, and to take synne awaye, wyth the offerynge vp of Christ, euē as he toke synne aay whē he offered hys blessed bodye vpon the crosse, whyche thynge I shall proue to be iniurious to Christes passyon and presthode and contrary vnto the word of God. Porphiry. Almyghty god sayde vnto the Ieues: In cathedra Mosi scribe & pharisae sederunt, that is, in the tea∣chynge stoole of Moyses, haue sytten
the scribes and the pharises: do what soeuer they byd ye do, but accordynge vnto theyr workes, do ye not, for they say, and do not. Yf that the Ieues wer bounde to do that whyche the Scribes and pharises bad them do, we are now bounde to do in the new testamēt those thynges, that our bisshoppes and or∣dinaries byd vs do: But oure ordina∣ries haue commaunded vs & the messe to offer vp Christ agayne dayly for the takynge awaye of synne, therfore we ar bounde to offer vp Christe agayne to take synnes awaye. And in doynge of oure superiours commaundement, we please God: who bad vs obeye our su∣periours. Therfore in offerynge vp Christe agayne to release synnes, bothe of the quycke and the dead, is not con∣trary vnto the wyll of God, but plea∣saunt and acceptable vnto him. knouu∣lege. The Iewes were boūde, I graūt you, so longe to obey the Scribes and pharisees, as they sat in Moses chayr, or teachynge stoole, but no longer. So
So longe sat they in Moses teachyng stoole or chayre, as they taughte only Moyses lawe and nothynge of theyr awne: But when as the Scribes and Pharises taught theyr awn traditiōs, and cōmaundementes, they sat in theyr awne chayre or teachyng stoole, and thē were the Iewes so lytle bound to obey them, that Christe gaue them a playne commaundement, that they should not obey thē, but auoyde and shunne theyr doctrine, and therfore sayde he Mat∣thew. xvi. Beware of the leuyn of the Pharisees, in the whyche place, leuyn, (as the scrypture expoundeth it selfe) betokeneth the doctryne of the Pha∣risees. Yf that al the Iewes were boūd to doo what soeuer the Scribes and Pharisees dyd commaunde wythout any exception, whether it were contey∣ned in the scripture or no, then brake the Apostles Christes commaūdemēt, when as they woulde not wasshe theyr handes, when they wente to meate, for the Pharises and the Scribes sayde
vnto Christe. Why doo thy dysciples breake the ordinaōces of the elders? for they washe not theyr handes, whē they eate bread: but Christ in defendyng of his disciples, declareth, that they brake not his cōmaundement in breakyng of the Pharisees cōmaundemēt: therfore by these places of scripture, it is euidēt that a man is somtyme bounde to obey the Pharisees cōmaundement, that is, when they teach nothing but the scrip∣ture, and some tyme men ar bounde to disobey and resist theyr cōmaundemēt, that is, whē they syt in theyr awn chay¦res, & teach traditiōs, which ar notin ye scripture. The pharises taught that al mē shoulde wasshe theyr hādes before meat. They taught, ye mē should not ho¦nor theyr father & mother, but put mo∣ney in the box, & yt therby they should be excused from honoryng of theyr father and mother. No mā is so mad to beleue that by thys saiynge of Christe: in the chayre of Moses haue sytte the scribes and pharises, doo whatsoeuer they dyd
you do: men ar bound to kepe the pha∣risees commaundement, when they ey∣ther teache men to wasshe handes be∣fore meat, or to dyshonour theyr father and mother. Then can ye not gather of the texte, that we are bounde to obeye oure Bysshoppes and pastores in all tradytions and commaundementes, whatsoeuer they commaunde vs to ke¦pe wythoute any exception, but onely in such cōmaundemētes, as they haue out of the new Testament. Yf that we were bounde to beleue and obeye what soeuer the preachers, or ordinaries, or Bishoppes dyd preache or commaūde, Certayn Ieues of the secte of the pha∣risees, whyche had beleued and profes∣sed Christ, stert vp and teached the bre∣thren. Act .xv. that they coulde not be saued, excepte they were circumcised, and kepte the lawe wyth the Gospell: was the Christē mē of that tyme boūd to beleue and to obeye these preachers commaundementes? Bisshop Fyssher layde that the Bysshop of Rome was
heed of the churche. Bysshop Reps a lytle before the Idole of Walsyngam was put downe, sayd, that men should go on pylgrymage. Bisshop Gardiner sayd, that Images should be worship∣ped wyth outwarde worshyp, and that men were iustifyed by theyr workes. These .iii. were ordinaries: were al they that wer vnder them at that tyme, whē they preached suche doctrine, bounde to doo as these men sayde, or they were not? Yf they were not, I praye you tell me, why were they not bounde to obey theyr doctrine and commaundemente? Philargy. because they commaunded bothe, that it was not in the scripture and also cōtrary doctrine vnto the scrip¦ture. Fremouth. Then when as youre ordinary commaundeth you, and your mestres Missa, any thyng concerning reli, gion that is not in the scripture, or contrary vnto the scripture, ye are not bounde to obeye hym, and kepe hys cō∣maundemente: But thys commaun∣dement of your ordinary, where as he
cōmaūdeth you to offer vp christ again is not cōmaūded of god in his scrip∣ture, yea it is cleane contrary vnto the scripture, wherfore ye should haue no∣more in this case haue folowed the coū∣sell & cōmaundement of your ordinary then the good Iewes, kepte the com∣maundemente of the Pharises, where they taughte men to dyshonour theyr father and mother. knouuelege. And I for my parte shal proue, that both your kynde of presthode that offer vp Christ agayne, & also your mastres, whom ye haue taken in hande to defende, ar con∣trary vnto the word of God. They that go aboute to make Christes sacrifyce vnperfyt, ar enemies vnto the scriptur and cōtrary vnto the word of god: but your preisthode wyth the messe, doo so: therfore they both ar contrary vnto the scripture. Saynt Paule in the epystel to the Hebrwes proueth by these rea∣sons, that the sacrifyces and preisthod of Moyses law, are vnperfyt, because they coulde neuer make perfyt them,
whyche were vnder the law. And in the seuēth chapter, he sayeth thus, speking of the lawe and sacrifices of Moyses The cōmaundement which wēt before is taken away for the weaknes and in∣profytablenes of it, for the lawe hathe brought nothyng vnto perfection, but it was a leadynge vnto a better hope. The preistes of the old law were many because they were not suffred by death to cōtinue. But christ, because he endu¦reth for euer, hath an euerlasting prest∣hode: wherfore he lyuynge for euer, can perfitly saue thē, which thorow him, go vnto god. Marke these wordes wel, for they ar not myne but Paules. Paule also in the .x. of the epistle to the Hebr. proueth that the lawe is vnperfit, be∣cause it could not, with the sacrifices & hostes which, ye prestes offred vp euery yere of fresh make thē yt cam to the law perfit: or els (saieth paul) they wold ha¦ue left of offerīg. Of the wordes I ma∣ke thes resōs. Yf ye sacrifices of moses law wer vn{per}fit, because thei could not make thē
perfyte, for whome they were offered, then yf that Christes sacryfyce make not all them perfyt, for whome it was offered, it was vnperfyt also: But ye offer vp agayne for them, for whome Christe ones before hathe offered, ergo ye reken, that the sacrifyce of Christe made not them perfyt, and so ye reken Christ no perfyter a preist, then Moy∣ses preistes were, and hys sacryfyce no perfiter, then theyr Sacrifices were. Marke well the wordes of Paule. Lex his hostiis, quas singulis annis continen∣ter offerunt, nun{quam} potest acced entes per∣fectos reddere, alioqui nonne desiissent offerre? The law can neuer make them that come vnto it perfyte, wyth these sacrifyces, whyche they offer contynu∣ally euery yere ye same: Or els I praye you, hadde not they ceased from offe∣rynge Ye maye se by Paule here, that where as there is no ceasynge from of∣ferynge, that there, is no perfection of sacrifice: but ye offer vp Christe again and cease neuer one daye in the yeare,
sauynge one, (yf that ye cease then) from offerynge hym agayne, therfore, ye make as much as lyeth in you, Chri∣stes Sacrifyce imperfyt. Whosoeuer maketh Christes sacrifyce vnperfyt, is blasphemous to Christ, and is a mem∣bre of Antichryst: but it it proued, ma∣stres Missa, that you wyth youre cha∣playnes doo so: ergo ye wyth youre Chaplaynes are Blasphemous vnto Christe, and membres of Antichryste. That in offerynge vp Christe agayne, ye be proude, arrogante, and take more auctorite, then euer God gaue you, I wyll proue it thus. What soeuer the hyghe preiste maye not doo, whyche is bothe God and man, that can not a sim∣ple preiste laufully doo, whyche is but a mere man: But Christe oure hyghe preist can not offer hym selfe vp again then can no symple Preistes, that are but mere men, offer vp laufully Christ agayne: but ye take in hande to doo so, therfore it, that ye take in hande, is vn¦laufull, and ye are in doynge of youre
facte, presūptuous and arrogāt, taking vnto you more auctorite, then yt haue gyuen vnto you. That Christ can not offer vp him selfe agayn, these wordes of Paule to the Hebrwes .ix. do testify. In ipsum coelum ingressus est ut appareat nunc in conspectu dei pro nobis, non ut soepius offer at semetipsum, quemadmo∣dum pontifex ingreditur in sancta singu∣lis annis, per sanguinem alienum: Alioqui oportuisset saepius passum fuisse a con∣dito mundo. etc. He entred into hea∣uen it selfe, to appere in the syghte of God for vs, not to offer hym selfe ofte tymes vp: as the high preist entreth in∣to the temple euery yeare by straunge bloud. For then from the begynning of the world, shoulde he haue oft suffered. Marke ye not here that Paule sayeth, that Christ should haue oft suffered, yf he had done a certayn thyng ofte? that same thyng was offeryng of hym selfe, as the texte dothe expressedly declare. Then seynge that Paule ioyneth inse∣parably together, ofte offerynge, and
sufferynge: it folowethe well, that so oft as Christe is offered: so oft dothe he suffer, and they that make hym to be ofte offered, maketh hym to be slayne. But ye mastres Missa wyth your cha∣playnes, offer Christ a thousand tymes in one yeare, then doo ye kyll Christe a thousande tymes in one yeare. Nowe my Lord iudge, what thys woman de∣serueth for kyllynge of Christ so oft, I refer it vnto your iudgement. Ye say also mastres Missa, that ye take synnes awaye wyth the offerynge vp of Christe, and Paule sayeth: Abs{que} sanguinis effusione non fit remissio. with∣oute sheddynge of bloude, there is no forgyuenes: then it folowethe also by this place, that ye & youre chaplaynes ar bloudy sacrificers. Now to you my masters ye be prestes what christē bishop wyl cōmaund you to offer vp Christ a∣gaine to take syn away, seynge yt as oft as he is offred vp so oft must he suffer, and haue his bloud shed. None surely, for they yt do so, are of the ryght lynage
of that Bysshop, whyche sayde: Necesse est, ut unus moriatur pro populo, ne tota gens pereat: and of theyrs also that said Nos habemus legem, & secundum hanc debet mori. There muste one dye for the people, least the hole multitude should peryshe. We haue a lawe and accor∣dynge to that, he muste dye. Dauid and Paule saye, that Christ is an euerlastynge Preiste, and hys preisthode hathe no ende. No man can succede him, that lasteth for euer, christ dureth for euer, then can no man suc∣cede hym: then are ye not Christes suc∣cessours as ye woulde be taken. Fur∣thermore, seynge that Christes preist∣hode is euerlastynge there can no other Preistehode laufully succede, then is youre Preistehode, whyche ye woulde brynge in after Christes preistode, vn∣laufull. Yf ye saye, that ye are of Chri∣stes ordre, Paule shewynge the dyffe∣rence betwene Christes preisthode and the preisthode of Moyses lawe, decla∣reth that none suche as ye be, can be of
Christes order. These .iii. properties. wherby Christes preisthode dyfferethe from all other preisthodes. The fyrst propertie that longeth vnto a Preiste of Christes order, is to be but one, and wythout synne: The seconde is, to in∣dure for euer in hys preisthode. The thyrde is to offer but ones, and wyth that offeryng to make perfyt all them, for whome he offereth. All these pro∣perties are playnly set oute in the .vii. and .x. chapters of the epistle to the He∣brewes, in these wordes. They were made many preistes, because they were not suffered by death to continue. But thys preiste, because he abydeth styll, the same for euer, hath an euerlastynge preisthode, wherfore he can saue fully them, that thorow hym goo vnto God, euer lyuynge for that intente, that he myghte make intercesyon for them. Yt was mete that we had such a hyghe Byshop, that should be, godly and de∣uout, innocent, vndefyled, set a syde frō synners, and hygher then the heauens,
whyche shoulde not haue nede euery∣daye to offer vp Sacryfyces as those hyghe preistes had: fyrst for theyr awn synnes, and then after, for the synnes of the people: For that he dyd ones, when he offered vp him selfe, and with one oblation he made perfyte for euer, them that are sanctifyed: But ye are many preistes, and lyue not euer and are not wythoute synne, and make not them perfyte, for whome ye offer wyth one oblation: Therfore ar ye not prei∣stes of Christes order, yea neyther of his order, nor ordynaunce, for he neuer ordyned any kynde of preistes wherof he hath made no mention in hys scrip∣ture. A preiste whych is ordened of God, to offer vp alone wythout any felowes in office, an euerlastynge offeryng for the takyngt awaye of synne, and dothe hys deuty perfytly, hath great wronge done vnto hym, yf any man take hys office in hande or wyll ioyne hym selfe in offyce wyth hym, wythout his leaue
or commaundemente: Christe was or∣deyned of God to offer alone wythout any felowes in offyce, an euerlastynge oblation, for the relesyng of synne, and that offyce doth he perfytly, yet ye vn∣sent for, and wythout lycence, thruste your selues into Christes offyce, to of∣fer wyth hym, for the takynge awaye of synnes. Therfore ye do Christ playn wronge, and not onely hym, but also hys father, who sente hym. Now, howe can this preisthode of youres be of god whyche is iniurius and doth wronge, bothe to the Father of heauen, and to Christe hys sonne, and oure redemer? Then yf the Messe leane vpon youre preisthode, they muste bothe fall togy∣ther. Here haue I proued also that this Messe is not ordened of God, and that she is contrary to the scrypture, and a blasphemous mēbre of Antichryst, and iniurious vnto the preisthod of Christ and to hys passiō also, and a foule ido∣latres, and a causer of Idolatry. Whe¦ther suche an Idolatres oughte to be
holdē styll in Christes church for god∣des seruyce or no, I refer all the mat∣ter vnto you, my Lorde Iudge, whych haue auctorite in thys matter to deter∣myn as ye haue se euydence. Palemon. These men thy accusers, haue brought furth sufficyent euidēce & wytnes, that thou arte not of God, that thou art cō∣trary and enemy vnto the holy scryp∣ture, and and Idolatres, makynge a god of vnconsecrated bread and wyne, and that to the greate iniury of Chri∣stes passion thou offerest vp Christe a∣gayne, and as muche as lyeth in the, kyllest hym a thousande tymes in one yeare. Wherfore, thou hast deserued deathe, and art worthye to be burned. But leaste thy fathers generation the Papistes shoulde saye, that we are as desyrous of bloude sheddyng, as they were, when they bare the swynge, I cō∣maunde the in payne of burnynge to packe the out of thys realme, wt all thy bagges & baggage wtin these. viii. da∣yes, & go to thy father the pope, with al
the spede, that thou cāst, & say, that her is in Englande no more place for hym neyther for any of hys generation. knouu. Syr, yf it please you, yf ther be no man appoynted to se thys woman shypped, and conueyed out of the lāde, the Preistes, wyll kepe her styl in theyr chambers and wyll abuse her, as they haue done before: Therfore, yf youre Lordshyp wyll let me haue her in my custody, I shall se her conueyed ones vnto the sea, let her chuse her, whether she wyll come agayne or no. Pale∣mon. I am content, saye not wo∣man but thou art warned: yf that thou euer come into thys realme agayn, af∣ther thes .viii. dayes loke none other but to be serued euē as thy father hath serued oure brethren in tyme past.
The Messe speaketh Helpe and defende my good brethrē all Whych loue doctrine Cathedrall And do beleue vnwryten veritie To be as good as scriptures sincerite Because in the Bible I cā not be foūde The Heretikes woulde burye me vnder the grounde I praye you hartely yf it be possible To get my a place in ye great Bible Or else as I do vnderstande I shalbe banished out of thys lāde And shalbe cōpelled with sorow & payn To returne to Rome to my father agayne
