25736 99837963 2314
Wat Williams Will. Well-wishing Williams Will and Testament, Which to the Ballad-singer he hath sent, To be dispers'd to all good people kinde, That would doe well, and beare an honest minde. To the tune of, Then let vs to Virginia goe. I Wish for no mans riches, yet would I were more wealthy; And those that are both sicke and lame I would they were more healthy: I wish to be contented with that which God doth send me, And take his blessings in good part, of all that he doth lend me. I wish all cruell Landlords would not be stony hearted, That to their Tenants which are poore some Rent be back imparted, Then sure their Heires would prosper, and not so soone consume it, As some with Dice, and Drabs, and Drinke, and Indian-wéede perfume it. I wish all Christian people in peace to liue together, And not for trifles goe to law, or wagging of a feather: The Lawyers they make rich, vnto their owne vndoing, As too too many in this Land doe wring their hands with wooing. I wish all Shop-kéepers would vse true waight and measure, And not with slight and rotten Wares get such a deale of Treasure; With yea, and nay, and truely, and verily, déere Brother, I cannot sell vnder that price if 'twere vnto my Mother. I wish Artificers and handy-crafty Trades-men, Would make no slight and rotten Wares, in which they so deceiue men; Their Stuffe are naught and rotten, and will not hold the wearing, I wish that Quack-saluers and Mountebanks so busie, That kills so many with their Drugges, and liue in corners priuie, They had some better skill, and not so many murther, Those priuate faults they doe commit the earth doth quickly smother. I wish that Farmers rich that hordeth Corne in corners, And those that buyes the Bread of life, and hides it in their Garners, It might from them be tooke, who makes such scarce of plenty, Ere it doth rot, as some hath done, and giuen to Poore that's empty. Would Bakers all were honest; and Colliers sell true measure, Nor shrinke their Sackes to wrong the poore, 'twould doe them mickle pleasure; Would Souters vse good Leather, and Taylers leaue their stealing, The néedy sort should better liue, if all vs'd honest dealing. I Wish all Tapsters eke, their liquor not to spill it, Nor yet to bumbast vp their Iugges and Pots, with froth to fill it; You néede not call for drinke, if you haue money plenty, Hée'l fill your braines and belly full, but soone your pockets empty. I wish all Ostlers eke to leaue their double dealing, Nor vse to grease their Horses téeth, nor yet their Oates be stealing; They'l cheat you to your face, strewing Oates on the pecks bottome,
The second part, To the same tune. WOuld drunkards leaue such drinking, and Gallants leaue their roaring: Would desperate Dick forbeare to stab, and Leachers leaue their whoring: If there were no Pick-pockets, nor Théeues in corners lurking, The Hangman might goe hang himselfe, or starue, for want of working. I doubt some money-mongers that vseth great extortion, Which maketh Dice of poore mens bones, they shall haue Dives portion: I wish that Iaylers eke of Country and of Citie, Would not vse Prisoners poore like dogges, but take of them some pitie. I wish all men were honest, and all did loue true dealing, Nor runne in debt good mindes to cheate, nor any bent to stealing; Would there no cheating were, no cogging, nor no lying: Would there were no deceit at all in selling or in buying. Would some receiue no bribes, nor double Fées be taking, Some Clyents on the surer side would not haue hearts so aking, And Termers might kéepe home, being rul'd by honest Neighbours, As many which were wise haue done, and sau'd their Coyne and labours. I wish no strifes nor jarring t'wixt married couples happen, And then each thing will prosper well, their children well wil batten: All things will well encrease, by Gods Almighty power, In discord doe not spend your dayes. nor on each other lower. Likewise I wish all Parents their Children wel to nourish, And in Gods word to traine them vp, which like to Vines wil flourish: And Children haue a care to please your Parents truly, Then long you shal enjoy the land, and haue all things most duly. I wish true amity 'mongst Neighbours may be common; And that no honest minded man be match't with a bad woman: Nor that an honest wife doe with a mad man marry, Being so yoak't, there's naught but strife, and all things séeme to varie. I wish all wicked Traytors, and such like bloudy fellowes, That doe their King and Countrey hate, were hanged on the Gallowes. I wish that peace and plenty may in our Kingdome flourish, And that the Gospels heauenly light we may embrace and nourish. And all wisht happinesse vnto my King I render, That long amongst vs he may raigne, in glory and in splendor: Our gracious Quéene God blesse, and Royall Progenie, Long let them liue, and after death place them in Heauen most hie. I wish the Clergie well, the Nobles, and the Gentrie, The Laymen, and the Commons all, poore men Ile not exempt yée; Lord send vs charity, let vs our liues be mending, And giue thée thanks for all thy gifts thou still to vs art sending. Thus now my Testament I fully haue concluded, And wish you well to vse these lines which here you haue perused: This is my Legacie which vnto all is giuen: The Lord preserue you euery one, And send your soules to heaven. FINIS. Wat Wo;;ms Printed at London for H. Gosson.
