25713 99837661 1999
A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF THE ASSAVLT COM∣MITTED VPON THE PER∣son of the most noble Prince, William Prince of Orange, Countie of Nas∣sau, Marquesse de la Vere &c. by Iohn Iauregui Spa∣niarde. With the true Copies of the writings, Ex∣aminations, Depositions, and Letters of sundrie offenders in that vile and diuelish attempte. Faithfullye translated out of the frenche Copie prin∣ted at Antwerp by Christopher Plantin. Anno. 1582. CERVA CHARISSIMA ET GRATISSIMVS HINNVLVS PRO: 5 Imprinted at London for Tho∣mas Charde and William Broome.
¶To the Reader, Grace and Peace from God. &c. THou hast here (good Christian Reader) a true narration, of that horri∣ble facte, committed a∣gainst that godlye and great person, my Lorde the Prince of Orange, together with the wri∣tinges, depositions, exa∣minations and letters of sundrie heinous offēders in this wicked & cruel deede: some of which are alrea∣die executed, thankes be to God for such Iustice; the other, howsoeuer they are escaped, as yet free from the punishment of men, haue, without vnfeigned repen∣tance, greater iudgements laide vp in store for them, with the Lord, who will plentifullie punishe such trea∣cherous and traiterous dealing. Concerning the credit and truth of this discourse, it is so plaine and sufficient, that neither all the Spaniardes in the worlde, nor all their fauourites whatsoeuer or wheresoeuer, shal be a∣ble iustlie any maner of way, to impugne or disgrace the same. The blow was giuen the greater is the sinne,
and the good Prince grieuouslie wounded, the more is the pitie, if the Lord had otherwise seene it good. A Spaniarde was the first broacher of it, by publishing that horrible proscription which by the Princes Apo∣logie is fullie aunswered, both to the great shame and discredite of some, & also to the wonderfull glorie and commendation of that good Prince. And as a Spani∣arde deuised it,I meane the death of the partie, whiche also I praye GOD they maye long want, & the church enioie his life, for the furthe∣rance of Gods glory in the same. and a Spaniarde performed it, sundrie of that proude and cruell nation, being combined and comperted in it, as some of their own confessions, yel∣ded before Gods Magistrates, doe plainlie witnesse it, whereby they haue bewraied their mischieuous mindes, though (thankes be to God for it) they haue hitherto missed of their purpose: so I must needes saie, that if anie should bee so shamelesse as to denie it, or so beastlie as to blanche it, or iustifie it (as I feare me some, and that no small some are) I would no more cō∣tend with suche, than with those, that would denie the Sunne to shine at noone daies. If there be none suche amongste vs, then there is no hurt done. But if they be here, or else where in the world (as Fraunce, Scotlande, and Flaunders, now at the last, haue yeelded vs some feareful examples) and it is to be thought, that we haue too too manie, of that same Iesuiticall sect, who blush not, both to reason too and fro, concerning such que∣stions, and to labour the attempting thereof (as wee haue had of late proofe sufficient) and that not to the maiming of meane men, but to the hurting of the highest (whome I beseeche God in mercie long to preserue) then I would haue such to know and vnder∣stand that to them it is that I speake, not in heate a∣gainst their persons, or to aggrauate their offences which are so grieuous, as no weight of wordes, cann
make them more heinous, but in the sincere zeale  God in the dutifull reuerence of hir Maiestie, in sound affection to the common wealth and countrie, and in loue vnfeigned towards them, wishing from my heart their heartie conuersion, if they appertaine to God, or else their vtter and speedie confusion (speciallie if they be such as the Lord hath sealed vp againste the daye of his wrath) for their stubbornnesse in heresies, touching matters of faith, and their practises againste the best in matters of estate: but inough of this matter at this time. The principall point, that I would haue the god∣ly reader (of what state or condition soeuer he be) to regard in this narration is, to labour to make it profi∣table to himselfe, that as generally it may instruct all, not to beleeue euery flying tale, but to let go running rumours and reportes, and withall earnestly to pray to God for all his children (my meaning is while they are aliue) that be so ouertaken, and namely for this good Prince his faithfull seruaunt, that according to Gods good pleasure, he and they all whatsoeuer in the like daungers, may recouer their wounds, and learne more Christian care and godlie wisedome in time hereafter to come: so particularlie, it may teach euery one, euen the hihhest fitst, and namely this, whome it doth moste chiefly concerne, that seeing that for their well doing, the enemies meane such mischiefes against them, they may carefully looke vnto themselues, that they be not surprised with such popish practises, being alwayes ve∣rie circumspect whome they admit to their presence and speeche, and so preuent such feareful daungers: and the lowest next, to pray to the Lord, as for themselues, that they be not intrapped, so chiefly for these that be their superiors (because if the head or principall mem∣bers
be stroken, the whole bodie is in danger of death and destruction) that they may liue long and gouerne also, in truth, peace and godlinesse, without any suche wicked attempt, to be either deuised or performed a∣gainste them or any of them: which God graunt, as to all nations professing his word and truth, so particu∣larly to the nation and countrie of Englande, euen for his crucified Christes sake: that so the lande may flo∣rishe, by the long life and prosperous raigne, of these that bee in authoritie, and the Church increase, by the pure doctrine of the Gospell alreadie esta∣blished, and by the planting of Gods holye Discipline. So be it.
A briefe discourse of the as∣sault committed vpon the person of the most noble Prince, WILLIAM Prince of Orange, Countie of Nas∣sau, Marques de la Vere &c. By Iohn Iauregui a Spaniard. MY Lord the Prince of Orange, after he had heard the sermon in the Church on Sonday the xviij. day of March 1582. repai∣red to his house, in the place where sometime the Castel of Antwerpe stoode, accompanied with manye Lords and Gentlemen, of whom some dined with him. Immediatelie after he had dined openly (as he was wont) in the great Hall of the sayd house, my Lordes the Counties de Laual, de Hohenlo, my Lords his children, and two of his nephewes, children of my Lorde the Countie Iohn of Nassau, the Lords of Bo∣niuet, des Pruneaux, and other gentlemen ac∣companying
him The dinner was passed & spent with many honest communications & spéeches, amōgst all others, was some spéeche had of the cruelties committed by the Spani∣ardes in these low Countries. A little after dinner, the sayde Prince repayred into his withdrawing chamber, intending to go into his bedde Chamber with the sayd Lords and gentlemen, and as he passed by, shewed them a péece of tapistrie, wherein were liuelye set forth the Spanish souldiours. At the sayd in∣stant, a yong man of low stature shot at the sayd Prince with a dagge, charged with one only pellet, the shot wherof hit him vnder the right eare, & passed through the pallet of his mouth and came forth at his left chéeke, néere vnto his vpper iaw bone: the saide Lorde (as since he hath said many times) did not know what it was, but thought that some parte of the house had fallen, for he felt not himself to be stricken: notwithstanding his sighte was a little while dazeled. Immediatelye some of the Lords & gentlemen then next at hand, stroke the said yong man twice or thrice into the bodie with their swordes, and so the saide Princes garde drawing nigh, made an ende of him with their Haulberds. In the meane
time the sayd Prince being aduertised what had happened, & the rather by féeling the fyre that had taken hold of his haire, and hearing ye noise about the murderer, cried out, kil him not, I forgiue him my death: and so turning to sundrie French Lords, said vnto them: O how faithfull a seruaunt doeth his highnesse lose and so was straight ledde betwéene two (that helde him vp by the armes) into his chamber: for he coulde goe, and fell not with the blow. The brute hereof wente presentlye ouer all the towne, which brought most men into a maze, by reason of so sodaine and vnlo∣ked for a matter, and that in ye person of such a one, as among all men was holden & repu∣ted for a deliuerer of the Countrie, further, because the murderer was presently dead, all men iudged that the way to verifie and iusti∣fie the facte, was quite shut vp. Many and dy∣uerse were the spéeches hereof: some through suspition accusing others, and few hitting vp∣on the truth and attributing the least to them who were the very authours indéede: so as if suche a déede had bene committed in manye townes where the people haue the bridle at libertie, and may at their pleasure run from place to place, it had bene likelie that some
great mischief and inconuenience might haue ensued: But in the town of Antwerp (such is the order and obedience that all men do yéeld to their Magistrates, Coronels & Captayns) immediately al the citizens withdrew them∣selues to their Ensignes ech one in his quar∣ter, and the chaines being drawne, & the body of the gard filled, there was no way lefte for any to departe from his garde but the Cap∣taines. My Lord the Duke of Brabant was spéedily aduertised of this mishappe, and bée∣ing at the first certifyed of no other thā death, he was greatly astonied, and sighing verye déepely, complained to himself of the extreme losse which thereby he sustained: repeating oftentimes, that if the king his owne father had bene aliue againe, he could not haue bene more sorie for his death, than for the death of the said Prince: where on the other side the Prince bewayled him no lesse, rehearsing of∣tentimes these wordes: Alas poore Prince, alas poore Prince, what pains must thou yet take? Whiles most part of his seruants that were present, as also those which at the brute of the newes were come in, employed them∣selues about the said L Princes person, his sonne the Earle Maurice, notwithstanding
his heauie mourning, departed not from the dead corps which he caused to be searched: & first they light vpon the dag which was fallē out of his hande, that caused them to thinke that he had no meanes to vse a dagger, which they found naked in his bréeches. In the meane season the Earle of Hohenlo, for feare of further inconuenience, causing the sayd Princes gard and diuerse Gentlemen to fol∣low him, seased vpon the doores of the house, so to kéepe all suche as were not verye well knowne, from comming in or going forth. The dead corps being further searched, they found about him certaine papers and Pam∣phlets which were deliuered to the said Erle Maurice, the which at that instāt finding one of the seruants of my Lord his father shewed him the said Papers, and wéeping saide, be∣hold what ye wicked wretch had about him: who answered him, my Lord be not discom∣forted, God is mightie and able to preserue my Lord your father, but kéepe these papers wel, for we are greatly troubled about disco∣uering somewhat of this cursed wretche: for otherwise in this Town we shal incur great peril. To the which he did replie, alas I am afrayde least here be some other villaine that
may take them from me, this yong Lord be∣ing the rather moued to say so, because there went a speeche through the Hall, giuen foorth by some, that those which had killed the mur∣derer, were partakers of the fact, and that mē might be assured of it, so that the daunger be∣ganne to fall likewise vpon the best friendes of the said Lord Prince, and vppon his hou∣shold. Vpon this talke of the sayd yong Erle, the said seruaunt tooke him vnder his Cloke, and said vnto him, my Lord go with me, and I will lay your Papers in safetie, whiche hée did, bringing him into the roofe of the house, where committing the said papers to safe cu∣stody, he perceiued that they were written in Spanish, wherefore he said to the Earle, My Lord, there is no danger to be feared on your part, returne and cause further searche to bée made: as for me. I go to my Lord: which was done. Then the said seruant began to certifie euery one, that it was a Spaniarde, and that men should leaue the missconceiued suspition which they had. A while after returned the sayd yong Earle, bringing mo Papers, Cros∣ses, & an Agnus Dei, with a gréene wax Can∣dle, & two pieces of skin, like vnto a beauers: which occasioned many to be of opinion that
he had about him some Toades and enchant∣ments. The saide seruant began to reade the first Papers: whiche he founde to be, partlye praiers, and partly vowes, and then he brake the couer of a packet of letters, and found that it was written in Spanish, by one Spaniard to another, of the whiche he did certifie euerie man, but would not open the rest alone A lit∣tle after came the Lord de S. Aldegonde, who had alreadie bene with his highnesse, and being returned, saide to the same seruant, we must take aduise what is to be done, for there is great trouble in ye Town: whervnto he an∣swered, my Lord, if it please you, let vs with∣draw our selues for a while to communicate therof, I thinke you shal finde counsell rea∣die: and then they wente by themselues be∣cause of the great preasse of people that was about them, and the saide Lord did open the rest of the saide packet, in which were founde two letters of exchaunge, the one of 2000. crownes, and the other of 877. with let∣ters of aduice, all in Spanish, and by Spani∣ards: the bookes were of seruices to be perfor∣med at certain set hours: also one Iesuits Ca∣techisme & a paire of tables written from one ende to ye other. Then praising God, that had
giuen thē such light of ye matter, ye Lord de S. Aldegonde, resolued to go straight to ye Town house, & passing by ye Gard, to assure thē that it was done be Spaniards, whiche he did hope to verifie: and would carrie with him ye writing tables and the most parte of the writings: ap∣pointing others to go to his highnes with the other part, to aduertise him, and not to depart from his person: which was done. In passing by, ye said Lorde of Saint Aldegonde went also in to his highnesse, & shewed him the sayde Papers. In ye mean time was ye first dressing. And the Prince was layde in his bedde, and afterward such as were next about him and most skilfull, began to conceiue some sparke of hope, by reason he had his sight and spake well, especially because his vnderstanding & iudgement was very certaine, also that be∣ing forbidden much speech, he wrote stedfast and quicke. While these things were in do∣ing, there came in one of the Captaines of the towne, named Lion Petit, demaunding whe∣ther he were aliue or deade, who, when the said seruant requested him to let the sayde L. Prince take his rest for that time, affirming that he hoped of his recouerie, answered that the people would neuer be content vnlesse he
assured them that hée had séene him: Where∣vpon he was caused to enter in: then after some spéeches, demaunding what it pleased the L. Prince to commaund him, he saide: Commend me hartily to the people, and will them not to trouble themselues, & if it please God to take me to him selfe, that they obey & faithfully serue this prince, for I know none in the worlde better or more méete for them. His highnesse hauing séene the letters of Ex∣chaunge and other the writings brought vn∣to him, commended them to Martini the Re∣corder of the town, who then was with him, to cary them to the Magistrate of the towne, and to examine those to whome the letters of Exchaunge were directed: In the meane time hauing assembled the counsel of Estate, he di∣spatched a Commission directed vnto the ge∣neral Estates, the counsell of Estate, the Ma∣gistrate of the towne, the Coronells, Cap∣taines, & Wardens of occupations, with all diligence to procéede, commaunding all men vnder paine of death to declare what they knewe concerning the sayd Murderer. Nowe had the Magistrate in the meane time (who already had begun to procéede herein, and by the sayd papers and writing tables had found
that the Murtherer was of ye house of a Spa∣niard, named Iasper d'Anastro) taken order that all that were in the sayd house should be committed to prison, which was done. But they found that the sayd Anastro himselfe de∣parted the tuesday before toward Bruges Thē were the Coronels and Captaines aduertised by the Magistrate, also all the Inhabitants by their Gouernours, that all this webbe was wouen by the Spanyards: whervpon the whole towne grew to quietnesse, remainyng neuerthelesse in armes, for the assistance of iustice. At the first examinatiō of Antony Ve∣nero they could not finde any great matter, but this onely, that they knewe the Murthe∣rers person: Howbeit for that he confessed that the same day Masse had bene celebrated secretly in the sayd Anastro his house, at all aduentures vpon suspition they apprehended one Antony Timmerman, of the order of the white Friers. Neuerthelesse it was decréed, that the Murderers body should be set vpon a scaffold in the towne to shew it to the people, to the end to know it, which thing was done: but so soone as he was séene in the great market place, euery one knew it presently to be the body of Iohn Iauregui a Spaniard, the
seruant of Iasper Anastro: yea the sayde Ve∣nero séeing him dead, knew him. The next morning the xix. of March, as all the gates of the towne of Antwerp were diligently kept, in the morning the Post of Bruges arriued, who hauing shewed his letters to the Garde of the Riuer gate, there were found letters of the sayd Anastro directed to Venero, which were caried to his highnesse and to the Magi∣strate of the towne. Further, the Magistrate appointed, that the same day the Murtherers body should be quartered, and his head set vp∣on the Bulwarke toward Ril, and his quar∣ters vpon the foure principall gates, which was done. The next day his highnesse and the Counsell of estate decréed, that throughout all the Churches there should be extraordinarie prayers vnto God for the health of the sayde L. Prince. Also by the Magistrate of the towne his apointment, the next Wednesday being the 21. of the sayd Moneth, was by trū∣pet proclaimed throughout the towne a ge∣nerall fast, with common prayers: also com∣maundement was giuen that euery man should that day leaue all worke, to the ende to attend fasting and prayer. Annastro his letters were shewed to Venero, who séeing
him selfe thereby confounded and conuicted, and being, as by his confession it appeareth, admonished by one of the Coronels & others, required paper and inke, and with his owne hand wrote and signed his second confession. The Prince thinking the houre of his decease to drawe neare, dispatched the L. S. Alde∣gonde with letters directed to the generall e∣states, wherein, as his last counsel, he wished them to persist in his highnesse obedience de∣claring vnto them that he iudged him to be the onely Prince that was most fit for them, according to the tenure whereof, the sayde Lordes sent their Deputies to his highnesse, to aduertise him of their faithfull affection. Vpon wednesday following was ye fast with extraordinary prayers celebrated, and that with such multitude and concourse of people, in all the Churches of both languages, as time out of mind the like numbers of people haue not bene séene in the Churches of Ant∣werp, neither so many wéeping eyes. Howbeit for that the Phisitions and Surgeons began to conceiue some hope of the recouerie of the sayde Prince, the prayers were partely mi∣xed with thankes giuings for this good begin∣ning, with humble supplication, that it might
please God to accomplish his health. Now be∣gan the sayde L. Princes person to drawe to amendment, and dayly did his highnesse care∣fully visit him, who séemed, and in déede did ake great care for him, as likewise the L. Prince did for him, vppon euerye occasion commending his seruice. On the other side, the Magistrate was as diligent in procéeding against the offendors: so as finally he attey∣ned to the truth of the whole matter, as it wil appeare in the depositions of the sayd offen∣dors. But the L. Prince hearing that they purposed to procéede to definitiue sentence, did by writing expreslye commaund the L. of S. Aldegonde, to request the Magistrate to pu∣nish them with the easiest death that might be: which was done: for by the Magistrates sentence the wednesday 28. of the sayd moneth they were set at a stake vpon a scaffold in the middest of the great market, ouer against the towne house, and by the hangman strangled, their bodies quartered, and hanged ouer the chiefe gates of the towne, and their heades pitched vppon two of the great bulwarkes which heretofore were part of the castle. An∣tony Timmerman the white Frier the same day exhibited his second confession, wherein he acknowledged that he had bene of opinion
that the sayd Iaregui might with a safe con∣science execute the sayd enterprise: but that nowe being better instructed by such good ad∣monitions as had bene giuen him, he confes∣sed that he had erred, & therefore besought the Lords of Iustice not to forget his sayd prote∣station, if euer this processe were published. Within few dayes after the sayd executi∣on, his highnesse receiued from sundry places letters which the Prince of Parma had writ∣ten to the townes, wherein he endeuored to perswade them to withdraw them selues frō his obedience, laying his foundation vppon the death of the sayd L. Prince, wherevpon the sayde townes besought his highnesse of counsaile. These were the townes: Brussels, Gaunt, Bridges, Malines, Ipres, Audernarde, Dunkirk, Berghe and sundry others. Finally the towne of Antwerpe also receiued the like letters. Annastro also sent letters to the towne of Gaunt, tending to the same ende, which Venero his deposition doth containe: so that he wrote to all places where he had any accesse. All the sayd letters, as well from the Prince of Parma as from Annastro were grounded vpon the assurance which they had conceiued of the death of the sayd L. Prince,
whom God hath hitherto neuerthelesse pre∣serued, and will still of his mercie kéepe and preserue, if he please. Hereafter followe: The copies of the writings found about the murderer. The depositions of the Offendors. The letters of Annastro and the Prince of Parma. The copies of the Writings founde about the Murtherer. IESV CHRISTO NVESTRO Sen̄or, y la Virgē sancta a Maria nuestra Sen̄ora sean en mi ayuda en esta resoluciō hecha para su sanctis∣simo seruicio. QVE su Magistad tiene dada esta orden por el amor que tiene à estos Flamencos, y por librarlos de las op∣pressions en que estan. Si esto se haze, recibira el Sen̄or à este pueblo en misericordia, y hara con el las capitulaciones en toda ventaja d'ellos. Offrescer les he, que dentro de ocho dias que se haga, los vendra a tomar a misericordia, medi∣ante que al que hiziere este hecho, le traten bien
que sera ganancia della villa hazerlo assi, y per∣donarle la vida, pues la ha empleada tan en ser∣uicio de Dios, y de su Yglesia, y de su Rey, y en hon ra de toda su nacion: y el que me regalare y trata∣re bien, se lo pagara su Magestad su muy cum∣plidamente. Persuaderlos que se suffran, y tengan paciencia quatra o seys dias, hasta que se le passe la alteracion, que despues todo se hara tan a con∣tento de la Villa, como nunca ellos pudieren desse∣ar. Yo ruego a estos sen̄ores, que miren lo que ha∣zen en tratarme bien porque en hazar lo que he hecho, todas las naciones lo attribuyran a virtud, y nobleza de my nacion. Y pues a qui son todos tan virtuosos, tengan attencion a tratarme bien, hasta tomar mis confessiones muy d'espacio, y por su orden. Y sobre todo, yo me encomiendo en la misericordia de Dios. IESVS CHRIST OVR LORDE, and the holie Virgin S. Marie our Ladie, assist mee in this my determination, which I haue vndertaken for his most holie seruice. HIs Royall Maiestie hathe sette downe this order for the loue he beareth to these Flemings, and to deliuer them from the oppres∣sions
wherein they are. This being accomplished, the Lorde wil receiue these people to mercie, and he will graunt them articles tending to their vtter∣most aduantage. I will promise them, that within eighte dayes after the déede, they shal be receiued into fauour, conditionally, that they do wel entreate him that shall haue done this déed. That the towne shall reape commoditie by so doing, also to pardon him his life, consi∣dering he hath so employed it in the seruice of God, of the Church, and of his King, and to the honour of his whole nation: and hys Maiestie will most liberally rewarde anye that shall furnishe him of things requisite, and wel entreate him. They muste bée perswaded patiently to beare for foure or sixe dayes, vntil thys al∣teration be ouer: whiche being paste, all thinges shall be ordered to as great conten∣tation of the Towne, as themselues could euer wishe. I beséeche these Lordes well to weigh what they doe in wel vsing of mée: because that, accomplishing this déede that I haue
done, all nations will attribute it to the vertue and nobilitie of my Countrey. In so muche therefore, as all men here bée so vertuous, they muste determine, wel to entreate mée, yea, so farre foorth, as at leysure, and as order requyreth, to take my confessions. And aboue all thinges, I com∣mend me to the mercie of God. IESVS MARIA. AVos Redemptory Saluado del mundo, Cria∣dor del cielo y de la tierra, Sen̄or Dios Iesus Christo, siendo seruido concederme esta vi∣ctoria a mi todo misero, muy infelice peccador, y vuestro sieruo, por a quellas preciosissimas cinco llagas y la preciosissima corona de spinas y los vne∣stros preciosissimos grandissimos trabaios, angusti∣as, arrastradas, bofetadas, maldezires: e hiel y vinagre sobre aquello beuistes, vos todo poderoso Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra, todo por saluar a los peccadores del mundo, y a mi to∣do muy infelice peccador: y como a talos supplico muy humilmente seays seruido concederme esta victoria contra este Pagano, Violador de vuestro
Templo diuino, Ruina de vnestra religion, sancta catholica y Romana y el que es occasion de tanto dessassossrego a la vuestra Christiandad, y pesti∣lencia que no attiende sino en sustentar maldades, vellaquerias y ruynas. O todo poderoso Senor Dios Iesu Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra a vos os supplico muy humilmente seays seruido no permitir que e∣ste maluado vse de mas ruinas, y conceder a mi muy indigno peccador la gracia, animo y valor, paraque despues de las vuestras preciosissimas ma∣nos pueda ser acabado por mi. De manera que ninguno de quien yo voy vencerle, despues de vos Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del cielo y de la tierra pueda auer poder contra mi. Pero despues siendo vos al∣tissimo Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo Redēptor y Sal∣uador del mundo Criador del cielo y de la tierra siendo seruido de que yo dexe aqui esta miserable vida, soy muy contento se a assi, y siempre como vos Sen̄or Dios Dios fueredes seruido. Y assi os suplico de todo coraçon todo poderoso Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo, por a quella vuestra preciosissima passion seays seruido concederme constancia y pa∣ciencia, paraque yo misero muy infelice peccador pueda sobrelleuar y suffrir qualquier genero de
pena que me dieren, que a todo (como soy obliga∣do) prestare muy humilde cora on, siendo vos to∣do poderoso Redemptor y Saluador del mundo Criador del cielo y de la tierra seruido. IESVS MARIA. TO thée Redéemer and Sauiour of the worlde, creator of heauen and earth, Lord God, Iesus Christe: If it please thée to graunte this victorie vnto me moste mi∣serable wretched sinner, and thy seruaunt, for the loue of thy fiue most pretious woun∣des, & thy moste pretious crowne of thorns, and thy most pretious greuous labours, an∣guishes, torments, stripes, and iniuries, and the gall and vineger, which besides all thys thou diddest drinke, euen thou the almigh∣tie Lorde God, Iesus Christe, the redéemer and sauiour of the world, the creator of hea∣uen and earth, and al to saue the sinners of this world, and among the rest, me, the most vnhappie sinner: and as suche a one I doe moste humbly beséeche thée, that it maye please thée, to grant me this victory against this heathen, defiler of thy holy Temple,
and subuerter of thy holy catholik Romane religion, who is the cause of so many dis∣quiets throughout thy Christendome, and suche a pestilence, as is busied onely in vp∣holding wickednesse, villanies, and deso∣lations. O most mightie Lorde God Iesus Christ, redéemer and sauiour of the world, creator of heauen and earth, I do most hum∣bly beséech thée, that it maye please thée no longer to suffer this wretche to worke far∣ther desolations: Farther, that thou wilte graunte vnto me an vnworthye sinner suche fauour, courage and valiancie, as by thy moste pretious handes I maye accom∣plishe this thing, in such wise, as none of those that doe belong to him, whom, (with thy helpe, Lorde God, Iesus Christe redée∣mer and sauiour of the worlde, creator of heauen and earth) I purpose to ouercome, may haue any power against me. Howbeit in as much as thou arte the Supreme Lord God Iesus Christe, redéemer and sauiour of the world, creator of heauen and earth, if it please thee, that I leaue this miserable life, I am well content, that it be so, and euer Lorde God, thy will be done. Thus most
mightie Lord God, Iesus Christ, I beséech thée with my whole hart, for the loue of thy most pretious passiō, that it may please thée to graunte me constancie and patience, that I most miserable sinner may beare and en∣dure whatsoeuer kinde of tormentes maye be laide vpon me, wherevnto I wil haue, as I ought, a most humble heart: if so it séeme good vnto thée O most mighty redéemer and sauiour of the world, creator of heauen and earth. AVos Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, Criador del Cielo y de la tierra, os offrezco siendo os seruido librar∣me con vida, despues de hauer effectuado mi des∣seo, vn velo muy rico: y a vos Nuestra Sen̄ora de Regona vna corona, vna ropa, vna lampara: y a vos Nuestra Sen̄ora de Arenzasu vna corona: y a vos Nuestra Sen̄ora de Guadalupe vna Co∣rona: a vos Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo. Nuestra Sen̄ora de Monserrate: al sancto Cru∣cifixo de Burgos, nuestra Sen̄ora del pilar de a∣ragoça.
TO thée Lorde God, Iesus Christ, Re∣déemer and Sauiour of the worlde, creator of heauen and earth, if it please thee to deliuer mée with life, I doe promise (af∣ter the finishing of my pretence,) a verye rich vaile: Also to thee our Lady of Regona, a crowne, a gowne, and a Lampe: To thée our Lady of Arancazu one crown: & to thée our Lady of Guadalupe, one crowne: and to thée our Lord God Iesus Christe. Also to our Lady of Montferrat: to the holy Cru∣cifixe of Burges: to our Lady of the Piller of Saragosse. AVos Sen̄or Dios Iesu Christo Redemptor y Saluador del mundo, os offrezco siendo ser∣uido librarme con vida d'este effecto qua traygo entre manos vna ropa muy rica: y a vos Nuestra Senora de Vegonbaan vna corona: y vna ropa, y vna lampara: y a vos Nuestra Sē∣nora de Aranzacu vna corona: y a vos Nuestra Sēnora de Guadalupe vna corona: y a vos Sē∣nor Dios Iesu Christo del Crucifixo de Burgos cabal offrezco vna rica ropa, y offrezco yr en Roma a vna semana continuando.
The Copy of that which was written in the sixth & seuenth pages of Iohn Iaureguyes writing Tables. TO the Lorde God Iesus Christe, redée∣mer and sauiour of the world, I do pro∣mise, if it please thée to deliuer me with life out of this enterprise whiche I haue takē in hand, one very rich gowne: To thée our La∣dy of Vegondaan one crown, one gowne, and one lampe: to thée our Lady of Arancazu one crowne: and to thée our Lady of Guada∣lupa one crowne: and to thée Lord God Ie∣sus Christe of the Crucifixe of Burges, I doe vowe one gowne richly furnished: and doe farther vowe to goe to Rome within one wéeke. AL Angel san Gabriel me encomiendo con todo mi spiritu y coracon, paraque agora y siēpre me sea mi intercessor a nuestro Sen̄or Iesu Christo, y a su hijo preciosissimo, y a la Virgen sancta Maria, y a todos los Sanctos y Sanctas de la corte del cielo de guardarme y encaminarme y tenerme de su bēdita mano sin que yo sea muerto
subitamente, y me de gracia paraque pueda con∣seguyr el buen zelo que tengo de salir con aquel effecto. Yen memoria desto prometo de ayunar to∣da vna semana entera (despues de ver me libre desto) a pan y agua, y de rezar, &c. In the tenth Page. I Do with my whole minde and hearte, commende me to the Aungell Sainct Gabriel, to the ende, that nowe and euer he may be my mediatour to our Lorde Iesus Christ and to his most pretious sonne, and to the Virgin Mary, and to all he Saincts and she Saincts of the heauenly Court, that he will kéepe and conduct me, and with his blessed hand vphold me from sodaine death, and to graunt me grace to attaine to the ef∣fect of my good zeale. In remembraunce whereof I doe promise, that if I escape frée from this déede, I will for one whole wéek fast breade and water, and pray. DE ayunar todos los Viernes a intercession de la passion de nuestro Sēnor Iesu Christo, y todos los Sabados a inuocation de nue∣stra
Senora la Virgen Maria, paraque yo sea guardado deste transito, y me encamine a dar fin a este effecto. In the fourteenth Page. TO fast euerie Fryday in cōmemoration of the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, and euerie Saturday for the inuocation of our Ladie the virgine Marie, to the ende I may be preserued from this perill, and that she may guide me to the ende of this enter∣prise. Hecho en la carcel desta vil∣la de Anueres à veinte de Marco, del an∣no 1582. En presentia del S. Malgraue, Godefrido Mōtens, Iacomo zuerio, y Lu∣douico Blomarte Esclauines d'ella. ANtonio de venero preso, hijode Iu Espan̄ol nascido de Bilbao en Bis∣caia, de edad de dies y nueue à ve∣nte annos teniendo los libros de Gasper d' Annastro, mercade Espanol, dize auer morado con e
dicho Anastro mas de dos annos. Preguntado s' y no saue quien ha escrito vn pa∣pel o bilete muestrado à el declarante hallado so∣bre el muerto, el qual el domingo passado ha tirado con vn pistolete la persona de su Excellentia, el Principe d' Orange, commençando el dicho bille∣te: Nuestro Sēnor Iesu Christo, &c. Dize ser es∣crito por mano de Iuan de Iaureguy. Preguntado quien es el dicho Iuā de Iaureguy? Dize ser Espan̄ol de Bilbao en Biscaya, sobrino de Pedro d' Orosco, mercader Espānol en Brujas, el qual Iuan vino morar con el dicho Anastro cer∣ca el mez de Iulio passado, auiendo miētres escri∣to y copiado las cartas del dicho Anastro y lo que le mando. Siendo al declarante muestrado el muerto y preg', si aquel es Iuan de Iaureguy sobredicho? Dize que si, y que el auiendo el dicho Domingo oydo la missa salio de casa cerca las onze horas an∣tes de comer, y auia entrado y salido la casa tres o quatro vezes. Preguntado quien auia dictado al dicho Iuan el dicho billette? Dize que esta cierto que se lo deue de auer dictado el dicho Anastro, por que el no tenia Iuyzio para hazerlo de si. Seyendo preguntado si no conoscia el pistolete,
que le fué mostrado, con el qual es herido su Ex∣cellentia por el dicho Iaureguy? Dize auer visto el mismo pistolete o semejante à el, passado seis mezes en casa del dicho Anastro, y que dicho A∣nastro ha embiado otros tres como ellos en Espā∣na, el vno à Don Fernando de Arieta, y el otro à Don Diego d' Alua, y el tercero a Pedro Lopes d' Arieta, sin que sabe quien los pueda auer fecho, quanto costaron, o quien les pago, sea el dicho A∣nastro o su caxero. Preguntado donde vienne, y quien ha hecho la vela de çera verde en que esta abaxo imprimido el senal de la crux, que el dicho Iaureguy tenis so∣bre su cuerpo nudo con vna medailla del Saluador y la Imagen de Nuestra Sennora Maria todo muestrado à el declarante? Dize que es vna de las velas que se da à algun passagero visitando el Monasterio en Burgos en Espana, adonde esta el Crucifixo, y la Imagen esta hecha de los Iesui∣tes en Madrid: pero no saue como el dicho Iaure∣guy ha cobrado lo sobredicho. Preguntado que fueron las postreras palabras que el dicho Iuan ha tenido cō el declarante? Di∣ze que la postrera vez que le hablo dixo que e∣staua muy bien determinado para executar y ac∣complir su empresa, pues que se auia confessado, y
que por esso seria bueno que el declarante te sal∣uasse, sobre que el declarante le respondio que nō sauia adonde yr, o saluar se: por estar cargado de los libros y papeles del dicho Anastro su amo, y que por esso quedaria cereo dellos como le auia prometido. Preguntado à quien el dicho Iaureguy se auia confessado? Dize à cierto frayle llamado Padre Antonio. Preguutado si el dicho Padre Antonio non ha sauido d'estu empresa, quando, y porquien? Dize que el declarante no ha comunicado dello con el padre Antonio, ny ha ouydo que ninguno en publi∣co, ny secreto aya comunicado con el saluo que el dicho Iuan de Iaureguy le dixò que se auia con∣fessado con el dicho Padre Antonio, y tratado d'esto negocio, y que eran en el Anastro, Iaureguy, y el declarante, y que le auia absuelto dello. Preguntado si no saue si el dico Gaspar de An∣nastro o otro vuiesse semejante empresa sobre la persona de la Sereniss. Reyna de Inglaterra, o so∣bre la del Sereniss. Ducque de Anjou? Dize que piensa que non. Preguntado si conosce la carta escrita en Dun∣quercque à xvj. de Março, donde la sobrescripti∣on y tenor le fue preleydo? Dize que si, y ser escri∣ta por las proprias manos del dicho Anastro: y tā∣bien
la otra carta serrada en ella es suya, y por el escrita. Preguntado si la carta escrita en Gre∣uelingues à xvij. d'este mez de Março estat tam∣bien escrita por el dicho Gaspar Anastro? Dize que si, y todo esso para que se effectuasse esta em∣presa como paresce por el contenido d'ellas. Preguntado si el dicho Iaureguy no tenia algun∣cauallo presto, o otro remedio para saluar se de∣spues de auer cometido el delito? Dize, que no: pero que estaua determinado de morir auiendo hecho el dicho efeto, y que era tan induzido del dicho Annastro para hazer dicho efeto, que paresçia, que era encantando, y que yua muy alegremente, para hazerlo fuera la caza del dicho Anastro, despues que auia oydo la missa, y auiendo almor∣zando bibido vn golpe de Bastardo. Preguntado quien era el hombre à cauallo teni∣endo de diestro otto cauallo ensilado paseando se al tiempo del dicho efetto delante la corte de su Ex∣cell. Dize dello no saber nada, y que libramente declarara lo que dello supiera, pues que tiene de∣clarado lo que mas importa, y sennaladamēte no sabe d'ello cosa alguna. Seyendo propuesto al dicho declarante que o∣uiese de nombrar y mostrar todos los que cono∣scia,
o sabia que podrian auer sabido de la dicha empresa. Dize que persona del mundo, ny de den∣tro ny de fuera d'esta villa sabe hablar de la di∣cha empressa, mas que dicho declarante, y el dicho Iaureguy y Gaspar d' Annastro y Iuan de Ysun∣ca, y su hijo Pedro de Ysunca. Done in the Prison of this tovvne of Antwerpe the 20. of March 1582. in the presence of my Lorde the Marcgraue, Godfrey Montens, Iames Zuerius and Lewes Blommart, shi∣rifes of the said towne. ANthony de Venero prisoner, the sonne of Iohn, a Spaniard born in Bilbao in Bi∣scay, of the age of ninetene or twenty yeres, kéeper of the booke of accompts of Iasper of Annastro a marchaunt and Spaniard borne, saith, that he hath dwelt with the sayd An∣nastro aboue two yeares. Being asked whether he knew who writ a certaine paper or remembraunce which was there shewed to the sayde Anthonie, which bill was founde about the dead bodie of him who the Sunday before had dischar∣ged a dagge against the person of his excel∣lencie, the Prince of Orange, which bill be∣ganne,
Our Lorde Iesus Christ, &c. He saith that I. Iaureguy writ it with his own hāde. Being demaunded what that Iohn Iaure∣guy is? He saith he is a Spaniard of Bilbao in Biscay, the coosin of Peter of Orosco mar∣chaunt & Spaniard borne, remaining at Bru∣ges, which Iohn came about the moneth of Iuly last past, to dwel wc the said Annastro, where hitherto he hath bin emploied in co∣pying the letters of the sayd Annastro, and in whatsoeuer else he commaunded him. The dead corps being shewed to the sayd deponent, and he asked whether it were the aforesayd Iohn Iaureguy? He sayth yea, and that the sayd Iohn hauing the Sunday be∣fore heard Masse, departed out of the house about eleuen of the clocke before noone, af∣ter he had thrée or foure times gone out and in at the said house. Being demaunded who penned the saide bill for the sayd Iohn: he sayth that the saide bill should surely be, of the penning of the said Annastro, bicause the said Iohn was not of vnderstanding sufficient to haue done it. Being demaunded whether he knew not the dagge which was shewed him, & where∣with
the sayd Iaureguy wounded his excel∣lencie: He sayth that he hath séene the same dagge or the like of it aboue sixe monethes since in the house of the sayd Annastro, who sent thrée others like the same into Spaine. One to Don Ferdinand of Arieta, an other to Don Diego of Alua and the third to Peter Lopes of Arieta: but he knoweth not who made them, how much they cost, either who payed for them, whether the sayd Annastro or his pursebearer. Being demaunded, from whence came or who made the gréene waxe candel, vpon the nether ende whereof the signe of the Crosse was painted, which the sayd Iaureguy bare vpō his naked bodie together with a quoine of the Sauiour, and the image of our Ladie Marie, all which was shewed to the sayd de∣ponent, he saith that it is one of the candels which vsually are giuen to pilgrimes when they visite the monasterie where the cruci∣fixe of Burgos in Spaine doth stand: and that the Iesuites made the image at Madrill but of whom the sayd Iaureguy had thē he wot∣teth not. Being demaunded what were the last
words that the said Iohn vsed vnto the sayd deponent: He sayeth that the last time he spake with him he sayde vnto him, that he was fully determined to execute and accom∣plish his enterprise, considering he was al∣readie shriuen, wherefore it were good that the sayd deponent saued him selfe. Where∣vnto the sayde deponent aunswered, that he wist not whether to goe or where to saue him selfe, for that he stoode charged with his sayd master Annastros books and writings, and therefore that according to his promise he woulde remaine with them. Being demaunded to whom the sayde Iaureguy was shriuen, he saith to a certaine Monke named father Antony. Being demaunded whether the sayd fa∣ther Anthony knew of their enterprise, whē or by whom: he saith that he this deponent neuer conferred with the sayd father Anto∣nie, neither knew that any other conferred with him either secretely nor openly, ex∣cept that the sayde Iohn Iaureguy tolde him that he had confessed him selfe to the sayd fa∣ther Anthony, & had conferred with him of this matter, whereunto Annastro, Iaureguy
and he she deponent were priuy, and that he had absolued him. Being demaunded whether he knewe, whether the sayd Iasper Annastro or any o∣ther had framed the like practise against the person of the most noble Quéene of England, or against the most noble Duke of Anjou? sayth that he thinketh no. Being demaunded whether he knew the letter written frō Dunkirke the 16. of March the superscription and tenure whereof were red vnto him, sayth, yea, and that Annastro wrote it with his owne hand. Also that the other letter inclosed therein, is of the same sort, and likewise written by him. Being demāded whether the letter writ∣ten from Graueling the 17. of this moneth of March were wrote by the sayd Annastro, he sayth yea, and that all was done for the at∣tayning to the execution of this enterprise, as is euident by the contentes of the same. Being demaūded whether the said Iaure∣guy had any house readye, or any other meane to saue him selfe after the execution of this trespasse, he sayth, no: but that he was fully resolued to die after he had broght
this offence to passe: for the sayd Annastro had so perswaded him to doe this déede, that he séemed euen bewitched: in suche wise as after he had hearde masse, and broken his fast, hauing drunke a good cuppe of Bastard he departed very chéerefully out of the house of the sayd Annastro. Being demaunded what he was who be∣ing on horseback & leading a spare horse sad∣led walked vp and downe before his excel∣lencies Court at the same time that this déede was done: he sayth, that he knew no∣thing thereof: also that fréely he would shew whatsoeuer he knewe, considering that he hath alreadie declared vnto them matters of greater importance: and that hereof e∣specially he is ignorant. The sayd Venero being willed to name and reueale all those whome he knewe or thought to be priuie to any thing cōcerning the sayde enterprise: he sayeth that neither one nor other, neither in the towne nor o∣ther where, are able to speake any thing of his enterprise, but him selfe, this deponent, Iaureguy, Iasper of Annastro, Iohn of Hūca, and his sonne Peter of Hunca.
La Deposition de Antonio Venero: la quelle de son pro∣pre mouuement il a faicte, & vo∣luntairement escript & sous∣signée de sa propre main. YO Antonio de Venero, vezino de Bil∣bao, hijo de Iuan de Venero, de edad de diez y nueue a veynte annos poco mas o menos, assistente en la casay negocios del Gaspar de Annastro vezino de Vi∣toria, desde veynte dias del mes de Enero del anno de 1580. hasta treze de Março de 1582. declaro lo seguiente que me ha accontescido con el dicho Gaspar de Annastro, siendo pregunt ado dello del senor Mulgraue, Burgomaestre, y Esclaunineo de∣sta villa de Anberes, diziendo la verdad sobre iu∣ramenta, y sobre mi alma y mi cōscientia, promet∣tienno dezir toda la verdad sin encubrir cosa al∣guna, por auerme prometiendo los dichos sennores Malgraue, Burgomaestre, y Esclauines a inter∣cession del sennior Esteuan Roquen Coronel de la dicha villa de Anberes, de diziendo todo lo que me consta, de darme muerte honrosa, y a medita
de mi desseo y contentamiento, y Saserd∣te para confessarme y comulgarme por lo que roca à la honra de mi linnage. E yo el dic ho Anto∣nio de Venero confiando en la palabra y nobleza de los dichos sennores de que assi lo cumpliran, di∣go lo seguiente. PRIMERAMENTE, es, que Iuan do Ysunca vezino de victoria, proueedor de fue de las arma∣das en estos estados, escriuio al dicho Annastro vna carta de Lisbona, aura diez meses poco mas menos, en que le pedia diuersos menages, sin a∣erle escripto hastae entonces, diziendole que ter∣ia por cosa nueua el auer carta suya, mas que lo hazia por estar en Lisbona, supplicandole le em∣biase lo que pedia. Y el dicho Gasper de Annastro le respondiò con palabras cortesanas, escusando se de no embiar selos, auiendolo hecho por no auerle embiado dineros, y por verse a la sazon rico, y sin gana de fiarle lo que le pedia. Y el dicho Iuan de Ysunca respondio à estio, rogandole se los embi∣asse, porque le hazian mucha falta, hallandose en Lisbona por conseruar su autoridad, atento que entendia que su Magestad le queria dar vn car∣go muy honroso, y que lo hiziesse, porque le cōmuni carta vn negocio de grādissima importancia, y que redondaria en gran bien, honor, y beneficio suyo. O∣tra
vez le respondiò con nueuas escusas, y d'estilo cortesano, y en effecto jamas le embio dichos me∣najes: pero le escriuio que que negocio podia ser el que lo cometia, y de tanta importancia, y que se lo auisasse. Estas des cartas arriba vi yo el dicho An∣tonio de Venero, y despues vino la respuesta d'esta carta, en que el dicho Iuan de Ysunça declaro el negocio, y leyo la carta: y de entonces aca me or∣denò a mi el dicho Antonio de Venero que no le a∣briesse ninguna carta que vtniesse cerrada à la corte saena. Y en este tiempo, que pudieron ser cin∣co o seys meses, poco mas o menos, anduuieron los dichos Iuan de Ysunça y Gaspar de Annastro en demandas y respuestas, escriutendose cartas vnos a otros con mucho secreto, y el dicho Gaspar de Annastro le respondia en su camara siempre de su mano, cerrando las cartas con lacre, y lo mas disfraçado que podia. En todo este tiempo estuue yo el dicho Antonio de Venero innocente de tal caso, echando imaginacion que le trataua casa∣miento con la hija de Iuan Ruyz de Vergara, her∣mano de Francisco Ruyz de Vergara, que ha vi∣uido en Anberes, por auerselo escripto al dicho Gaspar de Annastro donna Maria de Ysunça su madre, y que como sabian estaua rico, y era de los masqualificados de dicha Vitoria, se ladarian
con muchos ducados. Y como digo yo el dicho An∣tonio de Venero entendi que estos serian los secre∣tos y que tardaeuan en resoluerse, porque pediria el dicho Annastro aun mas dote de lo que of∣frescian, por gozar con mas larguesa desu graue∣dad. Despues parece ser que se perdieron dos naos Flamencas que yuan a Laredo, y que fue robada en Plemua la nao de Philipe Dorio que yua tam∣bien à Biscaya. En las quales dichas tres naos tu∣uo muy gruessas perdidas, de que el se vio con grā∣dissimo trabajo y descontento de espiritu, sin saber que hazerse para poder passar adelante con su honor. En este instante esciruio el dicho Iuan de Ysunça al dicho Gaspar de An̄astro, sin saberlo yo tampoco, yera que hiziesse matar a su Excel∣lencia el Principe d'Orange, y que lo tenta trata∣do cō su Magestad en grandissimo secreto, sin que nadie lo supiesse, sino entre los dos: y auia hecho ha∣zer à su Magestad vna capitulacion firmado de su mano, en que leprometia, despues de sabido la nueua ciertà dela muerte de su Excellētia, ochen ta mil duchados en dinero, o el valor d'ellos en renta, y vn habito de Sanctiago, y que esto esta∣ua por escrito, y que aun haria otras muchas cosas, de darle cargos honrosos: porque auia dicho y assegurado el dicho Iuan de Ysunça à su
Magestad, que el dicho Annastr era vn hom∣bre de muy claero entendimiento, y de muchas prē∣das. En este instante ami el dicho Antonio de Ve∣nero no me consta que este negocio lo supiesse per∣sona nascida: antes me asseguro al parecer mio, que por ningunae cosa del mundo se descubriera el dicho Gaspar de Annastro de nnguna nacion e∣strangera para tal caso. Y puesto caso que en An∣beres no ay Espan̄oles à quien poderlo descubrir, torno à dezir, que verdaderamēte me paerece que no lo dixo à persona ninguna, y esto affirmo assi por poder penetrar de otra cesa. Ara traeste tiempo, aura como vn mes, tuuo recelos de otra desgracia nueuamente, de que deuian de ester attaiados de haziēdo de mercaderes, cō quien el tenta muy gru∣essointeresse, de qui antidad de nueue mil quinient∣as libras de gruesso, poco mas o menos de mercade∣rias qu' el le aua embado, y cangazones{que} auiae hecho para embiar à ellos, por cuenta de algunos, Ingleses de Londres, y par letras de cābio que auiae acceptado y pagaedo llanamente por ellos. Y viendo∣se in tātos trabaios, y que d'este vltimo el no tenia culpa alguna, pues si a el le hazias hancoroto con tanta summa, el no lo podia remediar en ningunà manera, de se ausentar tambien. Y en este instan∣te me llamó à su camara a mi el dicho Antonio
de Venero, y encargandome mucho el secreto, y llorando muchas lagrimas, me dixo la substancia declarada, y de lo tratado con el dicho Iuan de Y∣sunca, y me mostro algunas cartas de las qu'l dicho Iuan de Ysunça le auia escripto, en que le hazia buenas todas las promessas suso decluradas, y las cartas venian escriptas diebolica e ingenio samē∣te sin firma, y el dicho Iuan de Ysunça paresce ser que dio cuenta del negocio en Espāna a vn hijo suyo que estaua en Madrid, llamado Pedro de Y∣sunça Le Queytio, y este mismo tambien le escri∣uia por muy buen termino, assegurandole la mis∣ma substancia con muchas prendas, y firmandose en la firma Apodaca. Estas cartas quemo en el aposento despues de auerme mostrado (como digo) la substancia d'ellas. Y en esto comenso à discur∣rir con migo, dizendo, que no queria verse à resi∣stir tantas affrentas, como se le aparetauan, y que se queria encomendar à Dios de todo coraçon, y matar el mismo à su Excellencia el Principe de Orāge: y que si le acauassen, por cierto que el que∣ria quador alli, por que era meior morir, que no vi∣uir (siendo el quien era) en affrenta, de que le di∣xiessen por el en la bolsa de Anberes, mirad aquel hombre que a hecho bancaroto, y que llegandolas cosas a este termino ninguno, consideraria à que
no era la culpa suya: sino echarle mucha culpa quando no la tuuiesse, y que deuia muchos dineros en Anberes a los principales, y que tenian mando en la tierra, y le perseguirian cruelmente, y que assi determinaua de morir, y que y a sabia que lleua∣ua la muerte tragada: pero que conesto se enca∣briria, y queno se attribuyria a dar nombre de bā∣caroto à su desgracia. Todo lo dezia llorando. E yo viendole tan de sconsolado, lloraua mucho mas, y le roguè, que por amor de Dios no buscasse con sus manos la muerte, y que tuuiesse patiencia de las cosas que Dios hazia, y que pues no era suya la culpa, resistiesse al trabaio que le sobreuenia, mo∣strando rostro à sus acrecdores, y la razon en la mano, que le destruyan Pedro Nunnez de Ar∣bulu, y Pedro de çubiaur, y que con esto se suffri∣esie. El me respondia, que no ternia rostro para mirar à nadie, y que assi estaua en su proposito, e yo se lo contradezia mucho, diziendo otra vez, que lo encomendasse todo à Dios y aguardasse à la desgracia. En estas platicas (que eran vndia de labor à la tarde, despues de la bolsa) entro en su aposento Andres de la Maça que viue en casa, in∣nocente de todo, y assi se quedo esto assi sin hoblar mas d'ello a quello noche por respecto della venida del dicho Andres de la Maça. Otro dia à la man∣nana (estando en su camara) me embiò à llamar,
y dixo, Pues como os va, Antonio hermano? y le respondi, que con mucha tristeza: y me comencò tratar otar vez de lo passado, y que si el no mata∣ua à su Excellēcia, no sabia à quien encomēdar se, si yo no fuesse prouar laventura con Iuā de Iaure∣guy, vezmo de Bilbao, cryado suyo, que ayudaua à escriuir en el cōtador, porque le parescia moç de∣terminado para qualqui era cosa, y pobre, E yo el dicho Antonio de Venero le respōdi, que seria grā∣dissimo cargo de consciencia, que el dicho Anastro diesse occasion que muriesse el dicho Iuan de Iau∣reguy mala muerte, prque (como querian tanto à su Excellencia en toda la tierra.) quando lo aca∣basse de hazer, le harian pieças. El dezia, que no, sino prenderle, y saber del à que fin lo auia hecho, y que en esto se passarian ocho dias, despues que el vuiesse hecho el effecto, y que para esto podia pàr∣tir el dicho Annastro de Anberes quatro dias antes que el lo hiziesse, y yria à Cales, y de alla de∣spacharia vn correo à Rauayn, que es Pedro de Ysunça, Le queytio, hijo de Iuan de Ysunça, en que auisasse à su Magestad, que auia salido para tal effecto, y que quedaua concertado, y que de Cales yria al cāpo del principe de Parma. Y quādo supi∣esse la nueua de la muerte, embiaria aca desde el cāpo vna Trōpeta, pidiēdo saluassen al dicho Iuan de Iau. la vida, y que el mesmo Gaspar de Anastro
e screuiria sobre el negoci, declarandose à algu∣nos amigos de la Villa pidiando la vida del dicho, y embiādo firmas en blanco del Principe de Par∣ma, paraque estos sennores padiessen lo que quisi∣essen en su vōtaeja de la religiō-frera, y todo lo de∣mas, y que con este auria paz despues de  el Principe de Orange. En esto entro à lacramara vn muchacho Flamenco del dicho Gaspar de An∣nastro, que le lleuo consigo, llamado Iuanico, y le dixo, que llamasse à Iuan de Iaureguy el qual est aua escriuiendo èn el contador y vino, y quādo en∣tró, me dixo à mi que me saliesse del aposento, y quedo con el en el aposento platicando. Y de alli vn rato me llamò à mi, y dixo que Iaureguy queria hazer aquello por amor d'el, y porsu honra, y que le auia mostrado vn pun̄al con que lo auia de ma∣tar, estando en la tabla, o en conuersaecion, y me∣terle elpun̄al por detras de la oreja, y passarle, y que e Iaureguy lo queria hazer de buena gana: à mi me dexo que que me parescia, y le respondi, que mirasse por lo que tecaua a la consciencia, y que si tal fuesse, padeceriā much as muertes los Espanno∣les que estauā en Anberes, de pesar de ver muer∣to, al Principe si le matassen, y que yo me queriayr de la tierra por no peligrar de la vida: y me dixo, que nó tuuiesse miedo, que como el Iaureguy dixis∣se la verdad claramente, no tocariā en la casa, ni
hariā cosa ninguna. En esto aconsejo ad Iaureguy que por amor de su hōra y d'el, que quedasse resuel∣to el hecho, y que aquel mismo dia fuesse à espiar como comia su Excellēcia, y assi lo hizo tres o qua∣tro vezes: y de zia, que tenia gran esperāça de ha∣zerlo, y aqui tenia grādes platicas cō el Iaureguy, como persona que auia de acometer tal cosa. Y pē∣sando mas en ello, à la postre estuuierō en duda, de si seria con pūnal, o pistolete. Y el Iaureguy dezia que nunca auia tir ado pistolete, ni sabia como ti∣rarlcy le dixo, que lo fuesse à prouar en alguna parte cō algun amigo, diziēdo que el dicho Iaure∣guy fuesse Flamenco, y que no ha blasse otra lēgua: y le dixo, de si, como lo hizo, Andādo en esto, llego cartade Londres, en que deziā, que Pedro de çu∣biaur era ausentado, y con esta occasiō le to mo grā gana de yrse, y se de spedio en la bolsa de algunos, y se fue arrebatadamēte. El Martes, ò Miercoles despediendose de todos los de casa innocente men∣te para boluer luego (saluo del dicho Iuan Iaure∣guy, y de mi el dicho Antonio de Venero) y me es∣criuio desde Bruias dos cartas, la vna general, y la otra d'este negocio: de que la general mo∣stre à Mortin de Varron, Pedro de la Pēna, An∣tonio Spinola, y à algunos otros, y despues la que∣me, y di la otra carta al dicho Iaureguy, y la leyó,
por{que} dezia le parescia fuesse cō pistolete, y el otro dixo que estaua bien, y que assi lo haria y lo dezia con mocha alegria, y quemo tambien la otra car∣ta, y me dixo, que se queria cōfessar, y se sue fuera de casa à hazarlo, sin que yo preguntasse al dicho Iaureguy con quien, y me dixo se auia confessado y comulgado, y despues estaua ya presto para ha∣zarlo quando el qui siesse, sin aguardar à nada. Y assi este Domingo passado, diez y ocho d'este oyo Missa en casa como à las onze horas, y despues se fue, e hizo lo que parece ser, que cierto aun yo lo no se. Y para de scargo de mi conscientia digo que no me consta que tenga ninguno otro culpa en este negocio: y que assilos que mas estan presos de∣uen ser sueltos y libres, por hallar los yo innocentes. Y si à mi el dicho Antonio de Venero (por auer descubierto mi coracon, y dicho quanto he podido y se me ha accordado) quisieren V. S. hazer mi∣sericordia de saluarle la vida (pues el que hi∣zo el mal es muerto, e yo no fuy auctor d'ello) lo re∣conoscere toda mi vida. El dicho Gaspar de Annastro nos prometio al dicho Iuan de Iaureguy, y à mi el dicho Antonio de Venero, que si a quello se hazia, nos ternia por proprios hijos, y que no auria cosa partida, sino que su hazienda seria nuestra propria: y otras pala∣bras
desta manera. Y el dicho Iaureguy dixò, que no queria ninguna cosa, y que lo hazia por amor d'el, y por auer comida su pan, e yo le quité el som∣brero temblando, y dandole á entender como te∣mia de la muerte, y el me asseguraua que no me tocarian en vn pelo de la cabeca. Soubsignê. Godofridus Montens. Zuerius. Blomart. Antonio de Venero. Siendo esta confession preleyda al dicho declarante fuera de la carcel debaxo del cie∣lo, ha persistidio en ella, liendo assi verdad en presentia de los Esclauines aqui abaxo firmado fecho à xxvj. de Marco. 1582. Zuerius. Blomart.
The deposition of Anthonie Venero, which of his owne motion he made and willinglie writ and subscri∣bed with his owne hande. I Anthonie of Venero, borne in Bilbao, the sonne of Iohn of Vene∣ro of the age of 19. or 20. yeares little more or lesse, assistant in the house & affaires of Iaspar of An∣nastro borne in Victoria, from the 20. daye of Ianuarie, 1580. vnto the xiij. of March 1582. do as followeth declare, what hapned vnto me with the said Iasper of Annastro, being there∣of examined by my Lordes the Marcgraue, Borowmaisters and Shirifes of this towne of Antwerpe, and do promise vppon my oathe, soule and conscience, to shew the whole truth thereof: not to cloke or conceale anye thing, whervpon the saide Lordes, the Marcgraue, Borowmaisters and Shirifes, haue by the intreatie of the Lord Steuen Racquet Coro∣nel of the saide towne of Antwerpe, promised me, that confessing whatsoeuer I do knowe, they wil grant me an honorable death, agrée∣able
to my desire and contentation, with a Prieste also to confesse me and to conferre withall, because it concerneth the honour of my stock: I Anthonie of Venero reposing my selfe vpon the word and nobilitie of the saide Lords, touching the accomplishment thereof, do say as followeth. First that Iohn of Ysunca borne in Ʋicto∣ria, aforetime Commissioner euer the furni∣ture of the armies in these partes, writte a letter to Iasper of Annastro of Lisbone, aboute ten monethes since, wherein he requested of him certaine goods, whereof he had neuer be∣fore written vnto him: he saide it woulde be newes to him to sée any of his letters, & that he did this, that so he mighte be at Lisbone re∣questing him to sende him that which he de∣maunded. Hereunto the saide Iasper of An∣nastro aunswerrd in friendlie wordes, excu∣sing himselfe for not sending them, as well vpon that he had not sent money, as because he founde not him selfe of wealth sufficiente, and so could not trust forth that which he de∣maunded. Whereto Iohn of Ysunca answe∣red, requesting him to sende the saide moue∣ables, for that at Lisbone he stoode in greate
néede of them for the conseruation of his au∣ctoritie, considering that his Maiestie woulde committe vnto him a verie honorable office: and that therefore he woulde doe it: for hée woulde communicate vnto him a matter of verie great importance, which would redoūd to his great benefite & honour. To the whiche the said Annastro replied againe with newe excuses and curtesies, but in déede sente him not the said moueables, only he desired to vn∣derstand what matter of so great importance it might be that he would communicate vnto him, wherof he desired him to aduertise hym. These two letters aforesaid did I ye said An∣thony of Venero sée, afterward came the an∣swer of this letter wherin the said I. of Y sun∣ca opened the matter, & when Annastro had red the saide letter, he commaunded me An∣thonie of Venero aforesaid from thenceforth not to open any letter comming sealed after the maner of the Court: frō that time, which might be about 5. or 6. monthes since, the saide Iohn of Ysunca and Iasper of Annastro haue prosecuted their purposes and answeres, each writing to other verie secretlie, and the saide Iasper of Annastro still answering his let∣ters
with his owne hande, in his chamber closing his letters with harde waxe the moste closliest that might be. All this while was I Anthony of Venero ignoraunt of this facte, imagining that it was some mariage mat∣ter with the daughter of Iohn Ruiz of Ver∣gara the brother of Fraunces Ruiz of Verga∣ra, who had dwelt in this towne of Ant∣werpe, and the rather because her mother the Ladie Marie of Ysunca hadde written to the sayd Iasper of Annastro, also that knowing him to be wealthie and of the best qualetied in Victoria they would bestow her vpon him with some good number of Duc∣kats. And as I say, Anthony of Venero sup∣posed these to be the secretes, and gessed that they deferred the finall resolution, because the sayd Anastro required for her dowrie and to the maintenaunce of her porte, more than they did offer: It afterward (as I remēber) fell so out, that two Flemish ves∣sels sayling towards Laredo wer drowned, also that at Plemue the barke of Philip Do∣rio which was bound to Biscay was robbed, in which thrée vessels he lost much, where∣by he grewe into great care and anguish of
minde, as one ignorant how to behaue him selfe to saue his credit, at which instant the sayd Iohn of Ysunca writ to the sayd Iasper of Annastro vnwitting to me: the effect whereof was, that he shoulde procure the slaughter of ye Prince of Orange, his excellē∣cie: wherof he had delt with his Maiestie ve∣rie secretlie, in suche wise, as none but they two were acquainted therewith: also that he had procured his Maiestie to set downe a certaine capitulation whiche also he had sig∣ned with his owne hande, wherein his saide Maiestie promised vpon the certaine news of his excellencies death, to giue to the said An∣nastro 80000. Duckets in siluer or the value therof in lands, togither with a commander∣ship of S. Iames. That this was set downe in writing, also that he woulde bestow on him great benefittes with sundrie honorable offi∣ces: for the saide Iohn of Ysunca had told and assured his Maiestie that the saide Annastro was a man of verie good capacitie, and greats wealth. All this while, I Anthonie of Vene∣ro doe not thinke that anye one was able to speake thereof, but rather in my opinion I durst assure my selfe that in any wise the said
Annastro woulde not make any of whatsoe∣uer nation or condition, priuie therevnto: so that as in Antwerpe there be no Spaniards able to detect him, so do I againe affirme, that cer∣tainely I thinke he disclosed it to none: which I doe the rather verifie, because I can not other wise thinke. Now shortly after this, and as it were a moneth since he had some inckling of an other new mischance, name∣ly of two Merchants, that were aboute to break, by whom he was in hazard of 9500. lb. sterling, or thereabout, for certaine mer∣chandise that he hadde sent them, and other goods vppon accompts of sundrie Englishe men of London: as also by reason of certain billes of exchaunge whiche he had accepted and faithfully payed to their vses: where∣by séeing him selfe entangled in so manye troubles, also, that of this last losse he was in no default, and not knowing any reme∣die, but by absenting himselfe, considering they had played bankerupte with so greate summes of his: he caused me Anthonie of Venero to be called into his Chamber, and charging me verie sore to be secreate, wyth teares running down his chéekes, he decla∣red
vnto me the substance of the aforesaide treatie with Iohn of Ysunça, shewing mee certaine of those Letters, whiche the saide Iohn of Ysunça had writtē vnto him, wher∣in he assured him of all the promises aboue specified, which letters were written diue∣lishly and subtilly without any subscriptiō: and it seemed, that the saide Iohn of Ysun∣ça, hath imparted this matter to a sonne of his, who remained at Madril called Peter of Ysunça le Queytio, who also writte to him in verye good spéeches, assuring him of the substance of al the premises diuersly na∣ming himselfe in the subscription Apodaca. These Letters, hauing as I saide, shewed me the substaunce of them, did he burne in his Chamber: and therevppon entred into discourse with me, saying, that he neither woulde ne could digest so manye shames as were prouided for him: therfore that commending himselfe to almightie God wyth all his hearte, he would with his own hāds slay my Lord ye Prince of Orange his excellencie, & that in case he were slaine about the execution therof, yet in trueth he had rather perish in ye place, as coueting ra∣ther
to die than to liue so dishonorably, that it shoulde be saide of him in the Burse at Antwerpe, sée, yonder man is become ban∣kerupt: whiche, if it shoulde so fall out, no man woulde iudge where the faulte is, but would rather impute it vnto him, thou∣ghe he were not faultie. Also, that he ought much money in Antwerpe, euen to the beste, and to suche as there bare authoritie, who would with rigour procéede againste hym, and therfore that he determined to die, yea, and that alreadie he had digested death, but that by this meanes he should couer and get glorie to his bankeruptship and discredite. All this spake he with teares: wherevpon I séeing him so discomforted, wept much fa∣ster, and besought him for Gods loue not to seke his death by his own hāds, but to be pa∣tient in Gods doings: & séeing the fault was not in himselfe, to withstand suche aduersi∣ties as might happen in shewing a good face to his creditours, and to let them know the reasons, how Peter Nunnes of Arbule, & Peter of çubiaur vndid him, and that hée shoulde repose himselfe vpon this, where∣to he aunswered, that he had not the face to
looke vpon any man, and therefore that hée was determined to persiste in his purpose: wherein I contraried him stiffely, sundrye times willing him to refer al to God, & to attend better hap. Vpon this communicatiō (which passed in an euening vpō a working day after Burse time) Andrew de la Maça, who notwtstanding he remaineth in ye same house, is innocent of al, came into his cham∣ber, so that by reason of the saide Andrewes comming in, we brake off talke for that night. The next morning the saide Anastro being in his chamber, sent for me, and said: Now, brother Anthony how doe you? I an∣swered, but heauely: herevppon he began againe to reenter into the former matter, saying, that if he himselfe shoulde not slaye his excellencie, he wist not to whom to com∣mit the doing thereof, excepte peraduenture to his man Iohn Iaureguy, borne in Bilbao, who holpe to write in the Counting house, because he semed a staied and resolute yong man to any intent whatsoeuer, and poore withall. Then I Antony of Venero an∣swered, that it woulde be a great burthen to his conscience, if the saide Annastro should
procure the saide Iaureguy any vile death: for séeing his excellencie was so well belo∣ued throughout the whole towne, he coulde no sooner haue done the déede, but he should be hewen in péeces. Nay, said Annastro, but they wil rather apprehend him, to the ende to learne for what purpose he did it, so as 7. or 8. dayes after the deed, would be spent be∣fore any execution, & that therefore the saide Annastro mighte departe from Antwerpe, four dayes before the déede, & so go to Calais, from whence he might dispatch a Poste to Apodaca, who is Peter of Ysunça le Queytio, the sonne of Iohn Ysunça, to the ende to giue his Maiestie to vnderstande, that he was departed from the purpose agréede vppon, then that from Calais he woulde goe to the Prince of Parma his Campe, and thence ha∣uing newes of the slaughter, he would send a trumpet to begge the life of the saide Iohn of Iaureguy: Also, that Iasper of Annastro himselfe would write concerning that mat∣ter, & open himself vnto sundrie hys friends in the towne, requiring the life of the said Iaureguy, and sending blanckes signed by the Prince of Parma, to the ende these
Lords might aske what they liste for theyr own aduātage cōcerning ye Religious Vreed and all other matters, also that there withal after the prince of Orenges death they should enioy and assured peace. Herevpō a Flemish boy belonging to the said Annastro named Ioānico, whom he hath takē with him, came into the Chamber, whom he commanded to call Iohn Iaureguy who was writing in the Counting house, when he was come he cau∣sed me to depart out of the Chamber, thē ha∣uing a while talked with him, he called me again, and shewed me that Iaureguy for his sake and Honor would do it, also that he had shewed him a dagger wherewith he shoulde kil him either at the Table or in any other companie by thrusting in the Dagger and wounding him behinde the eare: that Iaure∣guy would doe this with a verie good will, whervpon he asked my opiniō: I answered that he shoulde looke well vnto it, because it touched his conscience: further, because that if this matter were broughte to passe, they would slaie all the Spaniards in Antwerpe for sorrow of the Princes death, and that ther∣fore I had rather forsake the town thā ven∣ture my life. But he willed me not to feare,
saying that although Iaureguy should opēly confesse the truth, yet would no man medle with his house, neither wold ther be any fur¦ther pursuite: and therfore he counselled the saide Iaureguy in that matter to continue stedfast for the loue of his honour and him∣selfe: also the same day to go to espie in what manner his excellencie did eate, whiche he did thrée or foure times, so that he saide he was in good hope to bring his purpose to passe. After this he vsed much spéech with the said Iaureguy, as with the man who should commit such a hainous fact. Finally, hauing better considered of the matter, they began to doubte whether it were better to be done with a Dagger or with a Dagge: for Iaure∣guy said, that he neuer shot in Dagge, ney∣ther knewe howe to discharge it, the other willed him to repaire to some friend of hys to trie it, and to counterfeite himselfe to be a Fleming, and not to vse anye other lan∣guage, whereto he graunted, and did so. Du∣ring these practises there came letters from London, importing, that Peter of çubiaur had absented himselfe, vpon which occasion he thought best to departe, so as hauing dis∣patched
some at the Burse, sodainely vppon a Tewsday or Wednesday, hauing taken his leaue of all the housholde, he wente his way, seming as if he would shortly come a∣gaine, except to the sayd Iohn of Iaureguy & me Antony of Venero, and from Bruges he writ me two Letters, the one generall, the other concerning this matter: The generall Letter I shewed to Martin of Varion, Peter de la Penna, Anthony Spinula, and some o∣thers and so burned it. The other I deli∣uered to Iaureguy who read it, because ther∣in he saide that he thought the Dagge redi∣est: the other saide that he could well doe it so, the which he spake verie chéerefully & thē burned this letter also, and tolde me that he woulde be shriuen, and so went forth of the doores, neither did I euer aske him to what Confessour he woulde goe. Afterwarde hée tolde me that he was shriuen and house led, and that now he was readie vpon anye op∣portunitie without any lette to execute hys purpose. Thus, vpon this last Sunday, the 18. of this moneth, about eleuen of the clock he heard Masse in the house and so departed, and did that which séemeth to be done, not
that I doe certainely know it as yet: wher∣fore for the discharge of my conscience I doe say, that I cannot perceiue any other to bée guiltie of this déede, and therefore that the others who are apprehēded, ought to be re∣leased and deliuered, because in my cōsciēce they be innocent. Nowe therefore, if youre Lordships would graunt to me Anthony of Venero pardon, & to saue my life, as hauing opened the verie botome of my heart, and saide all that I knowe, besides that, he who committed the mischiefe, is dead already, I should be bound to you all my life long. Moreouer, the saide Iasper of Annastro promised vnto vs the saide Iohn of Iaure∣guy, and me Antony of Venero, that this being accomplished, he woulde accompte vs as his own naturall children: also, that no∣thing should be parted betwéene vs, but that all shoulde be our owne proper goodes, and suche like spéeches. The saide Iaureguy an∣swered, that he woulde haue nothing, but that that which he did, he did for his loue, and because he had eaten his breade: and I quaking, putte off my hatte, giuing him to vnderstande how sore I feared death, wher∣vpon
he assured me that no man wold once touch any haire of my head. This confession being red vnto the saide deponente without the prison vppon the Bridge openlye, hee persisted in the same his confession, confirming it to bee the trueth. Giuen the 26. of March 1582. in the presence of the vndernamed Zuerius Blomart. An other Examination ta∣ken the 24 of the same Mo∣neth of March 1582. SEyendo el dicho Antonio de Venero (puesto sobreiel atormentando) preguntado quien po∣drian mas hauer sabido d'esta empresa? Dize ningunos otros, que los por el aqui delante nom∣brados. Preguntado si d'esta impresa no han sabido Andres de la Maça Pedro d' Orosco, Pedro de la Pen̄a, o Valentin de Meurs? Dize que no.
Pregūtado si no se acuerda{que} (estādo à la mensa del dicho An̄astro su amo se platicò y disputosi era licito dematara su Excell. por zelo de la fee) el Clerigo Antonio Timmerman entonces declarò: que se podria hazer sin pecado? Dize que d'ello no sa acuerda. Preguntado si no sabia quien era el que estaua à Canallo iunto al Castillo quando el dicho efeto era complido? Dize que no. Yera dicho Examination firmada por los dichos Sennores Esclauines I. Zuerius. L. Blomaert. THe saide Antony of Venero being vpon the racke examined what other per∣sons might haue hadde intelligence of this enterprise, saieth, no other than those whome he hath aforenamed. Being demaunded whether Andrew del∣la Massa, Peter of Orosco, Peter della Penna, or Valentine de Meurs knew nothing of the saide enterprice, he saieth, No. Being demaunded whether he remem∣breth not that when some spéeche and argu∣ment
passed at the saide Annastro his Mai∣sters table, whether for zeale of religion it were lawfull to slay his excellencie, the Monke Antony Timmerman didde then af∣firme, that it might lawfully be done with∣out sinne. He saieth that he remembreth it not. Being demaunded whether he knoweth not who he was that was on horsebacke be∣fore the Castle when the déede was execu∣ted? he saith, No. This examination was conferred before the saide Lordes Shirifes, Iohn Zuerius, & Lewes Bloemart. The Examination of An∣tony Timmerman, taken in the presence of the Lords, the Markgraue, Godfrey Montens, M. Iames Zuerius, and Lewis Bloemart, Shirifes of the towne of Antwerpe the 18. 19. and 23. day of March. 1582. ANtony Timmerman born in Dunkirke of the age of one and thirtie yeares, sometimes Monke of the order of the white Friers, hauing his Chamber in the
long Newstréete at the golden Horse. Being demaunded what acquaintance he hath in the house of Iasper Annastro, sayeth that diuers times he hath said Masse in the house of the said Annastro, also that he hath sent others thither for the same purpose, & that therefore he had his finding as Chap∣leine to the Spanish Nation, and that the saide Annastro paide him. Being demaunded what priuate cōmu∣nication he hathe had with one Iohn Iaure∣guy a Spaniard of Biscay in the house of the sayde Annastro, saith, that the saide Iaure∣guy vpō Friday last came to him to shrift, desiring also to receiue the Sacrament at his hande, which he ministred vnto him, for the which the said party gaue him two dou∣ble Pistolets of gold, desiring the said Con∣fessour to pray for him. Also that according to the description of his stature and apparel that he ware, it séemeth to be the same per∣son, who vppon Sundaye at noone dischar∣ged a Dagge againste his excellencies per∣son. Being demaunded, what the saide Iaure∣guy gaue him to vnderstande concerning
this déede, either in his confession, or before or after the same: also whether he did not shewe him what he was promised for the performance of that Act, saith, that the said Iaureguy did cōfesse vnto him, that the said Iasper of Annastro woulde him selfe haue done it, if he could not haue perswaded him thereto: saying moreouer that he woulde execute the saide déede the same Fridaye at dinner, and that onlie for the glory of God, and because his father being an olde man should be reléeued. Being demaunded, whether he told not the sayd confessor in what place he was purpo∣sed to doe this déede, & with what weapons: sayth, that he told him that he purposed to doe it at the table as he thought, but shewed him not with what weapons. Being demaunded, whether the sayd con∣fessor did finally absolue the sayd Iauregui, so as he might execute his pretended déede, which afterward he committed against the person of his excellencie: Confesseth that he absolued the sayde Iauregui in this manner: That if he did not execute it for lucre of mo∣ney, but onely for the glorye of God and of a
zeale to the Catholike Romane Religion, that then it was lawfull for him to doe it, gi∣uing him therevpon absolution, hauing ne∣uerthelesse before represented to his view all suche daungers as might spring forth of the sayd déede. Being demaunded, whether he enquired of Iareguy if any other were able to vtter the pretence of the execution of the sayd déede: sayth, that he shewed him that no man was able to say any thing thereof, but onely the said Iasper Annastro, Antony of Venero, and an other man a Spanyard, whome he named not, either by name or surname: but that ye saide Confessor gesseth that it was a young man, whome he had often séene aboute the same time comming and going to the same house: the saide young man being reasona∣ble tall of stature, with a blacke bearde cut after the Spanishe maner, of a browne pale colour, long and leaue visaged, aboute 24. or 25. yeares of age, as it séemed, wearing ordinarily a Spanish Cassock of a gray rus∣set, and a blacke cloake. Being demaunded, what spéech passed be∣twéene the saide Confessor and the said Ias∣per
of Annastro, touching this déed commit∣ted against his Excellencie, saieth, that the sayde Annastro neuer spake any thing ther∣of, either in Shrifte, or otherwise. Being demaunded, whether the saide Iaureguy shewed him not, that Valentine de Meurs, Anthony Waechmans, and Anna Haecht, seruantes in the saide Annastroes house, knewe nothing of the practise or effecte of the saide déede attempted againste his excellencie, saieth, that the persons a∣forenamed, knewe nothing thereof as the said Iaureguy tolde him, and declared in his confession. Being demaunded, whether the said An∣nastro, Iaureguy or Antony of Venero, said not vnto him, that the King hadde by Iohn of Ysunça made greate promises to the said Annastro, for the performing of the déede a∣gainst his Excellencie, saith, that he neuer knew or heard that of any body. Being demaunded, whether he yt said con∣fessor hathe not aforetime bene in the house of the said Annastro, when sitting at the ta∣ble, he was demaunded, whether it were lawfull for any manne without offence, to
slaye his excellencie: what aunsweare was made thereto, when it was, and who were there present, declareth, that the saide An∣nastro hath sundrie times moued that que∣stion to him: & namely at the table in din∣ner time, or so soone as the Table was ta∣ken vp, either the firste or seconde Saterday before Candlemasse, & that there were then present Andrew de la Maça, Antony of Ve∣nero, and Valentine de Meurs: and that hée this Confessor answered, that no particular or priuate person mighte doe it, but that it pertained onely to the Iustice. Whereto the saide Annastro (as he remembreth) replied, that the King being a publike person might commaund an other to doe it: wherevppon this Confessor saide, that it was not law∣full for any man with money to buy an o∣thers life. He declared farther, that about fouretéene dayes since, he the saide Confes∣sour being at the Table, or else soone after they were risen, hearde the saide Annastro vse these or such like wordes: Valla me dios no at en esta tierra Flamenco que se atreua à este Principe de Oranges? whereto he the sayde Confessor replied, saying: Los Flamencos no
son tan furiosos como vos otros, where the said Maça was not then present, but was depar∣ted into Holland. This Confession being read before the said Confessour vppon the Bridge of the Bo∣row, vnder the open elemēt, he being loo∣sed and vndone, he persisted in the same in the presence of the Shirifes this 26. of March 1582. Subscribed Zuerius, & L. Bloemart. Here ensue the Copies of the Letters, vvritten by the saide Annastro, and the Prince of Parma, &c. Sennor Hermanno. DE Brujas os escreui ayer, y aura dos horas que llegue aqui, y no he podido hallar à Pe∣dro de Cubiaur, ni saber d'el, mas de que vn maestro dize, que passo de Doura à Cales ocho
dias a vn hombre casi de sus sennas. Yo passó de mala gana à Cales, por el tiempo que pierdo en boluer a casa: y a demas esto, el viento es contra∣rio, y no podre partir oy, pero sera mannana Sa∣bado plaziēdo à Dios, Al sennor Antonio Espin. nola beso las manos, y que tengo gana deboluerme Al sennor Andres de la Maça beso tābien las manos. Yo os encomiendo que tengays cuenta de lo que haz que hazer hasta que yo buelua: de papeles y assignaciones como de lo demas, que yo me dare lapriessa que pudiere. Pagareys luego à Hernando de Nagera las 402. libras que Bal∣tasar de Burgos escriuió se le diessen, porque de Cales le tengo de escreuir que estan pagadas, em∣bialde quitaça dello. A Ʋalentin me encomi∣endo, y à Iaureguy dezid que os ayude en lo de la escritura, y nuestro Sennor, &c. En Dunquerch. 16. de Março. 1582. El subscripto era Vuestro hermano Annastro El sobrescripto era. Al Sennor Antonio de Venero mi hermano Anuers. Al porte 4. Florins, dando lo a las ocho horas de la manana et lunes que es 19. de Março.
Annastros Letters written from Dunkirke. GOOD brother, yesterday I wrote vnto you from Bruges, and I arriued heere two hours since, but cannot yet finde M. Peter of Cubiaur, either heare anie other newes of him: but that a master of a ship shewed me, that about eight daies since there was one like him that passed from Douer to Callis. Very vn∣willing I am to goe to Callis least losing my time I shal not come soone inough home. Besides the wind being contrarie I cannot depart this day, but to morrow be∣ing Saterday, if it please God I shall. I humbly greete master Anthonie Spinula & am very desirous to returne home. I also humbly greete Andrew Massa. I pray you set to your hand to any thing that is to be done before my returne, as well for writings and assignations, as for any other matter. For my part I will make as much hast as I may. You shall presently pay Ferdinand of Na∣gera the 402. pounds that Baltassar of Burgos hath writ∣ten to be deliuered him: for from Callais I will write that they be paid. And send him the acquaintaunce. I commend me to Valentine, and will Iaureguy to helpe you in your writings. Our Lord, &c. At Dunkirck this 16. of March 1582. The subscription was. Your brother Annastro. The superscription was. To my brother Anthony of Venero. At Antwerpe. To the Post. 4. Florins so that he deliuer them vpon Munday at 8. a clocke in the morning, which shall bee the 19. of March.
SENNOR. PARA pagar a Baltasar de Burgos las qua∣tro cientas y dos libras, no hallo otro remedio, por la breuedad d'el tiempo sino dezir a Her∣nando de Nagera que tenia yo orden del dico Burgos: para que se diessen a el dichas quatro∣cientas y dos libras, y que se las querays pagar luego, y que Valentin se las dé, y quital de luego dos quitanças vna copia de otra, en que diga que se las days por orden de Baltasar de Burgos, y que se ob∣liga a hazer las buenas al dicho Baltasar de Bura gos, y d'esta manera el dicho Burgos se podra va∣ler dellas con su commodidad. Hazelde luego a la hora que esta recibays, antes que se haga el em∣pleo: porque de otra manera no veo orden de que vengan a mannos d'el dicho. Y assi os ruego mu∣cho que esto se haga luego el mismo Lunes. Dira Nagera, que no tiene auiso: direysle vos, que es hombre trabaioso, y que no quereys aguardar a esso, porque yo os lo ordiné assi, y Burgos esta des∣proueydo de dineros. En el empleo me parece bien lo que ay le escreui de Brujas, que se haga de la mercaderia que pide Diego Carreno, prouando la primero algunas vezes, y al tiempo del effe∣cto ponerse vna medida, y dos rodondas:
y d'esta manera comparà con mas seguridad, y menos ambaraç: y para aquel vestido tomarle la medida por detras. Esto tengo por mejor que lo o∣tro, y de menos embaraço, y mas seguro: y tābien puede ponerse lo otro, para en caso de necessidad. Pensad en ello, y mirad quāto va en que el empleo seacierte Hazed cuenta, que yo me detendre en Cales el Sabado por todo el dia, para escreuit à Apodaca, y despachar le correo, y despues he me∣nester tres dias para assentar mi cuenta con aquel hombre, y dezirle lo que conuiene, porque vaya to∣do per ordē: y despues se podra hazer quando el corredo quisiere, y dezilde que le de Dios buena dicha, y que consideres bien lo mucho que importa que el empleo sea bueno. En la margen est aua escripto. Otra vez torno à dez ir lo de Nagera, porque Baltasar de Burgos esta falto de dineros, y embi∣alde luego la vna cedula del dicho Nagera, y por esto doy esta ventaja de 13¼ libras. A Valentin y Iaureguy me en comiendo mucho. El sobre scripto era: Para Antonio de Venero.
SIr I cā finde by reasō of the shortnesse of the time no other remedie how to pay Baltassar of Burgos the 402. pounds, but to shew Ferdinande of Nagera, that I had commission from the said Burgos to deliuer him the said. 402. pounds, and that you will presently pay him: and let Valentine pay him the mony, taking of him two acquittaunces, the one copied out of the other, wherin he must confesse that you doe deliuer the same vnto him by the appointment of Baltassar of Burgos, then binde him to make them good to the said Baltassar of Burgos, and so may Burgos helpe himselfe to his owne commoditie. Doe this immediatly, and euen so soone as you haue receiued these presents, before the matter be performed, for I see no other meanes how they may come to his hands, wherefore I praye you heartelye let this be done this present Munday. Nagera will say that he hath no such warrant: then shall you aunswere him that the mā is troublesome, & that you wil not stay for that, seeing I haue so commaunded you, and that Bur∣gos is destitute of money.der this,  of mer∣andise he neth the stol, pou∣ and tvvo llets, ervvith  L. Prince oulde be . It seemeth good to mee the exploit and matter were performed, in such sort as ye∣sterday I wrote from Bruges, and that with such Mer∣chaundise as Diego Carreno requireth, hauing first tried it sundrie times: and at the time of the execution ther∣of to giue it a good measure, & two rounds: & in this wise it may be the more surely bought, and performed with lesse hinderaunce. As for the garment, you must take measure behinde. I thinke this a better waye than the other, of lesse hinderaunce, and moste safe. Also for further assuraunce, the other Dagger. may be added for ne∣cessities sake. Consider heereof and marke of what importaunce the execution of this exploit is. Make your account that I will stay at Callais all Saterdaye,
there to write to Apodaca, & to dispatch the post. And afterward I shall neede three daies to make vp my ac∣count with this man: Tell him also what is needfull to be done, that all things may proceede orderlye, after which the matter may be dispatched, whē theHe meaneth Iaureguy. Courti∣er will, and tell him also that I pray God graunt him good successe, and that I would haue him marke howe necessarie it is that this exploit be performed. In the Margent was written. Once againe I speake to you of Nagera. For Baltasar of Burgos needeth money: sende therefore to him im∣mediatly one of Nagera his Letters: for this I giue him the interest of 13. lib. 4. s. I commend me heartelye to Valentine and to Iauregui. The superscription was. For Antonie of Venero. Other Letters of the said Annastro. Sennor hermano DE Bruias y de Dunquerch os escreui, yo me detuue en Dunquerch dos dias, bien desgu∣stado, por ser el tiempo tā fuerte y contrario que non pude passar: y assi me a concesejo el go∣uernador de Dunquerch que passasse portierra, y que era mejor: y assi me robo el vn passa porte de Grauelinguas, y aqui, dos horas ha, en esta villa de Grauelingas, y mannana me yre por agua à Cales, à lo que entiendo, porque de aqui a Cales por tier∣ra esta todo llno de Franceses, que roban los que passam, y mas harā, siendos Espānoles. Ha me di∣cho
vn tal Quadra que està aqui, que Pedro de çubiaur estuuo aqui quatro dias ha, y que enten∣diò que era y do a Cales, podra serque alli le halla∣re, entre tāto hazelos lo meior que pudieredes. Y esse empleo de las mercaderias se puede hazer a cada hora, y sea tan bueno que los duonnos no se quexen. No tengo mas que escriuir, Nuestro Sē∣nor, &c. En comiendome a Valentin y Iaureguy. Al sēnor Marça beso las manos, y Nuestro Sēnor, &c. En Grauelingas 17. de Março 1582. Harta ventura ha sido aner escapado en el camino, legū andan los Franceses. Yo sere alla lo mas presto que pudiere, que ya queria ser buelto. El subscripto Era. Vestro buen hermano Annastro. Other Letters of the said Annastro. MY Lorde and brother I writ vnto you from Bru∣ges and Dunkirke. Two daies I abode at Dunkirke though farre against my minde, because the wea∣ther was so rough and contrarie that I could not passe: wherefore the gouernour of Dunkirke counsailed mee to goe by land (as the better way) and so he made mee a pasport for Graueling, whether I came two houres since, from whence I will to morrow depart by water; (as I thinke) to Callais, for that betweene this & Callais the waies be pestered with French men that doe robbe the passengers, wherevnto they would bee more readie if they should meete with any Spaniards. A certaine Quadra that is heere tolde me that Peter of Cubiaur,
was taken foure daies agoe, and that he heard that hee was gone to Callais, it may bee that I maye finde hym there. In the meane time doe the best you can concer∣ning the exploit of merchaundise, it may be done at al times, and let it be so well done, that the masters finde no fault. I haue no more to write. But our Lord, &c. commend me to Valentine and Iauregui. I humbly sa∣lute the Lord Massa. Our Lord, &c. From Graueling this 17 of March 1582. It was a great chaunce that I es∣caped all the waye, the Frenche doe so range vp and downe. I will be there so soone as I may, for I would with a good will be at home alreadie. The subscription was, Your good brother Annastro. After the which was written, Giue this Post whose name is Coppenhaghen that which is written vpon the Letter, for guiding me hither. His excellencies letters vvrit∣ten with his owne hande. MY L. of Aldegond, I heare that to mo∣rowe the ij. prisoners, his cōplices that shot at me, shall be executed. For my
owne parte I doe willingly forgiue them whatsoeuer they may haue offēded against me: and if peraduenture they haue deserued some sore and sharpe punishment, yet be a meane to my Lordes the Magistrates not to suffer them to abide any great torment. But rather if they haue so deserued, to content themselues with some speedie death. Here∣vpon I bidde you good night. Your very good friend to do you seruice, William of Nassau. Done in the prison of the tovvne of Antwerp in the presence of my Lordes, Lescou∣tet, M. Iames Zuerius, and Lewis Bloemart Shirifes, the 28. of March. 1582. MAister Anthonie Timmerman priso∣ner, readie to receyue his death wher∣vnto he was yesterdaye before noone con∣demned in the Vierschale by the Borrow∣maisters and Shirifes of this towne, saith and declareth in forme following. First, he sayth, that hauing better cal∣led
that whiche was spoken at the table in the house of Iasper of Annastro, when the saide deponent dined there, the said Anna∣stro propounded and argued: Whether by vertue of the proscription whiche the King of Spaine hathe published, anye man maye lawfullye slaie his excellencies per∣son, in trueth he cannot saye whether An∣drew Nassa were present or not, either thys spéeche passed aboute the ende or after din∣ner, adding moreouer, that he is well as∣sured and certaine, that Valentine of Meurs sate at the Table that dinner, but was then gone awaye. Moreouer the saide con∣demned person acknowledgeth his great o∣uersight and error whiche he helde, in thin∣king that by vertue of the saide proscription it was lawfull to slay his excellencies per∣son: Being therefore now better informed by learned men concerning the saide opini∣on, and hauing further considered of the matter, he doeth by this presente reuoke the same. Wherefore he requesteth the Lordes Magistrates of this Towne to par∣don him hys sayde offence also to adde this to his former confession, and if the
other be published, to publish this withal, to the end no man thinke that he dyed in so wicked an opinion. Subscribed. Zuerius. The Prince of Parma his Letters. Alexander Prince of Par∣ma and Plaisance, Lieuetenaunt, Gouernour, and Captayne Generall. RIght deare and welbeloued, woulde to God you knew as well as the inhabi∣tants of these partes, with what zeale and af∣fection I haue alwaies proceeded & procu∣red the weale, quiet and trāquilitie of these countries generallie, wherof I seek no greter nor more euidēt testimonie, thā the paines that I haue taken, the dueties which I haue yeelded, and the perils and daungers whi∣ch I haue incurred in seeking to restore the
whole to hir auncient brightnesse and feli∣citie, wherewith these Prouinces were wont to florish. According wherevnto, God ha∣uing vsed the death of the Prince of Orange, (the one and onely instrument and Author of so many miseries and calamities whiche you haue endured) as a meane to open the way vnto you, I hope he hath likewise takē from before your eies the vaile, which stop∣ped and kept you from knowing, or more neerely considering the sleightes, suttleties, and inuentions, wherewith the saide Prince nourished your mistrusts, and through hys owne couetousnesse and ambition continu∣ed your miseries, yea so farre foorth, that to the same ende he sought to bring you into the subiection & intollerable yoke of those, from whom in former worlds you haue re∣ceiued such domages and enmities. Thus much I thought good to write vnto you, to thende to aduertise and assure you, that in case you wil preuaile in this occasion and commoditie whiche God dothe offer vnto you, you shall not finde anye man in this worlde that will aide and assiste you wyth more sinceritie, readinesse and affection, thā
I wil: offering vnto you to the same effect whatsoeuer I may by vertue of the authori∣tie and special power vnto me giuen by his Maiestie, of whome I am well assured that you shal reape no lesse grace and fauor, nei∣ther any worse entertainement, than those haue tried, who trusting wholly in the na∣turall clemencie wherewith hee is endued, haue willingly caste themselues into the armes of his royall curtesie and gentlenesse. Wherevpon I will expecte your answeare, which I pray God may bee such as I desire for your owne benefite and quietnesse, also that it may bee so speedily, that his Maiestie may haue occasion to desiste from such pre∣paration as he maketh for the atteyning to this ende, by some other meanes peraduen∣ture more violent and vnprofitable to your selues. Thus right deere and welbeloued, God haue you in his holy and worthy kee∣ping. From Tournay this 25. of March 1582. Subscribed, Alexander: And somewhat lower F. Garnier.
The Superscription was, To our right dere & welbeloued, the Mark∣graue, Amptman, Borowmaisters, Shirifes, Counsaile, and Rent maisters of the Towne of Antwerp. The like letters, mutatis mutandis, were dis∣patched to the Inhabitantes of Bruxelles, Gaunt, Bruges, Ypres, &c. Annastro his Letters written from Tournay. Muy mag. Sennor. PVes ha querido No. Sor. que el Principe de O∣range aya acabado sus dias, se ha de creer que es para auer misericordia de estas tierras que estauan affligidas, y yo estoy aggradado de auer sido occasione instrumento de sa muerte, por el seruicio que deuo a mi Rey, y por la quietud y reposo que desséo a los estados: y quando mi criado no fuera sufficiēte para hazer lo{que} hizo, yo tenia determinae o de matarle por mi mano, por saccat esta tierrae l trauajo en que estaua. He querido escriuira
v.m. y al Sr. su hermano esta carta para assegurar los que pueden confiar en la misericordia que su Mag. y su Alteza del Principe de Parma des∣sea hazer conlos de essa villa, sin accordar se de las faltas passadas: si no con animo de perdonar las todas, y que todos puedan viuir pacifica∣mente. Y pues que v. m. tiene mano para po∣der dar a entender à essos S. Ses. del magistra∣do esta buena voluntad, y tomar buen consejo en esse negocio, assegurando los que en lo que yo pudi∣ere fauorescer los lo hare de muy buena gana. Y si quisierem empleara v.m. en ello, y al So. Lau∣rentío su hermano. y lleguarse por aca, yo les em∣biare passa porte de su Alteza assegurando los. Y saldre fiador por la seguridad de sui personas, y respondan me de la voluntad que en esto tienen, y no se ofresce otra cosa por agora N. Sor. de Tour∣nay à 25. de março, 1582. Besa las manos a vos. mes. Gaspar de Annastro. Noble Lordes, SIth it hath pleased God to end the Prince of Orange his daies, you are to beleeue it to be, to the ende to shewe mercie to these Countries which were affli∣cted, and I reioice that I was the occasion and instru∣ment of his death, bothe for the duetie I owe to my
King, and for the reste and tranquilitie of these estates. For if my seruant had not beene sufficient to doe that whiche is done, my selfe was resolued with my owne hand to haue slain him, so to deliuer this countrie out of the trouble it was in. This Letter I thought good to write to you, & to my L. your brother, to the end to as∣sure you that you may suerlie repose your selues in the mercie which his Maiestie &, the P. of Parma his High∣nesse desire to shew to this town: as not to thinke vpon anie former faultes, otherwise than fullie to pardon them, so as, all men maie liue peaceably. Further, sith it lieth in you to giue the Lordes and Magistrates to vnderstande of this good will, also to take good aduice cōcerning this affaire, assuring thē, that in what I may I will moste willingly pleasure them. If in this mat∣ter they will vse you and your brother Laurence as mes∣sengers hither, I wil send you a passeport frō his High∣nesse with all sufficient assuraunce, and will my selfe remaine pledge for the suretie of your persons. Let mee vnderstande your willes herein. Thus not hauing a∣nie other thing at this present, our Lorde &c. From Tournay this 25. of March. 1582. Subscribed, I humbly salute your Lordships, Iasper of Annastro. The Superscription was this, To the noble Lordes Denis de Meurs, and Laurence de Meurs. At Gant. FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Charde and William Broome. Anno 1582.
