26064 99853986 19391
THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON: CONTAINING The Ascent of CYRVS into the HIGHER COVNTRIES.Wherein is described THE ADMIRABLE IOVRNEY OF TEN thousand GRECIANS from ASIA the Lesse into the Territories of BABYLON, and their retrait from thence into GREECE, notwithstanding the opposition of all their Enemies. Whereunto is added A COMPARISON OF THE ROMAN MANNER OF WARRES with this of our Time, out of IVSTVS LIPSIVS. Translated by IOH. BINGHAM. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Haviland for Raphe Mabb. 1623.
TO THE RIGHT VVOR∣SHIPFVLL, HVGH HAMERSLEY, ONE OF THE ALDERMEN AND CORO∣NELS OF THE CITIE OF LONDON, AND President of the worthy Societie of CITIZENS exercising Armes in the ARTILLERIE Garden of LONDON; and to all the CAPTAINES and Generous CITIZENS professing Armes there. GENTLEMEN: I doe not present this Translation vnto you, to the end to incite you to Militarie cogitations. Your forwardnesse that way is such alreadie, as rather deserueth commendation, than requireth any mans words of incitement or exhortation; neither will I at this time enter into the large field of the praise of the Art of Warre; espe∣cially lest I should haply incurre the censure of the old Prouerbe: Suum cuique pulchrum. But see∣ing you haue taken the laudable paines to attaine to the knowledge of handling your Armes, and of the seuerall motions of a battell requisite for the seruice of the Field, wherein many of you may iustly chal∣lenge
the praise of equalling, if not exceeding the greatest number of Souldiers, that haue a long time followed the warres in forein parts, in which also it hath pleased you to vse my poore endeuour; I haue thought good to adioine to your former Speculation (I hope I may vse that word, considering you haue not yet come to the sight of an Enemie, nor proceeded vsque ad sanguinem) and to present vnto you in your owne Language, a Precedent of Warre of another nature, than you haue hitherto beene exercised in, that is to say, the greatest March and Retreat, that euer was found in any Historie; wherein are notable Strata∣gems set out of resisting a multitude of Enemies in an open Field, of passing Mountaines possessed by an E∣nemie, of leading an Armie thorow Straights, thorow Forests, thorow Woods, thorow Riuers, ouer Bridges, of laying and auoiding Ambushes, of Marching by night, of resisting Horse, of stilling Souldiers muti∣nies, of escaping Enemies machinations, of taking in Forts, of making prouision for an Armie; in a word, of all accidents, that may fall out in a long and dan∣gerous March. In reading whereof, besides the va∣rietie of discourse, you may obserue many documents fit for a worthy Souldiers consideration. For they are not to be heard that contemne the experience of for∣mer Times, and thinke, that the policies vsed by anci∣ent Generals match or sute not with our moderne Warres. From whence, I pray, are deriued our Mo∣tions, and whole manner of exercise now in vse, but from Antiquitie? Neither is there any other true
difference to be found betwixt vs and Antiquitie, in the vniuersall course Militarie, saue only in the vse of Gunnes: Of which the great Ordinance succeed in the place of ancient Engines of Battery; the smaller Peeces in place of Arrowes, Slings, and Darts▪ Now as I must confesse, that the force and violence of Gunnes is farre greater, than of the weapons mis∣siue vsed in time past; so me thinks I may truly maintaine, that their place in Battell, and elsewhere, is altogether the same: Shot must haue defence either from Pikes or from other aduantage of ground, or else they are subiect to be scattered or ouer-runne by Horse, or the like, as well as the light-armed of old time. But hereof I shall haue other opportunitie to speake. My desire is at this instant that you will be pleased to accept this presentation, with the same minde it is offered vnto you by 16 Maij 1623. Your seruant to doe all seruice, IOHN BINGHAM.
THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. DARIVS and PARISATIS had two Sonnes, of whom the eldest was named Artaxerxes, the younger Cyrus. And when Darius fell sick, and suspected he should not liue long, he de∣sired to haue a sight of both his Sonnes. The eldest happened then to be present; he set for Cyrus from the Prouince whereof he had made him Satrapa or Ruler, and had declared him Generall of all the people, that vpon Mu∣sters resorted to the plaine of Castolus.A city of Lydia. Cyrus therefore iourneyed vpward to his Father, taking with him Tissaphernes as a friend, and hauing for his Guard 300 armed Grecian Foot, vnder the leading of Xenias the Parrhasian. After the death of Darius, and crown∣ing of Artaxerxes, Tyssaphernes accused Cyrus to his Brother,The occasion of the diffe∣rence betwixt the Brethren for the trea∣son, see Plu∣tarch in vita Artaxerxis. as though he intended treason against him: who being easily perswaded and indu∣ced to beleeue, caused Cyrus to be apprehended, with intent to put him to death. But his Mother made intercession for him, set him at libertie, and remised him to his gouernment. He hauing been thus in perill, and dishonoured, deliberated after his departure, how to exempt himselfe from his Brothers subiection, and to make himselfe King in his Brothers stead. Their Mother Parisatis inclined more to Cyrus, louing him bet∣ter than she did Artaxerxes, that reigned. And Cyrus, if any were sent to him from King Artaxerxes, won them so by his courtesies, that they de∣parted better affected to him, than to the King. Besides, he had that re∣gard of the Barbarians, which were about him, that he both made them good Souldiers, and purchased their loue. As for the Grecians, he waged them as secretly as he could, to the intent to take his Brother altogether
vnprouided. When therefore he made leuies of such, as should lye in Garrison in his Cities, he commanded the Captaines of the Garrisons, euerie man apart, to wage as many, and the best Peloponesians they could, vnder pretence,Peloponesus was that part of Greee which is now called Mo∣nea. Ionia, a part of Asia the Lesse. Miletus, a Citie of Cara. that Tissaphernes sought to surprise the Cities: For the Ionian Cities were before deliuered to Tissaphernes by the King, but then they all reuolted to Cyrus, excepting only Miletus. And Tissaphernes be∣ing in Miletus, and perceiuing they also would turne, and take part with Cyrus, put some to death, some other he chased and banished out of the Citie. Cyrus receiuing these banished men, and gathering an Armie to∣gether, besieged Miletus both by Sea and Land, seeking to restore them to their Countrey. And this was also another pretence of raising an Armie. Besides, he sent to the King, and desired him, that being his Brother, the rule of those Cities might rather be committed to him, than to Tissaphernes; wherein he was seconded by his Mother, so that the King perceiued not, that reason was intended against him at any hand, but imagined, that Cyrus waged that Armie to warre against Tissaphernes; for which warre, he was not greatly sory, because Cyrus sent to the King the Tribute of those Cities, whereof Tissaphernes had the command. Another Armie was collected for Cyrus,Abydus, a Citie lying vpon Hel∣lespont, right a∣gainst Sestos. A Darick, was a peece of gold of the value of thirteene shil∣lings. Cherronesus, an Island ioyned to the Conti∣nent of Euro∣paean Thra, on∣ly by a Necke of Land. right ouer against Abydus, in this manner. Clearchus was banished from Lacedemon, he came to Cyrus, and Cyrus, after conference and acquaintance with him, both admired the man, and besides, gaue him 10000 Daricks. Clearchus taking the gold, leuied an Armie therwith, and passing out of Cherronesus, warred vpon the Thracians, that inhabit aboue Hellespont, thereby aduantaging greatly the affaires of the Grecians; and so much in deed he did aduantage them, that the Cities of Hellespont willingly furnished him with money to main∣taine his Armie. So that this Armie also was not descried to be held on foot for Cyrus. Further, there was one Aristippus a Thessalian, a , a guest, amongst the Grecians was one of another Citie or Nati∣on, that a man admitted into his house, and lodged. Thessaly, a coun∣trey of Greece. Boeotia, that part of Greece where the citie Thebes stood. Symphalus, a ci∣tie of Arcadia. Achaia, a coun∣trey of Pelopo∣nsus. Pisidia, a Coun∣trey of Asia. guest to Cyrus, who being ouerpressed with his Countrey-men of the contrarie faction, came to Cyrus, & requested him to spare him 2000 Mercenaries, and three Moneths pay, alleaging, that thereby he should be able to ouer∣come his aduersaries. Cyrus furnished him with 4000 men, and sixe Moneths pay, desiring him withall, not to agree with his aduersaries, till they two had had conference together. So againe this Armie in Thessaly was not perceiued to be kept on foot, and nourished for Cyrus. Further, he commanded Proxenus the Boeotian, who was his friend, to bring vnto him as many men as he might, vnder pretence of warring against the Pisidians, that spoyled his Countrey; and Sophaenetus the Stymphalian, and Socrates the Achaean, who likewise were both his guests, to come to him with as many men, as they could make, vnder colour, together with the banished Milesians, to make warre against Tissaphernes, which also they did. Cyrus, after he was resolued to ascend into the higher Prouinces, gaue out, that his purpose was to chace the Pisidians wholly out of the Countrey, and so assembled both his Barbarian and Grecian troopes, as if it had been against them. And he commanded Clearchus, with the Armie which he led, to come vnto him, and Aristippus to compound with his
aduersaries, and afterwards to send him that Armie of his likewise. And Xenias the Arcadia, a Countrey of Peloponesus. Arcadian (whom he had appointed Generall of the Merce∣naries, which he laid in Garrison in the Cities) to bring vnto him those Troops, leauing behind so many only, as should be sufficient to guard the Cittadels. Likewise he sent for those that were at the siege of Miletus, and inuited the banished men to his seruice, promising, if his affaires had good successe, not to giue ouer till he had restored them to their home. They with ioy accepted of his proffer, (for they trusted him) and there∣upon came to Sardes.Sards, a Citie in Lydia. Armed, 11300. Light armed, 2300. Megara, a Citie in Greece. The Grecians that serued Cy∣rus. Xenias gathered together the Mercenaries in the Cities, and brought them to Sardes, being in number about 4000 armed foot. Proxenus came with 1500 armed, and 500 light armed foot. Sophenetus the Stymphalian, with 1000 armed. Socrates the Achaean, with about 500 armed. Pasion the Megarean, with 300 armed, and 300 Targetiers (or Peltasts.) This last, and Socrates, were of those that besie∣ged Milet. These Troops came to Cyrus to Sardes. Tyssaphernes hauing intelligence hereof, and conceiuing that the preparation was greater than fitted the warre against the Pisidians, hasted with as much speed as he could, towards the King, hauing with him about 500 Hors-men. And the King, as soone as he heard by Tyssaphernes, of the Armie that Cyrus had raised, made contrarie preparation. Cyrus with the Forces afore¦mentioned, marched from Sardes. He marched into Lydia, 22 A Parasang containeth 30 Stadia, or Fur∣longs, 8 Fur∣longs goe to a Mile, so a Para∣sang is 3 Mile three quarters. 22 Parasangs a∣mount to 82 Miles and a halfe, which being diuided by 3, the quoti∣ent will be 27 and a halfe, so he marched euerie day 27 miles & a halfe. Para∣sangs in three encampings, and came as farre as the Riuer Maeander, the bredth whereof is Plethrum, is 100 Foot. 2 Plethors. A Bridge was layd ouer the Riuer vpon six Ships ioyned one to another. Passing ouer here, he made one encamping in Lydia, hauing marched eight Parasangs, and came to Colosse, a great, rich, and well inhabited Citie, where he remained seuen dayes. Hither Menon the Thessalian came to him with 1000 armed Foot, and 500 Dolopian, Aenian, and Olynthian Peltasts, or Targetiers. From thence he marched in three encampings, 20 67 Miles & a halfe. 22 Miles and a halfe e∣uerie encamp∣ing. . Parasangs, as far as Celaene, a great, rich, and well inhabited Citie of Phrygia. Here had Cyrus a Palace, and a great Parke, full of wilde Beasts, which he hunted on Hors-backe, when∣soeuer he was disposed to exercise himselfe, and his Horses. Maeander runneth thorow the middest of the Parke, the Fountaines whereof arise within the Palace. It runneth also thorow the Citie Celaene. The great King hath also a strong Palace in Celaene, vnder the Citadell, vpon the Spring of the Riuer Marsyas, which Riuer runneth thorow the Ci∣tie, and falleth into Maeander. The bredth of Marsyas, is 25 foot. It is said, that Apollo pulled the Skin of Marsyas ouer his head (who conten∣ded with him about Wisdome) and hung it vp in the Denne, where the Spring of the Riuer Marsyas ariseth, and that thereupon, the Riuer is cal∣led Marsyas. The report is, that Xerxes flying out of Greece after his ouerthrow, builded the Palace, and the Citadell of Celaene. In this place, Cyrus rested 30 dayes, and Clearchus, the exile of Lacedemon, came vnto him with 1000 armed Foot, and 800 Thracian Targetiers, and 200 Cre∣tan Archers; and Sosias the Syracusian, with 1000 armed Foot; and So∣phaenetus the Arcadian, with 1000 armed Foot. Cyrus tooke muster,
and numbred the Grecians in this Parke,13000 Armed, and light ar∣med. 37 Miles and a halfe. The day, 18 miles and more. These Games were first insti∣tuted in the honour of Pan, god of Arcadia. Young men ran naked in them. Liuius, l. 1. They were cal∣led Luperalia a∣mongst the Ro∣nes, vide  Acadi is, . 456. numo. 3. 517. num. 40. and found them to be 11000 armed, and about 2000 Targetiers, or Peltasts. From thence, he mar∣ched in two encampings, 10 Parasangs, and came to Peltae, a Citie well peopled, there he remained three dayes, during which time, Xenias the Arcadian solemnized the Playes, called Lycaea, and proposed games. The games were Golden rubbers. Cyrus was present and beheld that exercise. From thence, in two encampings, he marched 5 Mil Eue∣y day 22 mles and a halfe. 12 Para∣sangs, and came as farre as the Market of the Ceramians, a Citie full of people, the last of the Countrey of Mysia. From thence, in three en∣campings, he marched A geat March if it be not mistaken. It amounteth to 112 miles in all. And to more than 37 mile a day. Epiaxa, the Queene of Ci∣licia. 30 Parasangs, as farre as the Citie called the Plaine of Cayster (a Citie well peopled) where he stayed fiue dayes. By this time, there was due to the Souldiers more than three Moneths pay, which they often demanded, gathering themselues together before Cyrus his doore. But he put them off with hopes, not without manifest signes of discontentment in his countenance. For it was not Cyrus his manner to hold vp payment, when he was furnished with money. Here Epiaxa, the Queene of Syennesis the King of Cilicia, came to Cyrus, and was said to bring vnto him great summes of money, wherewith he payd the Souldiers their entertainment for foure Moneths. This Cilician Queene, had a Guard of Cilicians, and Aspendians, about her. The report went, that Cyrus was verie familiar with her. From hence, in two en∣campings he proceeded 37 Miles and a halfe. 18 miles euerie day and aboue. 10 Parasangs, euen as far as Thymvrium, a well inhabited Citie. Neere the way leading to this Citie, there is a Fountaine, called the Fountaine of Mydas King of Phrygia, where the fame is, that Mydas hunted the Satyr, mingling the water of the Fountaine with wine. From thence, in two encampings, he marched 10 Parasangs, and came to Tyriaeum, a Citie full of people; He remained there fiue dayes. Whilst he was there, the report goes, the Cilician Queene requested him to shew her his Armie, whose request, he being desirous to satisfie, tooke a muster of the Grecians, and Barbarians, in the Plaine neere adioyning. He comman∣ded the Grecians to order, and range themselues according to their won∣ted manner of embattailing, euerie Leader directing his owne Souldiers. They were therefore ordered . Clchus, the Chiefe of the Grecian Com∣manders in the let Wing. A muster of the Army of Cyrus. No Cuaces. foure in depth. Menon, & those with him, had the right Wing; Clearchus, and his Souldiers, the left; The other Commanders, the middest. Cyrus, and the Queene, he in his Chariot, she in her Coach, rid vp and downe, and first viewed the Barbarians (who passed by, and aduanced in Troops, and Companies) and then afterward the Grecians. They had euerie man a Brazen Head-peece, a Scarlet Coat, Greues, and a polished and bright Target. When he had passed by all, staying his Chariot before the middest of the Phalange, he sent Pigres his Interpreter, to the Grecian Coronels, willing them to command a Charge (as if they were to giue vpon the Enemie) and to moue forward with the whole Phalange, who gaue warning hereof to their Souldiers. No sooner therefore had the Trumpet sounded, but they straightwayes ad∣uanced, . holding out their weapons as in a Charge, and then mending their pace, and giuing a shout, they fell of themselues into a Plaine,
running toward their Tents.The Grecians put the Barba∣rians in feare. Both the other Barbarians were taken with sodaine feare, and also the Cilician Queene forsooke her Coach, and the Market-folke, leauing their wares behind, shifted away euerie one to saue himselfe. The Grecians not without laughter, held on forward to their Tents. The Cilician Queene wondred not a little at the beautie and order of the Armie, and Cyrus tooke as much pleasure to behold the Barbari∣ans put into such a feare by the Grecians. From hence, in three encam∣pings, he marched 20 Parasangs, and came to Iconium,22 Miles and a∣boue, a day. the last Citie of Phrygia. He stayed there three dayes, and from hence, he marched in fiue encampings thorow Lycaonia, 30 Parasangs.20 Miles and a∣boue, a day. He suffered the Gre∣cians to spoile this Countrey, as Enemie. From hence Cyrus sent away the Cilician Queene by the neerest way to Cilicia, and with her he sent Menons Regiment, and Menon the Thessalian himselfe. Cyrus, with the rest, marched thorow Cappadocia, 25 Parasangs in foure encampings, as farre as Dana, a great, wealthy, and well peopled Citie.23 Miles and a halfe, and vp∣ward. Here he remained three dayes, within which time, he put to death Megaphernes, a Persian, the Kings Purple Dyer, and another Ruler of great authority, charging them with Treason against himselfe. From hence they attempted to breake into Cilicia, but the entrance was so narrow,The entrance into Cilicia. that more than one Chariot could not passe at once, and withall, exceeding steepe, and vnpassable for an Armie, in case resistance were made. The fame was, that Syennesis had planted himselfe in the highest of the Straights,Syennesis, King of Cilicia. to de∣fend the passage, which was the cause, that the Armie staid in the Plaine one day. The next day, there came a Messenger bringing tydings, that Syennesis had left the Straights, after he perceiued that Menons Troopes were alreadie beyond the Mountaines in Cilicia, and heard that a Fleet of Lacedemonian Gallies, and another of Cyrus, were vnder saile, to passe from Ionia to Cilicia, vnder the leading of Tamon. Cyrus ascended the Mountaines without resistance of any Man, and found the Tents yet standing, of those that were in guard of the Mountaines. From thence, he descended into a great, beautifull, and well watered Plaine,Cilicia. and reple∣nished with all manner of Trees, and with Vines. It beareth abun∣dance of Sesamum, and Panick, and Millet, and Wheat, and Barley.A kind of Indi∣an Corne. It is inuironed on euerie side from Sea to Sea, with abrupt, and high Moun∣taines. Descending from this Mountaine, in foure encampings, he mar∣ched 25 Parasangs, thorow Cilicia as farre as Tarsus, a great,23 Miles and vpward, a day. and rich Citie of Cilicia. In that Citie was the Palace of Syennesis, King of Cilicia. Thorow the middest of this Citie, runneth the Riuer named Cydnus,Cydnus. . being 200 foot in breadth. The Inhabitants thereof, excepting such as bought and sold, left the Citie, and fled to the Mountaines with Syennesis. But the Inhabitants of Solos, and Issos, which stand neere the Sea, held themselues to their homes. Epiaxa, the Wife of Syennesis, arriued at Tarsus, fiue dayes before Cyrus. But in the tops of the Mountaines, that stretcht towards the Plain,Lochos, signifi∣eth here a Companie: in Aelia, it is vsed for a File. two  (or Companies) of Menons Regiment were lost. Some say, that being busie in pillage, they were cut off by the Cilicians; Other some, that they were left behind not able to find the rest
of the Troops, nor the waies which they were to passe, and were lost in wandring vp and downe. Their number was about 100 armed Foot. The rest comming to Tarsus, sacked the Citie, and the Palace in it, in a rage for the losse of their Companions. Cyrus entring the Citie, sent for Syennesis, who returned answer, that as he neuer yet had committed himselfe to the hands of a Man better than himselfe, so he would not now begin. In which minde he continued, till his Wife perswaded him to the contrarie, and till he had taken assurance from Cyrus. After that they met, Syennesis gaue Cyrus great summes to vphold his Armie. Cyrus againe gaue him gifts, such as he thought honourable, and much estee∣med amongst Kings; As namely, a Horse with a golden bitt, a Chaine of gold, Bracelets, a Sword decked with gold, a Persian garment, and freedome of his Land from spoile; As also, restitution of the Slaues, which were taken in spoile by the Souldiers, wheresoeuer he could find them.The Grecians refuse to goe any further. Cyrus, and the Armie, remained here 20 dayes, for the Souldiers plainly denied to goe any further, imagining now they were led against the King, which they said, was no part of their agreement. Clearchus was the first that went about to force his Souldiers to proceed, but they, as soone as he offered to goe forward, cast Stones at him, and at his carriage Beasts.Clearchus art in drawing them further. And surely he hardly escaped stoning. But afterward perceiuing it was in vaine to vse force, he called his Souldiers to an assembly; and first he stood weeping a good time, which they seeing, wondred at, and kept silence. Afterwards he spake thus: My fellow Souldiers, wonder not that the present state of this businesse toucheth me to the quicke, for Cyrus hath made himselfe mine Host, being banished out of my Coun∣trey, and not only done me other honours, but also giuen me 10000 Darickes: which I taking, hoorded not vp for mine owne priuate vse, and pleasure, but disbursed them vpon you. And first I made warre vpon the Thracians, and with your helpes reuenged the wrongs they did vnto Greece, chasing them out of Cheronesus, whilst they endeuoured to take that Land from the Grecians. But when Cyrus called for me, I tooke you with me, and went to Cyrus, to the end in his need to shew my selfe thankful for his former kindnesse and fauours towards me. But since you please to goe no further, I must of necessitie either forsake you and apply my selfe to his friendship, or deceiue his hopes, and remaine still with you. For my part (I know not whether I am in the right or not) I will rather chuse you, and with you partake such fortune as God shall send. Neither shal any man euer say, that I led the Grecians against the Barbari∣ans, & embracing the friendship of the Barbarians betrayed the Grecians. And because it pleaseth you neither to be perswaded by, nor yet to fol∣low me, I will follow you, and with you willingly vndergoe whatsoeuer shall happen. For my resolution is, that you are my countrey, my friends, and my fellowes in Armes, and that with your presence, I shall be hono∣rable, wheresoeuer I become: Being depriued of you, I shall neither be able to pleasure a friend, nor to be reuenged vpon an enemie. Wherefore I would haue you thinke assuredly, that whithersoeuer you goe, thither
will I goe with you. Thus he spake. His owne Souldiers, and others hea∣ring these words, and that he purposed not to goe against the King, com∣mended him much, and aboue 2000 of Xenias, and Pasions Souldiers ta∣king with them their Armes and Carriages, came and encamped with Clearchus. Cyrus doubting the sequell of these things, and somewhat aggrieued in his minde, sent for Clearchus, who refused to goe vnto him, but secretly without the Souldiers knowledge willed him to be of good courage, for he doubted not, but all should be well. Onely he desi∣red him to send for him once more, albeit he signified before hand, that he would denie to come. Afterward, gathering together his owne Souldiers, and the other that quartered with him, and as many besides as list to heare, he said thus: My fellow Souldiers, the affaires of Cyrus with vs, and ours with him, stand almost vpon one foot, and carrie no great difference: For neither are we his Souldiers any more, because we follow him not, nor yet is he to giue vs any more entertainment. I know well he thinketh himselfe much wronged by vs, which is the cause I refused to goe vnto him, when I was sent for, especially being ashamed, & touched in conscience, that I had deceiued his hopes. Further I feared lest lay∣ing hands vpon me, he might perhaps inflict some seuere punishment for the wrong I haue done him. I am therefore of opinion, that it is high time for vs not to sleepe, nor be carelesse of our selues, but to take coun∣sell what is to be done: for if we be forced to stay here, it is to be consi∣dered, after what sort we may stay with most safetie: If to depart, how we may most securely depart, and how recouer things necessarie for our iourney. For without these, neither Geerall, nor common Souldier is able to atchieue any thing. As for Cyrus, where he is a friend, he is a sure friend, and highly to be prised; where an enemie, no man more sowre, nor more enemie-like. Besides, he hath Forces of Foot, of Horse, and Shipping, which we all see, and verie well vnderstand, as being quartered not farre from his Campe. So that it is high time for any man to vtter what he thinketh. Hauing spoken thus, he held his peace. Then arose some of their owne accord, who deliuered their opinions. Other some by his subornation, shewed the impossibilitie of going or staying, without the good will of Cyrus. One making semblance of hasting into Greece with all speed, aduised to chuse other Generals quickly, in case Cle∣archus refused to leade away, and to buy things requisite for the iourney (for there was a Market, said he, in the quarter of the Barbarians) and immediatly to trusse vp their baggage, and goe to Cyrus, and require Shipping, to depart in: And in case he refuse to giue them, to desire a guide to leade vs thorow the Countrey as friends. If he refuse that also, then presently to put the Armie in Battell array, and to dispatch away some, to seise vpon the height of the Straights, that neither Cyrus preuent vs, nor yet the Cilicians, abundance of whose persons and goods, we haue preid and carrie with vs. Thus much spake he. Then answered Clearchus in this manner: Let no man once imagine, that I will take vpon me the place of Generall ouer this Armie (for there are many things that
disswade me from it) But if you shall thinke good to chuse any other man, I will not faile to obey him to my vttermost; that you may see, I know as well to be commanded, as any man else whosoeuer. After Clearchus, another arose, shewing the simplicitie of him, that aduised to require Shipping of Cyrus, as though he had no further vse for it, and what a shallownesse it would be, to require that of a Generall, which if he granted, his enterprise should be quite ouerthrowne. And if we were in any thing to trust the guide, that Cyrus should giue vs, why commanded we not Cyrus to take the top of the Hils for vs? For my part, I would be thorowly aduised, ere I went into Ships of his prouiding, lest he sinke both vs and them; and would feare his guide, left he leade vs to a place, from whence there were no comming off. I had rather goe hence with∣out Cyrus his knowledge, if there were any meanes to hide my depar∣ture from him: but that is a thing impossible, as also I say, these are all idle conceits: for my aduice, I would thinke it expedient, to send fit men with Clearchus vnto Cyrus, to enquire, wherein he will be pleased to vse our seruice, and if the action be like vnto those, wherein he hath heretofore imployed Strangers, to follow him, and to shew our selues no worse, then they were, that heretofore ascended to his father with him. But if the enterprise seeme greater, and of more labour, and more perill, than other former enterprises haue been, to desire him either to perswade vs, and so to leade vs with him, or else to yeeld to our perswasions, and friendly to dismisse vs. For so both in following him, we shall follow as friends, readie to doe him seruice, and in returning, returne with safetie. What answer he maketh, I thinke necessarie to be reported to the Armie, that we may consult vpon it accordingly. This was decreed by the whole assembly, and chosen men sent with Clearchus to make demands to Cyrus, according to the resolution of the Assembly. Cyrus answered, that he had newes, that Abrocomas an enemie of his, was at the Riuer Euphrates, which was about 12 encampings from thence: That he went against him, and if he found him there, he would be reuenged vpon him; if he fled away, we will deliberate then, said he, what is to be done. The chosen men made report hereof to the Souldiers, who albeit they had a suspition, they were led against the King, yet decreed to hold on. When they demanded of Cyrus an augmentation of pay, hee promised them halfe as much more as they had before,20 s. and 6 d. namely, in stead of one Da∣rick the month, a Darick and an halfe to euery souldier. But all this while no man heard in publike,37 miles, and a half. 18 miles & vpwards a day. Three Plethers. that they were led against the King. From thence he marched ten Parasangs in two encampings, as farre as the Ri∣uer Pharos, whose bredth was 300 foot. From thence in one encam∣ping 18 Mile and vpwards. 600 Foot. fiue Parasangs, and came to the Riuer Pyramus, whose bredth is a furlong. From thence in two encampings, 28 Miles and more a day. 15 Parasangs, and came to Issos, the last Citie of Cilicia, a Citie situated vpon the Sea, being well peopled, large and rich. There he remained three daies. Here out of Pelo∣ponnesus came to Cyrus 35 Ships vnder the command of Pythagoras the Lacedemonian. The Admirall of the whole Fleet was Tamos the
Aegyptian, who brought with him 25 other of Cyrus his Ships from Ephesus, with which hee had before besieged Miletus, because that Citie tooke part with Tissaphernes: and this Tamos followed Cyrus against him. Cherisophus the Lacedemonian came with these Ships,Cheisophus, who afterwards was one of the Co∣ronells. whom Cyrus had sent for by name, and brought with him 700 armed foot, with which he serued Cyrus. The Ships anchored hard by Cyrus his Tent. Whilest the Army rested here, the Grecian Mercenaries, which were vnder the pay of Abrocomas, being in number 400 armed foot, reuolted from him, and came to Cyrus, and serued against the King. From hence in one encamp∣ing hee marched fiue Parasangs, euen to the streights of Cilicia, and Syria.18 Mile and more. The streights of Syria. The Riuer Chersos. These were two walles, of which Syennesis, and a guard of the Cilicians had the defence of the inmost next to Cilicia: The other next Syria was defended by a guard of the Kings souldiers. Thorow the middest of these two runneth the riuer called Kersos, being of the bredth of a hun∣dred foot. The whole distance betweene the two walls is three furlongs, and it admitteth no passage by force, the neather way toward the Sea be∣ing narrow and fenced with strong walles, and the vpper nothing but in∣accessible rockes. In either wall there is a gate set. This passage was the cause that Cyrus sent for his ships, that in them he might transport armed foot both without and within the gates to force a way, if it were so that the enemy sought to make good that place, which he thought Abrocomas with his souldiers, that he had in great number, went about to doe. But Abrocomas did it not: For as soone as he heard, that Cyrus was aduanced into Cilicia, he returned with all speed out of Phoenicia to the King,Abrocomas his armie 300000. men. hauing with him, as it is reported, an army of thirtie Myriads of men. From hence he marched in one encamping thorow Syria fiue Parasangs, euen as farre as Myriandrum a Citie inhabited by the Phoenicians,18 Mile and vpward. and situated vpon the Sea. This towne is a place of trafficke, and many ships of bur∣then rode in the Hauen. There he remained seuen daies,Xenias & Pasion, two Coronells, forsake Cyrus without leaue. and Xenias the Arcadian Coronell, and Pasion of Megara shipping themselues, and their goods of most esteeme, sayled homeward discontented (as it was thought by most) because Cyrus suffered Clearchus to keepe their souldi∣ers, which refusing to goe any further against the King, remoued into his campe, with intent to returne into Greece. As soone as they were out of sight, the rumour went that Cyrus pursued them with gallies, and some wished they might be taken, as men that had vsed trechery: Other some pittied them, and feared their danger in case they were taken.The lenitie of Cyrus. Cyrs calling the Coronells together, said, Xenias and Pasion haue forsaken vs. But let them know for certaintie, that neither they are so secretly fled, but that I am informed whither they are gone, nor yet that they are out of my reach, for I haue gallies enow that will easily (if I list) fetch vp their ship. But indeed it is not my purpose to pursue them: neither shall it be said, that I vse the seruice of any man so long, as he is willing to follow me, and when he is desirous to be gone, arrest him, and intreat him ill, and spoile him of that, he hath. But, as I said, let them goe, and vnderstand, that they deale worse with vs, than wee with them: And al∣beit
I haue their wiues and children at Tralles in custodie, yet shall they not be defrauded, but haue them safely deliuered into their hands, in re∣spect of their former seruice to mee. So much Cyrus. The Grecians hearing the worthy disposition of Cyrus, euen those that before were slacke and backward in the iourney, followed him now more willingly and cheerefully.75 Miles, 18 miles and more the day. From thence in foure encampings he marched twentie Parasangs to the riuer Chalos, a riuer A Plether. The gods of the Syrians. 100 foot broad, which was full of great tame fish, which the Syrians thinke to be gods, and therefore suffer them not to be harmed no more than they doe Pigeons. The villages wherein they encamped pertained to Parisatis, being giuen to her for her maintenance.22 Mles and vpwards a day. A Plther. From thence in 5 encampings, he marched 30 Parasangs, as farre as the head of the riuer Daradaces, which was 100 foot in bredth: there was the Palace of Belesis, who sometimes gouerned Syria, & a very large and beautifull Parke stored with all kinde of fruit, and wanting no∣thing that growes at any time of the yere. Cyrus cut downe the trees ther∣of and burned the Palace. From thence in three encampings he marched fifteene Parasangs,56 Miles. 18 And more the day. Thapsacus. euen as farre as the Riuer Euphrates, whose bredth is three furlongs. A great and rich Citie is built vpon Euphrates, which is called Thapsacus, where the army remained fiue daies. Cyrus sending here for the Commanders of the Grecians told them, that his purpose was to lead against the great King, willing them to signifie so much to the soul∣diers, and to perswade them to follow. They calling an assembly, decla∣red all that was deliuered vnto them. The Souldiers were offended with the Commanders, alleaging they knew as much before and concea∣led it, and refused absolutely to stirre a foot forward, vnlesse they had such rewards assured them,Vnder the lea∣ding of Xenias. as the other Grecians had that before ascen∣ded vp with Cyrus to his father: who notwithstanding went not to fight, but onely waited vpon Cyrus when his father sent for him. The Com∣manders reported those things to Cyrus, who promised to giue euery man fiue pounds of siluer as soone as they came to Babylon, amongst the Greciās was of the value of 58 s—4 d. the whole summe is-14 li. 11 s-8 d. and to conti∣nue their whole pay vntill they were sent backe and came into Ionia. Most part of the Grecians yeelded to these conditions. But Menon, before it was knowne what the other souldiers purposed to do, & whether they would follow Cyrus or no, called his owne Regiment apart, and spake vnto them in this sort.Menons subtilty. My Companions (quoth he) if you will be ruled by mee, you shall without danger or labour be more esteemed of Cyrus than all the rest. What then would I haue you doe? Cyrus at this in∣stant is intreating the Grecians to follow him against the King. This is therefore my counsell, that wee passe ouer Euphrates before it appeare what answer the other Grecians will deliuer vnto Cyrus. For if they re∣solue to follow him, it will seeme that you that first began to passe, are the cause thereof, and Cyrus will both thanke and reward you, as the most forward of all the rest (for he knowes how to doe it as well as any man) but if they resolue the contrarie, we will all returne ouer the riuer backe againe. So shall it come to passe that Cyrus will vse vs both for Garrisons, and for Commanders, as the most obedient and most faith∣full
souldiers of his Armie, and if there bee any thing else you shall re∣quest of him, I assure my selfe you shall finde him your especiall friend. The souldiers hearing this, yeelded to his perswasion, and passed the ri∣uer before the other could resolue vpon an answer. Cyrus perceiuing they were passed ouer, was glad at heart, and sent Glous vnto them, wil∣ling him to say in his name; Cyrus at this present praiseth and commen∣deth you, but he will indeuour to giue you cause hereafter to praise him, else would he not haue you thinke him to be Cyrus. The souldiers filled with great hopes, wished him good successe in all designes. It is said, he sent rich presents vnto Menon. This done, he passed the riuer,Euphrates a deepe riuer. and the whole Armie after him, and not a man was wet aboue his brests in wa∣ding ouer. The Thapsacens report that the riuer was neuer passed ouer on foot before, but with shipping alone, which Abrocomas had burnt, to the intent to hinder Cyrus in his passage. This seemed to be a miracle, and that the riuer gaue way to Cyrus, portending hee should be King. From thence in nine encampings hee marched fiftie Parasangs thorow Syria▪ and they came to the riuer Araxes,187 Mile and vpwards; aboue 20 mile a day. where were many villages re∣plenished with Corne and Wine. There remained they three dayes, and made prouision of victualls. From thence in fiue encampings in the wil∣dernesse he marched thorow Arabia 35 Parasangs,Arabia. hauing Euphrates on the right hand. The territorie of this Countrey was a Plaine all ouer, e∣uen like vnto the Sea, but full of wormewood, and if any shrubs or reeds grew there, they yeelded a sweet sauour like vnto spices, but there was not a tree to be seene. Of vntamed beasts, the most were wilde Asses,Wilde Asses. Ostriches. Bustards. and not a few Ostriches. There were also Bustards and wilde Goats. These asses being chaced first fled on afore, and afterward turned and stood at a gaze (for they were much swifter than a horse) & again did the like when a horse came neere them. So that it was a matter impossible to take them, vnlesse the horsemen hunted with their horses placed in distance, and taking the chace one from another. The flesh of them being caught is in taste like a red Deere, sauing that it is a little more tender. No man could lay hand vpon an Ostrich, and the horsemen that gaue her chace soone quitted it. For she runs away flying vsing her feet for course, & lifting vp her selfe with her wings, as it were with the sailes of a ship. As for the Bu∣stards, they are easily caught if a man sodainly spring them: for they both make a short flight as Partriges doe, and are soone weary. The flesh of them is very delicate & pleasant. Proceeding on thorow this country the Armie came to the Riuer Masca, which carrieth 100 foot in bredth.A Plether. Here was a great Citie, but dispeopled, named Corsote, which hath the Riuer Masca running round about it, where they staied three daies ma∣king prouision for the Armie. From hence in thirteene encampings in the wildernesse Cyrus marched 90 Parasangs,337 Miles and a halfe, which amounteth to 25 Miles and vpward the day hauing Euphrates on his right hand, & came to the streights. In these encampings many carriage-beasts were lost for want of food. The inhabitants digging out and fashioning milstones about the riuer, carried them to Babylon and sold them, buying with the price victualls to maintaine their liues. The Army
was now destitute of victuall, neither was there any to be bought else∣where than only in the Lydian market amongst the Barbariās that follow∣ed Cyrus, where a A Capitha con∣taineth halfe a pecke of our measure. A Chaenix a quarter of a pecke. Capitha of meale was sold for foure Sicles: a Sicle is va∣lued at 7 Attick Obolus Atticus is taken for pe∣ny farthing of our money. Oboli, & a half, and a Capitha containes 2 Atticke Chaenices. The Souldiers therefore fed vpon flesh. These encampings were a great distance one from another, & they fell out to be the longer because Cyrus was forced to march on till he came either to water or fodder. And if it chanced that the way leading thorow streights or mire were hardly passa∣ble for the Chariots, Cyrus would stay with the best and gallantest of his traine, & command Glous or Pigres to take some of the Barbarian army, & draw the Chariots out of the mire. And in case they seemed too slow, he would,The cause of long marches. as it were in anger, command the strongest of the Persians that followed him, to put to their hands and free the chariots. There might a man haue beheld no smal peece of obedience. For casting off their skarlet cloaks (called Candyes) in the place where euery one stood, they hasted, as if a man should runne for a wager, euen against the steepnesse of hills, be∣ing clad with rich coats, and embrodered breeches, & some of them with chaines of gold about their neckes, and bracelets about their wrests; and yet with these leaping quickly into the mire, they hoysed, and brought out the wagons sooner than a man would haue imagined. In a word, Cyrus spared no manner of diligence all the way to haste the iourney for∣ward, staying in no place vnlesse there, where he must needs furnish him∣selfe with prouision, or else set downe for some other necessary cause; conceiuing the more speed he made, the rather he should surprise the King, and fall vpon him at vnawares; and the more he loitered, the grea∣ter Armie the King should be able to raise. For it was easie for any man that would marke, to perceiue, that the Kings dominion was strong in largenesse of Territories, and multitudes of men, but weake in length of waies, and separation of his forces, in case warre were roundly moued against him. Beyond Euphrates, and the encampings in the wildernesse, there was a great and rich Citie, the name whereof was Carmanda, out of which the Armie made their prouision passing ouer in boats,Carmanda. which boats were contriued vpon the sudden in this sort:Boats for a shift. The skins which they vsed for couerings, they filled with light hay and chaffe, binding and sowing them so close that the water could not come into the chaffe, and vpon those, they went ouer and got prouision, which was wine pressed out of Palme nuts, & corne called Millet, whereof there was great plentie in this country.Seditious Soul∣diers put all in danger. Here a controuersie falling out betwixt a Souldier of Cle∣archus and another of Menons Regiment, Clearchus commanded Menons Souldier to be beaten, iudging him to be in the wrong. This Souldier went to his owne quarter, and complained hereof to his companions, and they hearing what had passed, grew discontent and angry with Clear∣chus. The same day Clearchus going to the passage of the riuer, and there viewing the Market, rid backe to his owne Tent with small attendance thorow Menons quarter. Cyrus was not yet arriued, but was vpon the way comming forward. It fortuned at the same time that one of Menons
Souldiers was hewing Wood, who seeing Clearchus passing by, threw his Hatchet at, but missed him, then threw one Stones, and so another, and then many more, raising a great cry. Clearchus fled to his owne quarter, and forthwith commanded his Souldiers to take Armes. The armed Souldiers he commanded to stay there,. resting their Targets against their knees; the Thracians, and the Hors-men, of which he had aboue 40 in his quarter (the most part Thracians) he tooke with him, and galloped against Menons Souldiers; so that both they, and Menon himselfe, were put in a feare, and some ran to their Armes, others stood still, doubting what the sequell would be. Proxenus his turne was to come in the reare that day, with his whole Regiment of Armed,The Coronels marhed by turnes. . who presently thrust his Troopes in betwixt them both, and laid downe his Armes, entreating Clearchus to forbeare. Clearchus contrariwise was angry be∣cause being so neere stoning, Proxenus vsed so calme words in his extre∣mitie of danger, and willed him to depart from betweene them. Whilest they stood vpon these termes, Cyrus came vp, and was certified how things went, and presently arming himselfe,Cyrus stilleth the contenti∣on. and attended with most of them that were about him, he galloped in betweene, and spake thus: Clearchus, and Proxenus, and you the rest of the Grecians that are present, you know not what you doe; For if you fall to fight among your selues, you may well thinke, that this day you shall cut me a peeces, and your selues not long after me. For if our affaires goe ill, all these Barbarians that you see, will be greater enemies to you, than they, who are with the King. Clearchus hearing these things, came againe to himselfe, and both of them moderating their choller, laid their Armes downe in the place.. Proceeding in their iourney from hence, they discouered the footing, and dung of Horses. It seemed the number of the Horse, was about 2000, which going before our Campe, burnt the Fodder, and all other things profitable for vse. Orontes a Persian, neere a in to the King, and deemed one of the best Souldiers of Persia, did seeke in former times to betray Cyrus, making warre against him; but being after reconciled to Cyrus, he iournied with him now, and profered,A faire pre∣tence of a trai∣tor. that if Cyrus would let him haue 1000 Horse, he would either by ambush cut off the Scouts of the Enemie, that burnt the Countrey, or would take many of them aliue, and so inhibit their burnings, or at least disable them to report to the King any thing touching the Armie of Cyrus. Cyrus hearing this, held it a matter of importance, and therefore he willed him to take a parcell of Horse out of euerie Troope. Orontes thinking these Horse were readie at his call, writ a Letter to the King, that he would come vnto him with as many Horse, as he could get; Onely he desired, it would please the King, to giue charge to his Hors-men to receiue him as a friend. Besides, he added in his Letters many remembrances, & tokens of his old friend∣ship & faith to the King, and deliuered the letter to a trustie Messenger, as he imagined; who as soone as he receiued it, shewed it to Cyrus. When Cyrus had read the contents, he caused Orontes to be apprehended, & cal∣led into the same tent wherein himselfe was, seuen of the most honorable
Persians he had about him, & commanded the Grecian Leaders, to bring vnto him some number of their armed Foot, whom he appointed to lay downe their Armes at his Tent.. They as they were commanded, brought with them about 3000 armed Foot: Cyrus then called Clear∣chus also into Councell, who seemed to him, and to the rest, to be of farre greater reputation, than any other of the Grecians; And he, after e came forth,The manner of proceeding in iudgement a∣gainst Orontes. told the Historie of Orontes Iudgement, to his friends, and how it was carried: for secretnesse in this businesse was not enioyned. Clearchus reported then, that Cyrus began after this manner: My friends, I haue called you together, that consulting with you about this Orontes, I might doe that, which is most iust, both before God, and Men. My Fa∣ther at the first gaue him to be vnder my command; afterward by com∣mandement of my Brother, as he professeth, hauing in possession the Citadell of Sardes, he made warre vpon me; but I pursued him with armes so neere, that he thought it best to forbeare bearing armes against me, and afterward receiued his, and gaue him my right hand in token of reconciliation. He added, Was there any thing, Orontes, I wronged you in after this? Orontes answered, Nothing. Then Cyrus asked him againe, Did not you afterward, being not wronged by me, as your selfe confesse, reuolt to the Mysians, and spoile my Countrey to your vttermost power? I did, said Orontes. And when you found your selfe too weake, did you not fly to the Altar of Diana, saying, you repented of that you had done, and desired pardon, and gaue and tooke of me assurance of no further enmitie betwixt vs? Orontes acknowledged this also. Wherein then (quoth Cyrus) haue I wronged you, that you sought to betray me the third time? When Orontes confessed, he was not wronged; Cyrus asked him, Doe you confesse then, you haue done me wrong? I must needs, quoth Orontes. Then Cyrus asked him againe, will you henceforward then be enemie to my Brother, and friend, and trustie to me? Although I should, answered he, I shall not seeme so to you. After this, Cyrus said to those that were present: You haue heard, what this man hath done, and said; Begin Clearchus, and giue first your iudgement vpon him. Then said Clearchus:His condem∣nation. Mine aduice and counsell is, that he be forthwith dispatched out of the way, that we be not troubled with keeping him, and that he hinder vs not to doe good to those, that willingly would be∣come our friends. To this aduice the rest assented. Afterward by com∣mandement of Cyrus, all they that were present, and his kinsmen also, rising vp, tooke hold of Orontes girdle, as of one condemned to die, and men appointed for the purpose led him forth: When he came out, those that were wont to bow to him with reuerence, made then also obeisance, albeit they knew,His execution. he was led to die. But being conueighed to the Tent of Artapata, one of the most trustie Mase-bearers of Cyrus, from that time forward, no man saw Orontes aliue, or dead, nor could report the manner of his death (some being of one imagination, some of another) nor yet was there made any Graue or Monument for him. From thence in three encampings,45 Mile, 15 a day. he marched 12 Parasangs, thorow the Countrey of
Babylon.Ordering of the battell. In the third encamping, Cyrus about midnight tooke musters of the Grecians, and Barbarians, in the Plaine where they then were (for he thought, that the next morning, the King would come with his Ar∣mie, and bid him battell) and gaue to Clearchus the command of the right Wing of the Grecians; and to Menon the Thessalian, the left; himselfe ordered his owne people. After musters ended, as soone as it was day, there came Fugitiues from the great Kings Campe, and brought newes to Cyrus touching the Armie of the King. Cyrus calling together the chiefe Commanders, and the Captaines of the Grecians, consulted with them, how he might best order his Armie for fight, and admonished, and incouraged them in these words: I made choice of you (ô Grecians) to be my Companions in Armes, not because I wanted, or might not haue had plentie of Barbarians, but I chose you for that I esteemed you better, and more to be valued than many multitudes of Barbarians. Shew your selues therefore men worthy of the libertie you enioy, in re∣spect whereof, I hold you also happie. For I would haue you know, that I prise libertie aboue all things I possesse, and aboue many more of grea∣ter worth, than those, I possesse. But to the end you may vnderstand what fight you are at this present to vndergoe, I will in few words declare it vnto you. The number of the enemie is great, and they charge with a great cry. Endure the first, and I am ashamed of the rest: and, am like∣wise ashamed, what manner of men you shall finde the Inhabitants of these Countreys to be. And in case you shew your selues men, and be couragious, and valiant, whosoeuer desireth to returne to his home, I will so send him away, that at his returne, his fellow Citizens shall haue cause to enuie his good hap. But I thinke so to vse the matter, that many shall rather chuse to remaine, and take such part as I shall haue, than to returne home to their Countreys. Hereupon Gaulites a Fugitiue of Sa∣mos, but faithfull to Cyrus, replied; There are (ô Cyrus) that say, you make large promises by reason of the perill at hand; but in case the suc∣cesse be good, you will forget all. Other some,The largenesse of the Persian Kingdome. that although you re∣member, and would, you cannot performe what you promise. Cyrus hearing these things, answered, My Fathers Kingdome stretcheth toward the South so farre, that for heat, no man is able to inhabit; toward the North, that no man can inhabit for cold; the middlemost parts, are vn∣der the gouernment of my Brothers friends. If we get the victorie, I can doe no lesse, than establish you my friends in the possession of them. So that I feare not (if my iourney prosper) not to haue enough, where∣with to pleasure euerie one of my friends, but I feare rather, I shall not haue friends enow to pleasure. But to you, ô Grecians, to euerie one of you, I will giue ouer and aboue my promise, a Crowne of Gold. They that heard these things, were much more forward than before, and rela∣ted them to the rest. Many both of the chiefest Commanders, and also some other of the Grecians, went in to Cyrus, demanding what should be their reward, in case they won the day; whom Cyrus sent away full of good hopes. About that time, Clearchus asked Cyrus, Doe you thinke
(Cyrus) your Brother will hazard a battell?Cyrus foot were 112800. If (quoth Cyrus) he be the Sonne of Daerius and Parisatis, and my Brother, I shall neuer obtaine the things, I seeke for, without fight. Here the Grecians being in Armes, were numbred to be . 10400 Armed, and 2400 Targetiers, the Barbarians with Cyrus Euery Myri∣ade is 10000. 10 Myriades, Sythed Chariots about 20. The enemie was said to be 120 Myriades, and about 200 Sythed Chariots. Besides, there were 6000 Horse vnder the leading of Artagerses; they were ranged before the King. There were foure Rulers, or Generals, or Leaders, of the Kings Armie; of whom, euerie one had 30 Myriades vnder his charge; to wit,The king foot 900000. Abrocomas, Tissaphernes, Gobryas, and Arbaces. But of this number, there were no more, then 90 Myriades present in the battell, and 150 Sy∣thed Chariots. For Abrocomas, although he posted with all speed out of Phoenicia, came fiue daies after the battell. The Fugitiues from the Kings Armie, brought this information to Cyrus before the battell; and those of the enemie, that were intercepted after the battel, confirmed the same. From hence Cyrus in one encamping, marched 3 Parasangs; his whole Armie, both Grecians & Barbarians, being in battell array: for he thought the king would haue fought that day, because at the end of this halfe daies iourney,A Fathome containeth two yards. he found a deepe Trench cast, the bredth whereof was fiue Fa∣thomes, the depth three Fathomes. The trench ran vp into the Countrie 12 Parasangs, thorow the Plain euen as far as the wall of Media, where the Channels begin, that are deriued out of the Riuer Tygris, being in number foure, each of them 100 Foot in bredth, and verie deepe, so that Ships of burthen doe saile in them. They fall into Euphrates, euerie one distant a Parasang from other, and euerie one hauing a Bridge laid ouer it of the bredth of 20 Foot. A narrow way was betwixt the Riuer Euphrates, and this Trench. The great King caused this Trench to be cast for a Fortification, assoone as he heard that Cyrus was on foot. Cyrus and his Armie passed ouer this narrow way, and were come within the Trench. The great King ioined not battell this day, but many Tracts of men and beasts, that retired, might hereabouts be euidently perceiued. Vpon the same day, Cyrus calling to him Silanus the Diuiner of Ambracia, gaue him 3000 Daricks, because 11 daies before offering Sacrifice he told him, that the King would not fight within ten daies. If he fight not within ten daies, quoth Cyrus, he will neuer fight; but if thy saying proue true, I promise to giue thee 10 Talents, and he gaue him that gold then, because the ten daies were past. Now seeing the King did not hinder the passage of Cyrus his Armie ouer that Trench, Cyrus, and the rest, were strongly perswaded, that he determined not to fight, which was the cause, that Cy∣rus had not so great care of his march the next day; and he aduanced the third day after sitting in his Chariot, and the most of his Armie mar∣ched confusedly, and many of the Souldiers Armes were put vpon the Waines, & vpon the cariage beasts. Now it was the time, the Market was full, and the place of encamping, where they should quarter, was at hand, when Patagyas a Persian, one of the faithfullest of Cyrus his Traine, was seene to come vpon the spur, his Horse dropping with sweat, crying out
in the Persian and Greeke Language; that the King was hard by with an huge Armie readie, and prepared for fight. This newes made a great confusion, and as well the Grecians, as all the rest, imagined they should be charged in this disorder. Cyrus leaping from his Chariot, put on his Curace, and getting on Hors-back, tooke his Darts in his hand, and com∣manded the rest to Arme, and euerie man to take his place.The order of Cyrus his battel. The place of the Comman∣ders. Of the battell of Gre∣cians. Light armed of the Grecians. Ariaeus is after∣ward called General of the Horse. . Then with great diligence they ordered themselues, Clearchus in the point of the right Wing, by the Riuer Euphrates, Proxenus next vnto him, and the other after Proxenus. Menon, and his Regiment, had the point of the left Wing of the Grecian battell. Of the Barbarians, about 1000 Paphlagonian Hors-men stood by Clearchus on the right hand, and all the Targetiers of the Grecians. On the left hand of the whole Phalange, Arieus, Cyrus his Lieutenant Generall, and the remnant of the Barbarians. Cyrus himselfe held the middest with 600 Hors-men, which were armed with great Cu∣races and tases, and all of them with Caskes, except Cyrus alone. Cyrus stood waiting the fight with his head vnarmed: It is said, that other Per∣sians also, when they hazard battell, fight with their heads vnarmed. All the Horse that serued vnder Cyrus, had both Frontlets and Brest-plates; the Hors-men had Grecian Swords also. It was now mid-day, and the enemie was not yet come in sight; but when mid-day was past, first a dust appeared like vnto a Cloud, and a little while after, a kinde of black∣nesse spread ouer the whole Plaine. When they came somewhat neerer, a man might discerne the shining of Brasse, and their Speares, and array were easily discouered. And on the left Wing of the enemie,The order of the Persians. The arming of the Aegyptians. were pla∣ced Hors-men armed with white Curaces, who were reported to be vnder the command of Tissaphernes, next to whom were placed the Wickar Targetiers, and hard by them armed Foot, that caried long Woodden Targets, reaching downe to their feet. They were said to be Aegyptians; then other Hors-men, and other Archers, all according to their Nations; and euerie Nation was cast into a Plesium (or square battell) full of men, and before them, the Sythed Chariots,A Plesium. Battalions. The place of the Chariots. See my Notes vpon the 11 ch. of Aelian. distant a good space one from ano∣ther. These Chariots had on the sides Sythes prominent, and bearing straight forth from the Axeltrees, and some from the former Seat of the Chariot, with their points turned toward the ground, to the end to cut a peeces whatsoeuer they met, and strooke vpon. The Kings purpose was to send them with high speed against the rankes of the Grecians, to breake and rent them in peeces. Cyrus in a speech (heretofore deliuered) ex∣horting, and encouraging the Grecians, gaue them to vnderstand, it should be enough only to endure the cry and shout of the Barbarians. But he was therein greatly deceiued; for they aduanced not with a cry, but with as great silence, and quietnesse, as was possible, continuing still in an equall and slow pace. Cyrus at this time galloping vp to the right Wing with Pigres his Interpreter, and with three or foure more, cried out to Clearchus, to lead the Grecians against the middest of the enemies battell,Plutarch ac∣counteth this a fault in Clear∣chus, in vita Ar∣taxerxis. because the King was there; for if it be ouercome, quoth he, there is no more for vs to doe. Clearchus seeing the middest of the battell, and
hearing from Cyrus, that the King was farre without the point of the left wing of the Grecian Phalange (for the king so abounded in multitude, that all the middest of his battell stretched, and was extended without the left Wing of Cyrus his Troopes) would not for all that draw away the right Wing from the Riuer,Remedy a∣gainst ouer-winging. fearing to be ouerfronted, and incom∣passed on both sides: but answered Cyrus, He would haue a care, that all things should goe well. In the meane time, the Barbarians Army ad∣uanced equally, but the Grecians remaining in the same place, increased still, and ordered their Troops, as they came on. And Cyrus putting forth a little before the rest, viewed both Armies at a good distance, ca∣sting his eyes sometimes vpon the enemie, sometimes vpon his friends, whom when Xenophon the Athenian, being amongst the Grecians, percei∣ued, he spurred his Horse to meet him, and when he was come vp, as∣ked, if he would command any thing; Cyrus pausing a little, said, Tell all your people, that the beast sacrifced, and the inwards, promise vs good lucke. In speaking this, he heard a murmuring, that ran along cleane thorow the Grecian Troopes, and asked, what noise it might be, and what it meant; Xenophon told him, the Word was now giuen the second time. He mruailed who had betraied the Word, and asked, what the new Word was;The Word. Xenophon answered, Iupiter the Sauiour, and Victorie: which Cyrus hearing, I accept it, said he, and let it be so. After he had thus spoken, he returned to his owne pla. And now the two Phalanges were not aboue three or foure Furlongs one from another, when the Grecians sang the Paan,A Militarie Song. and set forward against the enemie. The part of the Phalange which aduanced, swelled toward the Front, as it had been a waue of the Sea, and the hinder part began to follow apace, and all shouted (as they are wont in a Furie Martiall) and all ran on at once.Alexander gaue direction to his souldiers to doe the like. The victorie of the Grecians. Some also report, that they beat their Pikes vpon their Targets, to the end to scare the Horses. Before they came within an Arrowes shot, the Barbarians turned their Horses, and fled. The Grecians followed the chace with all speed, and cryed one to another, not o run and haste too much, but to follow in good order. The Chariots, void of guides, were caried, some vpon the enemies themselues, some vpon the Grecians, who vpon a forecast opened, and let them passe thorow; yet were there some that were ouerthrowne for feare, as it is wont to happen in a Horse race, who notwithstanding were reported to haue had no harme, nor yet any other Grecian in this whole fight, one only excepted, who was strucken with an Arrow in the left side. Cyrus seeing the Grecians haue the victo∣rie against their aduersaries, and hotly pursuing them, reioiced much, and was now worshipped of those,Cyrus warinesse in his good successe. that were about him, as King. Notwith∣standing, he brake not out to follow the cace, but keeping by him his Troope of 600 Horse close serred, he obserued what the King had in intention to doe.The place of the K. of Persia in a battell. For he knew well, that his place was in the middest of the Persian Phalange, as it is the manner of all the Persian Commanders, to leade in the middest of their Troopes, conceiuing that they are there in greatest safetie, both because their strength is equally diuided on both
sides of them, and in case of Commands, the Armie may receiue di∣rections in halfe the time it should, if they were else-where placed. So the King being then in his Station in the middest of his Phalange, and yet without the point of Cyrus his left Wing, and seeing no man to fight against him on the contrarie part, nor yet against the Troopes, that were ranged before him, he wound and turned his battell to the left hand, to the intent to ouerwing and encompasse in his aduersaries; which Cyrus perceiuing, and fearing lest comming on the backes of the Grecians, he should cut them in peeces, he galloped forth, and met him in Front,Horse in front. and charging with his 600 ouercame, and put to flight the 6000 that were ordered before the King; and with his owne hands (as the report goeth) slew Artagerses, one of the Generals of the King.An error in too arnest pursuit. They were no sooner put to flight, but Cyrus his 600 pursuing hotly, were dispersed here and there, except a few, that were left with him, who were for the most part such, as vsually sate at his Table: being accompanied with these, he espied the King, and the Troope, that was about him, and by and by, after he had said, I see the Man, he flew out directly against him,Cyrus his valor. and strooke him on the Brest, and wounded him thorow the Curace, as Ctesias the Physitian reporteth, who reporteth also, that he cured the wound. Whilest Cyrus was thus in fight, one with a Dart hit him a sore blow vnder the eye. The King, and Cyrus, and their Followers in de∣fence of either of them thus coping together, Ctesias (for he was pre∣sent) telleth the number of those, that died about the King; and Cyrus himselfe was also slaine,The death of Cyrus. and eight of his best Followers lay dead vpon him. Artapata, one of the faithfullest of Cyrus Mase-bearers, was said, after he saw Cyrus fallen, to haue alighted from his Horse, and cast him∣selfe vpon him. And some affirme, that the King commanded him to be killed vpon Cyrus; others report, that he killed himselfe, drawing out his owne Sword. For he had a gilt Sword, and wore a Chaine, and Bracelets, and such other Ornaments, as the best of the Persians wore, being of great esteeme with Cyrus for his loue and faithfulnesse towards him. Thus died Cyrus,The praise of Cyrus. a man by the opinion of those that had ac∣quaintance with him, of the most Kingly disposition, and most worthy to beare rule, of all the Persians, that succeeded the Elder Cyrus. For first,His childhood. being but a Child, and brought vp with his Brother, and other Children, he was thought to surmount them all in all things. For all the Children of the best sort of Persians, haue their education at the Kings Gate,The K. of Persi∣aes Gate. where a man may learne much temperance, and where no kind of filthinesse is to be heard or seene; and the Children haue daily conuersant before their eyes, those that are honoured, or disesteemed of the Kings. So that being yet but Children, they learne to rule, and to obey. There Cyrus seemed to be the aptest to learne of all, that were of his age, and to be more obedient to the Elder sort, than those that were farre his inferiours. Besides, to be a great louer of Horses, and to vse them with great skill, and to delight, and be studious of warlike exercise, and of shooting, and darting. When he was in the flower of his age, he
greatly loued hunting, and shunned not danger, when he came to en∣counter with wilde beasts. And when on a time a Beare set vpon him, he feared her not, but buckling with her, was pulled from his horse and receiued those wounds, the skarres whereof he after carried about him, and yet slew her at last. The man, that first came in to his rescue, he re∣warded with royall gifts, and made him more happy, than many others of his time. Afterward when he was sent by his father, and made Sa∣trapa (or Gouernour) of Lydia, and of the greater Phrygia, and of Cap∣padocia, and was declared Generall of the people, that were to assemble and be mustred in the Plaine of Castlus,His keeping of his word. he gaue all men to vnderstand, that he esteemed nothing more, than to keepe faith with whomsoeuer he made league, agreement, or promise. Wherefore the Cities vnder his command beleeued him in all he spake, and particular men euery where beleeued him. And if an Enemie were to come in at any time vpon Cyrus his word, he was easily perswaded of his assurance and safetie; which was the cause, when he moued warre against Tissaphernes, that euery Citie willingly chose to take part with Cyrus, rather than with Tissaphernes, Milet onely excepted: which feared him, for that he would not forsake, but gaue incouragement to the fugitiues of their Citie. For he declared both in deed and word, that after he had once receiued them into his friendship,His thankful∣nesse. howsoeuer their number, or fortune afterward fell out to be, he would not cast them off. Besides he made it euident, that in case any man shewed him kindnesse, or were malitious against him, he would doe all he could, to goe beyond him in either of both. And there were, that reported this wish of his, namely, to liue so long, as to be able to ouercome his friends in kindnesses, his Enemies in reuenge. Therefore many men were content to giue vp their riches, Cities, and bodies into his hands,Strictnesse in punishment. rather than into any mans, tha liued in our age. Neither could it be truly said, that he suffered wicked and loose persons to scorne him. For that kinde of people he punished seuerely, and in the common waies were often to be seene men without feet, and hands, and eyes; so that in Cyrus his gouernement both Grecians and Barbarians behauing themselues orderly, might walke, where they list without feare, and car∣ry such things with them, as they thought fitting for their iourney. By all mens confession he extraordinarily honoured men skilfull in the Art Military.His esteeme of Souldiers. The first warre he had, was against the Pisidians and Mysians: Himselfe therefore leading an Army against those countries, if he saw men willingly offer themselues to danger, he made them gouernours of the Country, which he conquered, and honoured them besides with other gifts. Whereby it appeared, that valiant men were happiest, and cowards accounted, as it were, their slaues. And for this cause many willingly put themselues into, and prouoked danger, especially if they imagined, that Cyrus should haue notice thereof. Whosoeuer it was that shewed to the world any notable example of Iustice, he much rather in∣riched him, than those, that fished for gaine out of vniust dealing. There∣fore both many other things were rightly administred by him, and also
he had an army, that might truly be called an Army. For the chiefe Commanders and Captaines resorted vnto him no for monies sake, but because they knew, that the seruice of Cyrus was much more to be prised, than their monthly pay. Now his seruants that executed his commands with dexteritie and diligence,Loue & kind∣nesse to his seruants. he suffered not to goe vnre∣warded. Wherefore the ame went, that there was no kinde of worke to be thought vpon, wherein the seruants and workmen of Cyrus did not excell. Ifhe found a man to be a good husband in augmenting his owne wealth without oppression, or in garnishing the Prouince, which he gouerned, with new reuenewes, he was so farre from taking from him, that he gaue him more to that, he had. So that men gladly tooke paines, and boldly held, what they had gotten, and none concealed from Cyrus, the things he possessed. For he seemed not to enuy them, which in open shew were rich, but would often vse the goods of such, as concealed and kept them close. What friends soeuer he chose,To his friends. and found well affected to him, and iudged able to effect that, which he desired, by the confes∣sion of all men he vsed most obsequiously. For as he needed friends to be fellow-workers of his designes, as he conceiued: so himselfe endeuou∣red to be to his friends, the best fellow-worker of that, which he thought, euery one of them desired. I haue many causes to thinke, he had more presents made vnto him, than any one man of that age whatsoeuer. All these he distributed especially amongst his friends, hauing consideration of euery mans manner of life, and of their need. The things that were sent him for ornament of his bodie, or else fo warre, or for other trim∣mings and beautifyings; of these he is reported to haue said, that his owne body could not vse them all, and that his opinon was, that friends well adorned were a mans greatest ornament. But it is no maruell, that being of greater ability he ouercame his friends in kindnesse. This rather seemeth a maruell, that he went beyond them in care, to gratifie and doe them good. For Cyrus oftentimes, when he happened vpon extraordi∣nary pleasant wine, would send them flaggons, with this message: Cyrus hath not tasted more pleasant wine a long time; he hath therfore sent this to you, and desireth you to day to drinke it out with those, that you loue best. Oftentimes also he sent halfe geese, and halfe loaues, and such like, willing the messenger to say, the taste of these pleased Cyrus, and there∣fore he would haue you also to taste them. If at any time there were small store of fodder, it was easie to him to furnish himselfe, by reason of the multitude and diligence of his seruants. Being then so furnished, he vsed to end part vnto his friends, and willed them to giue that fodder to the beasts, vpon which they rid, lest they might suffer hunger, af∣ter they had trauelled in carrying his friends. If he iournied any whither in the sight of many, he would call his friends to him, and finde talke with them of purpose, that it might appeare, who they were, that he ho∣noured. Out of which I may truely coniecture, that no man was be∣loued of more either Grecians, or Barbarians, than hee. Let this al∣so be a testimony hereof, that no man sought to flye from Cyrus
(who was but a seruant) vnto the King (that was Master of all) except only Ores (who also found the man, whom he thought his sure friend, more friend to Cyrus than to himselfe) but many after the enmitie brake out betwixt the two Brothers, yea, some whom the King loued best, left him,The loue that all men bore to Cyrus. and came to Cyrus, beleeuing the rewad of Vertue was greater with Cyrus, than with the King. That he was both good himselfe, and could giue true iudgement, who were faithfull, louing, and constant, it is a great argument, that chanced at the end of his life; For when he died, all his friends, and such as were partakers of his Ta∣ble, died fighting ouer his body, sauing onely Ariaeus, he was Commander of the Horse on the left Wing, and, when he percei∣ued, that Cyrus was fallen, fled with the whole Troopes vnder his com∣mand. There the head and right hand of Cyrus were cut off. But the King and his folke following the chace chanced vpon the Campe of Cyrus. The Troopes of Ariaeus made stand no where, but fled out of the Campe to the place, where they last before quartered. The way thither was accounted foure Parasangs in distance:15 Miles. The Greian Cape taken by the King. But the King and his Armie spoiled both other things, and tooke Cyrus his Phocean Concu∣bine, called the Wise, and Beautifull. For the Milesian, younger in yeeres than the other, being in hand to the Kings people, escaped away naked to the Grecians, that stood armed by the Baggage; who hauing put them∣selues in order for fight, flew many of the Spoilers, though some of them also were slaine. Notwithstanding they fled not, but saued hir, and saued all whatsoeuer both good & men, that were within their custodie. Here the King and the Grecians were 30 Furlongs asunder;Three Mile & three quarters. thse last, giuing chace to those enemies that stood against them, as if they had been Con∣querors of the whole Armie enemie; the other, rifling the Campe of the Grecians, as if their whole Armie had gained the victorie. But when the Grecians vnderstood, that the King and his Armie were amongst their Baggage, and the King heard by Tissaphernes, that the Grecians had ouer∣come those, that were opposite against them, and that they proceeded forward giuing chace, he gathered together his dispersed Troopes, and put them in order of battell. And Clearchus calling to him Proxenus (for he was the next vnto him) consulted, whether it were better to send away some few, or whether with their whole Forces they should go to succor the Campe. In the meane time, the King appeared againe, aduancing forward (as it seemed) vpon the reare of the Grecians: the Grecians whee∣ling about their battell, prepared themselues to march on, and to receiue the Kings charge that way. But the King aduanced not, but as before he passed by without the left Wing, so he returned backe againe the same way, taking with him those, that fled to the Grecians during the time of sight, as also, Tissaphernes, and his Troopes: for Tissaphernes fled not in the first encounter,Tissaphernes chargeth the Grecians. but gaue vpon the Grecian Targetiers by the Riuer side, yet killed he no man in giuing on, for the Grecians opening their battell spee∣dily, left a passage for Tissaphernes, striking and darting at him, and his, as they passed thorow. Episthenes the Amphipolitan, was Captaine of the
Targetiers, esteemed a man of good direction; therefore Tissaphernes de∣parted, as hauing the worst; and making toward the Grecian Campe, met the King there, and both ioining againe their Forces, aduanced forward. After they were now come as far as the left Wing of the Grecians, the Gre∣cians feared the enemie would charge their Wing, and so wrapping in their battell on both sides, cut it in peeces.Remedy a∣gainst encom∣passing. They therefore thought fit to draw out that Wing in length, and to apply and set their backes against the Riuer. Whilest they were in this consultation, the King changing the forme he was in, ordered his Phalange against them as at first, aduancing as though he meant to charge. And the Grecians seeing the enemie at hand, and ordered for fight, began the Paean againe, and moued forward with much more alacritie, than in the first fight. The Barbarians receiued them not, but fled with greater speed than before. They followed the chace vn∣to a certaine Village, where they made Alt. For aboue the Village, was a hill, vpon the which the Kings Forces were rallied, and stood with their faces toward vs, being no Foot, but Horse alone, and so many as couered the hill. A man could not see what was to be done; some said, they dis∣cerned the Kings Standard, a golden eagle with her wings displaied as on a little Target fixed to the end of a long woodden staffe. When the Gre∣cians aduanced thither also, the Horse forsooke the Hill, not in Troopes, but dispersedly, some scattering here, some there, in the end, all vanished away. Clearchus therefore ascended not the hill himselfe, but making Alt with the Armie at the foot of the hill, sent Lucius the Syracusian and ano∣ther, willing them to get vp the hill, and to discouer, and make report to him of that they saw. Lucius galloped vp the hill, and after he had taken view, returned and told him, that the enemie fled vpon the Spur. Whilest these things were in doing, the Sunne was almost set. Here the Grecians made a stand, and rested themselues, laying downe their Armes;. and withall, they wondred they saw not Cyrus, nor any man that came from him; for they knew not, that he was dead, but imagined, that either he followed the chace, or else hasted forward to take in some place of im∣portance, & they consulted, whether it were better to remaine still in the place where they were, & to cause their baggage to be brought to them,The Grecians return to their Campe. or to returne vnto the Campe. At last, they resolued to depart, and about supper time they came to the campe, and so the day ended. When they came there, they found the most of their other goods rifled, and especial∣ly the meat and drinke, and the wainesladen with flower & wine, which Cyrus had prepared to releeue the Grecians,Cyrus his pro∣uision for the Grecians. in case the Armie should at a∣ny time be driuen to penurie, and need. They were, as was said, 400 waines, which the Kings Armie spoiled, so that the most part of the Gre∣cians were supperlesse, as also they wanted their dinner that day: for the King came in sight before the Army could rest themselues, and take their dinner. Thus therefore they passed that night. Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. IN the booke next before-going, is declared how Cyrus at such time, as he warred against his brother Artaxerxes, leuied his forces out of Greece, and what happened in the iourney, and how the battell was fought, and after what manner Cyrus ended his life, and how the Greekes thinking themselues masters of the field, and Cyrus to be aliue, returned to their campe, and tooke themselues to rest. As soone as it was day, the chiefe Comman∣ders gathering together, maruelled that Cyrus neither sent vnto them, nor came himselfe to giue direction, what was to be done. Therefore they thought good to trusse vp their baggage, that was left, and to put them∣selues in armes, and march forward, and ioyne their forces with Cyrus. Whilest they were busie herein, by sun-rising came Procles,For Demaratus see Herodot. lib. 6.175. & Pau∣sanis in Laconi∣cis. l. 3.171.30. Ariaeus his mes∣sage to the Grecians. sometimes gouernour of Teuthrania, a man of the posteritie of Demaratus the Lace∣demonian, and Glus the sonne of Tamon. They brought word of the death of Cyrus, and that Ariaeus, with the other Barbarians, being put to flight in the battell, were retired to the campe, from whence they dis∣lodged the day before: and said further, that Ariaeus would stay for them that whole day, if they thought good to come vnto him, and the next day set forward toward Ionia,A countrey of Asia the lesse. from whence they first began their iour∣ney. The chiefe Commanders, and the rest of the Greekes hearing this newes, were much perplexed. Clearchus hereupon said:
Would God Cy∣rus had liued. But seeing he is dead, carry word to Ariaeus, that we haue vanquished the King, and that no man, as your selues are eye-witnesses, fighteth or lifteth vp his hand against vs; and had you not come, we were euen at this instant marching against the King. But say to Ariaeus, if hee please to come & ioyne with vs, we will install him in the Kings throne.Clearchus his answer. For they, that are conquerors, haue also power to dispose of the gouern∣ment of the Kingdome. Hauing spoken thus much, he sent away the messengers, and with them Cherisophus the Laedemonian, and Menon the Thessalian: For Menon himselfe, being a friend and guest to Ariaeus, desired to goe. So these men departed, leauing Clearchus behinde with the army. The army in the meanetime victualled it selfe, in the best man∣ner it could,Firing to dresse their meat. with the carriage-beasts, cutting the throats of Oxen and Asses. And going a little further to the ground, where the battell was fought, they gathered vp arrowes, which were many in number (which also they compelled the run-awayes from the King to pull out of the ground) & wicker targets, & woodden Aegyptian targets for fire-wood. There remained also in the campe a multitude of targets and emptie waines, with which they sod their meat, and so fed that day. By this time was the market-place replenished with people, when messengers came from the King, and from Tissaphernes. The other were Barbarians; amongst them was one Phalinus a Greeke, who followed Tissaphernes, and liued in good account with him. For he professed skill of embattelling an army, and of the vse of armes. These comming neere, and calling for the Grecian Coronels, said, that the King hauing gained the victory, and slaine Cyrus,The kings mes∣sage to the Grcians. commanded the Grecians to deliuer vp their armes, and to repaire to the Kings gate, and submit themselues to his mercy. This was the effect of the message. The Grecians tooke the message in euill part. Notwithstanding Clearchus answered, that it was not the manner for conquerours to deliuer vp their armes. But you the Coronels, said he, giue answer to these men, as you shall thinke best, and most fitting our affaires: I will streightwaies returne to you. For he had at that present a sacrifice in hand, and one of the Serieants came for him, to the end he might looke vpon the intrailes of the beast.Answer of the Grecians. Then Cleanor the Ar∣cadian, the eldest Coronell spake, and said, he had rather die, than deliuer vp his armes; and the next after him Proxenus the Theban replied: I won∣der, quoth he, whether the King require our armes as a conquerour, or by way of friendship, and as a gift. If he would haue them as a con∣querour, why doth he rather aske them, than take them by force; If by way of perswasion, let him tell vs, what we, that are Souldiers, shall haue left, after we haue gratified him herein. Hereunto Phalinus answered: The King thinkes himselfe master of the field,Reply of Phalinus. because he hath slaine Cy∣rus; and who is he, that now contendeth with him about the kingdome? He thinkes also, that you are his, for that he hath you in the middest of his territory inclosed with vnpassable riuers, and is able to bring such a multitude against you, as you shall not be able to put to the sword, though they were by him deliuered into your hands. Then said Xeno∣phon the Athenian: Phalinus, you see we haue nothing left vs, besides our armes and valour. As long as we keepe our armes, wee shall haue vse of our valour; deliuering them vp, wee imagine, wee shall not long be owners of our bodies or liues. Thinke not then, Pha∣linus,Xenophon. that wee are so vnaduised, as to yeeld vp our onely riches,
by the helpe whereof we purpose to make triall▪ if we can possesse your riches also. Phalinus hearing this▪ fll into a great laughter, and said: Young man you looke like a Philosopher, and speake not vnplea∣singly. Know notwithstanding, wise man, as you are, that your va∣lour will not ouermatch the Kings power. The report is, that some other spake to crrie fauour: namely, that as they had been faith∣full to Cyrus, so would they doe the King good seruice, if he plea∣sed to be their friend: For whether he were disposed to employ them otherwise, or else in the warres against Aegypt, they would vndertake to bring it vnder his subiection. By this time came Clearchus, & asked, whe∣ther they had yet giuen answer to the messengers, or no, Phalinus told him that the Coronels answered one one, another another thing. But I pray, said he, let vs heare your answer. For my part, quoth Clearchus,Clearchus his answer. I am glad to see you, Phalinus, and so I thinke are the rest of vs here present. For you are a Graecian, and we being so many in number, as you behold, and in this estate, would willingly be aduised by you, what were best to be done in that, which is propounded vnto vs. Therefore we de∣sire you, for Gods cause, to declare vnto vs, what course in your opinion will be safest and most honourable for vs: which also being reported in time to come may bring you reputation: namely, that Phalinus being sent a messenger from the King vnto the Graecians, with commandement to deliuer vp their armes, gaue such and such aduice. For you know, that the counsell, which you giue vs, cannot, but be related in Greece. Thus much insinuated Clearchus, being desirous, that Phalinus the Kings mes∣senger should aduise the Graecians not to deliuer vp their armes, that ther∣by they might gather heart, and receiue the greater encouragement. But Phalinus withdrawing himselfe a little, and streight-waies returning, spake thus contrary to Clearchus his expectation: If amongst 10000 hopes you had but one,The aduice of Phalinus. to saue your selues by bearing armes against the King, I would counsell you not to deliuer vp your armes. But seeing there is no hope to escape danger against his will, I counsell you to seeke your safety by whatsoeuer meanes, you can. Hereunto Clearchus replied: Well then this is your opinion: But from vs returne this answer to the King; that, if we may be thought worthy to be his friends, we shall be better friends hauing armes, than deliuering them vp to any man else; if no remedy be but warre, we shall better make warre with armes, than without, after we haue rendred them vp. We will, quoth Phalinus, deli∣uer your answer; But we haue futher in charge from the King to say vn∣to you: That as long, as you stay where you are, you may expect truce; warre, if you march forward, or depart. Say hereunto, I pray, whether you will stay, and haue truce, or else I shall carry tidings of warre vnto the King? Clearchus answered: Carry tidings with you, that we are of the same opinion that the King is of. What opinion is that, quoth Phalinus? To haue truce, said Clearchus, if we stay; warre, if we depart, or march forward. But he signified not, what he meant to doe.The doubtfull answer of Cle∣archus. So Phalinus and those in his company departed. Prcles and Cherisophus were by this time
returned from Ariaens, but Menon remained still with him. They brought answer from him, whereby he signified, that there were many Persians in all respects better, than he, who would neuer endure, that he should be King. But if you resolue, said they, to depart with him, he willeth you to come this night; if not, he meaneth to march away early in the morning. Clearchus said; we must doe as you aduise, if we goe vnto him. If not, we are to resolue vpon that, which shall be thought most conue∣nient for vs. But neither signified he to these men, what he purposed to doe. After this, about sunne set, he called the Coronels and Captaines together, and spake to them to this effect: Euen now when I asked counsell of the gods by sacrifice, whether we should goe against the King or no, the intrayles assented not; and not without case: For, as I now vnderstand, the Riuer Tigris, a Riuer nauigable, lieth in the mid∣way betwixt vs and the King; which Riuer we cannot passe without shipping. Shipping we haue none, and being destitute of victuall we may not remaine here. But the sacrifice was faire, and allowed of our going to the friends of Cyrus. This therefore must be our order. We must for the present away euery man to his lodging, and there sup with such as he hath. When the horne giueth signe to rest, let euery man make ready to depart. At the second signe lay your baggage vpon the carriage-beasts; at the third follow your leaders; and in our march the cariage-beasts are to be placed next the riuer, the armed without them. The Coronels and Captaines hearing this, departed, and did so. And thence∣forward Clearchus commanded, and they obeyed him, not because he was chiefe by election, but because they saw, he onely was able to com∣mand, the rest without experience. The length of the iourney frō Ephesu in Ionia to the place of the battell were 93 encampings,2000. Miles and aboue. 535 Parasangs, 16030 furlongs. From the place, where the battell was fought, to Baby∣lon,382 Miles and a quarter. were by estimation 3060 furlongs. Here Metocythes the Thracian, when it was darke, fled to the King with 40 Horsemen, which were vn∣der his command, and with 300 Thracian foot. The rest Clearchus led according to the appointment made betweene them, and the whole ar∣my at the first encamping came vp to Ariaeus and to his army about midnight,. and laying downe their armes in order, the Coronels and Cap∣taines of the Grecians resorted to Ariaeus; and both the Grecians and Ariaeus and the chiefe men about him tooke an oath to be friends, and confederates, & not to betray one another. The Barbarians swore also to be faithfull Guides to the Grecians in their returne homeward. This oath was taken killing a Boare, a Bull, a Woolfe, and a Ram; and the Grecians dipped the point of a sword, the Barbarians of a speare in the bloud of these beasts, being powred out into the hollownesse of a Target. After they had taken mutuall assurance, Clearchus said to Ariaeus; Ariaeus, seeing it so falleth out, that your iourney, and ours is all one, tell me, I pray, your opinion,Ariaeus his counsell for the way of their return. whether we are to returne the same way we came, or else can you direct vs any better way. He answered: If we returne the same way we came, we shall for want of prouision all perish with hunger. For in 7
encampings, aduācing hither, we found nothing in the country to relieue vs, and that little that was left, was consumed in our passage. We are ther∣fore resolued to returne by a way of more circuit, but able enough to fur∣nish out all manner of prouision for vs. And for our first encampings we had need to gaine in them as much ground, as we can, that the Kings army may be cast a great distance behinde vs. For if we get before him but two or three dayes iourney, he can by no possibilitie be able to ouer∣take vs: with a small army he will not dare to follow vs; with a great he can make no speed, besides that it is like to be destitute of Victuall. This is mine opinion, quoth he. Which suggestion of his serued for no other purpose but for a speedy shifting and running away. But fortune after∣ward was a better guide for vs. As soone as it was day, all set forward, hauing the sunne on the right hand, imagining that by sun-set they should reach to Villages of the Babylonian Territorie. Neither were they deceiued in their imagination. About euening they thought they saw the enemies Horse; and both the Grecians, which were out of order, ranne to their places, and Ariaeus (for he rode on a Waggon, because of his wound receiued in the battell) alighted and put on his cu∣race, as did the rest likewise, that were in his Company. But while they were arming, the scouts brought tydings, that they were no Horse, but onely carriage-beasts at pasture, and streightwaies euery man easily coniectured, that the Kings Campe was some where not farre of. How∣beit Clearchus led not against the enemy, both because our Souldiers courages began to fall, and also because they had beene fasting that whole day, and now it grew something late. Yet turned not out of the way, left hee might seeme to flie, but holding on right forth, by sunne-set he reached to the villages with the Vant-guard, and there quartered. The tymber of the houses of some of the villages was bro∣ken downe, and carried away by the Souldiers of the Kings armie. Therefore they, that came first, lodged themselues reasonably well; the last being benighted, euery one tooke vp his lodging, as fell out; and calling one vpon another made a great noise; so that the Kings army heard it. Whereby came to passe, that the enemy next at hand fled out of their tents. This appeared the next day For neither was there car∣riage-beast, nor campe, nor smoake at hand to be seene. The King also (as it should seeme) was terrified with the accesse of our armie, which he de∣clared by the next dayes worke. Yet in the processe of the night a feare seised vpon the Grecians themselues, and the tumult and hurlibur∣ley was such, as is wont, when men are possessed with feare.A Panicall fear amongst the Graecians. Clear∣chus in this distresse called Tolmides the Elean (whom hee had with him, the best Cryer of those times) and after silence enioyned willed him to make proclamation, that the Coronells signified, whosoeuer in generall could bring forth the author of this tumult, should haue a talent of siluer for his reward. By the proclamation the Souldiers perceiued, that their feare was vaine, and their commanders in safetie. As soone as it was day, Clearchus commanded the Grecians to
fall into the same order, they held, when the battell was fought. And where I before wrote, that the King was put into a feare by our accesse, it hereby appeared to be so, because the day before he sent an Imperious commandement to deliuer vp our armes,The King ma∣keth an ouer∣ture of Truce. and now this day he imploied messengers about a truce. They after they came to our out-guards asked for the Coronels. The out-guards aduertised Clearchus hereof, who was then viewing the order of our embatteling, and he willed them to say to the messengers, that they should stay, where they were, till his further leasure. After he had so ordered the Armie, that the whole Phalange ap∣peared in a faire thicknesse, well compacted together, and no vnarmed man in sight, he called for the messengers; and both himselfe taking with him some of the best armed and gallantest Souldiers of the Troopes, and willing the other Coronels to do the like, he aduanced to meet them. Meeting together, he demanded the cause of their comming. They said, they came about a uce, and had full power to deliuer the Kings plea∣sure vnto them, and to returne their answer to the King. Clearchus an∣swered: Tell the King now from me, that there is no other way, but first to fight. For we haue no dinner, neither dares any man speake a word to the Grecians about Truce without offering them meat to eat. The mes∣sengers hearing this, posted away, and returned presently. Whereby also appeared that the king was at hand, or at least some other man, that had authoritie about this negotiation. They said, the King allowed the mo∣tion, and, if the Truce were concluded, would send guides to conduct them to sufficient prouision. Clearchus asked whether the Truce should stretch to all in generall, or to those only, which were to goe betweene. They answered, to all, till your propositions be related to the king. After these things spoken, Clearchus fell to counsell with the Coronels. It see∣med good to all to embrace a Truce forthwith, and quietly to goe to the place, where the prouision was, and there to take it. I am of your minde, quoth Clearchus; but I would not signifie so much to the messengers, but linger a little to put them in feare of our refusall of Truce; and I thinke our Souldiers are in the like feare.The Grecians accept the Truce. When he iudged it time, he told the messengers, he accepted the Truce, and willed them to leade imme∣diatly to the place, where prouision might be found: which they did. Clearchus, albeit he purposed to accept Truce, yet marched on with his Armie in order of battell himselfe following in the Reare. He chanced vpon Ditches and draines full of water, which were not passable without Bridges. Yet framed they a passage with Palme trees, of which some were alreadie fallen to the ground, othersome they felled themselues. A man might hereby perceiue the sufficiencie of Clearchus his command,The diligence and sufficiency of Clearchus in his command. who carying in the left hand a Pike, in the right a Trunchion, in case any man appointed to worke seemed to slacke, chusing a fit man in his place, he chastised and put him off, and withall thrusting into the dirt himselfe, set his hand to the worke. So that it seemed a shame to all, that had the worke in hand, not to make haste, and be earnest in it. The worke was by him laid vpon the Souldiers of 30 yeeres of age. But the elder
sort vndertooke it also, when they saw Clearchus so busie about it. And he hasted the more, suspecting, that the Ditches were not at all times so full of water (for it was no time of the yeere to water the Plaine) but that the King had let the water in, to the end that the difficulties of the iourney might seeme to the Grecians greater and more in shew, than they were in deed. Marching on, they came to the villages, in which the guides assigned their prouision. There was much Wheat,Palme nuts. and Wine of Palme to be found, and Vineger boiled out of Palme nuts. Those Nuts of Palme, such as are not to be seene in Greece, were reserued for the Ser∣uants; but the Masters had other chosen out from the rest, of wonder∣full beautie and greatnesse: The colour of them nothing differeth from Amber, and being dried some of them were vsually set vpon the Table for dainties. The Wine is pleasant, but raising paine in the head. This was the place,. where the Souldiers first fed vpon the Marrow of the Nuts of Palme, and many wondred at the kinde and propertie of pleasantnesse of them. This also bred extraordinarie paine in the head. The Palme, when the head is taken out, waxeth wholly dry. Here they rested three daies; and hither Tissaphernes and the Kings Wiues Brother, and three other Persians with many attendants, came from the great King. When the Coronels of the Grecians met them,A dissembling speech of Tissa∣phernes. Tissaphernes by an Interpreter began thus: I (ô Grecians) haue my habitation neere Greece, and seeing the dangers & misaduentures, which you are fallen into, to be without issue, I besought the King▪ that he would be pleased to giue me some meanes, whereby, if possibly I could, I might deliuer you into Greece in safetie. For I imagine the doing hereof would be acceptable to you, and to all Greece beside. In this minde I made suit to the King, alleaging he had good cause to be gracious in my suit, for that I first brought newes, that Cyrus raised an Armie against him, and withall brought him aid, and alone of all, that were ordered in battell against the Grecias, fled not, but brake thorow them, and ioined with him in their Campe whither the King came, after he had slaine Cyrus; and with those, that are now in my company (who are most faithfull to the King) followed the chace vpon the Barbarians, that serued Cyrus. Whereupon he promised mee to aduise. But he commanded me to goe to you, and demand the rea∣son, why you tooke vp armes against him. I would counsell you there∣fore to make a milde answer, that I may more easily compasse the good, which shall lie in my power to doe for you. After this the Grecians with∣drew themselues to consult and giue answer: and Clearchus in the name of the rest said: Wee neither assembled our selues to make warre,The answer of the Grecians. nor did we take this iourney in hand against the King. Cyrus found many pretences, as you very well know, to ingage vs and bring vs hither. When we saw him in distresse, we were ashamed, before gods and men, to betray him, hauing in former times addicted our selues to his seruice. Now Cyrus is dead, we neither oppose against the Kings gouernment, nor is there cause for vs to infest his Countries, or to seeke his death, but we would without offence of any man returne to our countrey. If wrong
be offered vs, we will by the helpe of God defend our selues, as well as we can. If on the other side any man shew vs fauour, we will not, to our power, be behinde in kindnesse. Thus much Clearchus; which Tissa∣phernes hearing,The conclu∣sion of truce, with the con∣ditions an∣nexed. said: I will report these things to the King, and to you againe, what the Kings pleasure is. Let the truce continue, till I come. We will exhibite you a market. The next day he came not, so that the Grecians were in a perplexitie, and knew not, what to thinke. The third day he came, and said, he had obtained power of the King to preserue the Grecians, albeit many gainesaid, and vrged, that it stood not with the Kings honour to suffer those, that had made warre against him, to de∣part quietly. He added at last, you may now take assurance of vs, if you will, to make the countrey your friend, and that without fraud we shall lead you into Greece, exhibiting all the way a market of things necessa∣rie for you, and that where you haue it not, you may lawfully take pro∣uision of the countrey, as you finde it. You on the contrary side must sweare that you will passe thorow the countrey peaceably, taking onely meat and drinke where you haue no market; where you haue, buying and paying for such things, as you stand in need of. These points were concluded, and Tissaphernes, and the Kings wiues brother gaue their oathes and right hands,The assurāce of truce. to the Coronels and Captaines of the Grecians, and tooke the like of them. Afterward Tissaphernes said, I must for the present depart to the King. When I haue my dispatch, I will come with my baggage readie both to guide you into Greece, & also to return to my gouernment. The Grecians and Ariaeus encamping neere together, wai∣ted for Tissaphernes more than twentie daies. In the meane space Ariaeus his brother, and many other of his friends came to him, and to the Per∣sians with him, some encouraging them, other some bringing the Kings right hand,Ariaeus practi∣sed to returne to the Kings obeysance. and assurance, that he would forget, that they had serued Cy∣rus in his warre, and all things else, that were past: after which it might easily be perceiued, that Ariaeus and his armie made small account of the Grecians, in comparison of that, they did before; so that this also was not greatly pleasing to the most part of the Grecians, who came to Clear∣chus,Suspition of the Grecians. and the other Coronels, saying: Why stay we here? know we not, that the King would giue any thing to haue vs destroied, to the end that other Grecians may hereafter be put in feare of bearing armes against him? And now he keepeth vs here, because his armie is dispersed, which being againe assembled, he will in all likelihood set vpon vs. It may be also, hee is intrenching or raising a wall somewhere to blocke vp our way. For he would not willingly haue vs returne into Greece, and re∣port, that being so few in number, we haue vanquished his forces, euen before his owne gates, and now depart homeward in scorne and derision of him.Clearchus confident in the truce. Clearchus answered them, that so discoursed; The things, you speake, are likewise in my minde. But I conceiue withall, that if we now depart, we shall seeme to depart as men, that seeke warre, and besides doe against the truce. Furthermore, no man will furnish vs with a mar∣ket, nor shall we haue corne in any place. Then who shall be our guide?
Further I know not, whether we haue any other Riuer to passe. For it is impossible to passe ouer Euphrates, the enemie opposing against vs. And if we chance to fight, we haue no Horse, whereas the enemies Horse are many▪ and much esteemed: so that albeit we get the victorie, whom shall we kill? If we be beaten, not a man of vs can escape. If therefore the King should harbour so much as a thought to make vs away, I cannot see why in so many aduantages he should sweare, giue his right hand, & adiure the gods, and so eleuate his bands of assurance both with the Gre∣cians and with the Barbarians. He spoke many other things to this pur∣pose. About this time came Tissaphernes with his owne Forces, making semblance to march homeward, and with him Orontes and his Forces, which last led with him the Kings daughter, whom he had lately maried. From thence the Grecians proceeded in their iourney, Tissaphernes being their guide, and exhibiting a market of all things needfull. Ariaeus also hauing with him the Armie of Barbarians that serued Cyrus,Ariaeus ioyneth with the Kings Forces. marched with Tissaphernes and Orontes, and lodged in the same Campe. The Gre∣cians being iealous hereof, marched alone by themselues with their guides. They euer encamped a Parasang or little lesse one from another,Three miles three quarters. and they obserued and watched one another, as enemies are wont, which straightway bred a suspicion betweene them. Sometime going for wood to the same place, and gathering fodder and such like, they fel to blowes, which also set them at further ods. After three dayes encamping they came to the Wall of Media.The Wall of Media. The height 33. yards. The bredth 6. yards and more. The length 75 miles or thereabout .30 Miles, 15 mile a day. Draine of Tygris. It was built of Bricke mortered with asphalt, being in thicknesse 20, in height 100 Foot. The length was said to be 20 Parasangs. It was not far distant from Babylon. From hence they marched eight Parasangs in two encampings, and passed ouer two great Draines, one vpon a Bridge, the other vpon Ships ioyned together. These Draines came out of the Riuer Tygris, and from them were sewers deriued to water the Countrey, being at the first greater, then lesse, lastly little Draines, such as they vse in Greece when Panick seed is sowen. From thence they came to the Riuer Tygris, neere to which stood a great Citie well peopled, named Sitaca, being distant from the Riuer 15 Furlongs. The Grecians encamped by the Citie neere a faire and large Parke,Sitaca A mile & three quarters. where∣in grew plentie of all manner of Trees. The Barbarians passed ouer the Riuer, and were out of sight. After supper Proxenus and Xenophon chan∣ced to walke before the place of Armes, when there came one and asked the out-watch, where he might finde Proxenus or Clearchus. He sought not for Menon, albeit he came from Ariaeus Menons guest. When Proxenus told him, he was the man, whom he sought; Ariaeus and Artaosus,Ariaeus his mes∣sage. quoth he, that were faithfull to Cyrus, while he liued, and are now your friends, haue sent me vnto you, and aduise you by me to keepe good watch to night, lest the Barbarians assault your Campe.A practice of the Barbarians. There is a great army in the Parke. Besides they counsell you to put a good guard vpon the Riuer Tygris, because Tissaphernes is determined this night to breake the Bridge, if he can, to the end to hinder your passage, and to inclose you betwixt the Bridge and the Draine. After they heard this, they led the man to
Clearchus,A true conie∣cture about the message. and imparted the message vnto him. Clearchus was much trou∣bled and in extreme feare with the newes. But a young man then pre∣sent, after he had well ruminated the matter, said: It hangs not together, that Tissaphernes should goe about to charge vs, and to breake downe the Bridge. For it is euident, that charging vs he must either ouercome, or be beaten. If he ouercome, what need the Bridge be broken? For ad∣mit, there were many Bridges, yet should we haue no where to saue our selues by flight. If he be beaten, whither shall his Armie fly, the Bridge being broken, and most of the Armie being beyond the Riuer, how shall they succour one another, but by the Bridge? After Clearchus heard this, he asked, what quantitie of Land lay betwixt Tygris and the Draine? He answered, that the territorie was large & had many villages & great cities in it. Here-hence they perceiued, that the Barbarians sent the man vnder∣hand, fearing that the Grecians would not passe the Bridge, but remaine in the Island hauing for their Fortification the Riuer Tygris on the one side, and the Draine on the other, taking their prouision out of the Countrey, where it was both plenteous and verie good, in which also many Labourers inhabited. Besides the place would be fit for retreat, in case they were disposed to make inroades vpon the Kings dominions. After this they gaue themselues to rest, and yet were not vnmindfull to send a Guard to the Bridge. But neither did any man assault the Greekish Campe, nor yet, as the Guard brought newes, did any of the enemie come to the Bridge. Assoone as it was day they passed the Bridge in as good order, as was possible; which Bridge was laid ouer the Riuer vpon 37 Ships.A Bridge vpon Ships. Some of the Grecians in Tissaphernes Campe gaue in∣telligence, they should be charged in their passage ouer. But nothing of this was true. During the time of their passage Glus and others were seene to obserue, whether they passed ouer or no: and when they saw them passing, they spurred away with all speed. From Tygris they mar∣ched 20 Parasangs in foure encampings as farre as the Riuer Fyscus.75 miles, euery day 18 & more. Fyscus, a Riuer. Opis. It hath a Bridge vpon it, and neere it a great Citie inhabited, the name wher∣of is Opis, hard by which the bastard-Brother of Cyrus and of Artax∣erxes, leading a great Armie from Sufae and Ecbatana to the Kings aid, met the Grecians, and causing his owne Armie to stay, beheld the Grecians in their march. Clearchus led his men two in a ranke, and oftentimes made Alt in his going on.. The ar∣my must take vp fiue mile in length, being 10000, and be∣twixt euerie ranke six foot. 112 miles, eue∣rie day 18, and more. As long as the Front of the Armie stood still, so long the whole Armie stood also still; so that both the Grecians held it a great Armie, and the Persian was astonied at the sight thereof. From hence they marched in six encampings 30 Parasangs in the Wildernesse thorow Media euen vp to the Villages, which appertained to Parisatis Mother of Cyrus and of the King. These did Tissaphernes permit the Grecians in derision of Cyrus to ransacke, and take out of them, what they list (excepting only the bodies of men.) Much Corne, and many Sheep, and other goods were found there. From thence in fiue encampings in the Wildernesse they marched 20 Parasangs leauing the Riuer Tygris on the left hand.75 miles, euery day 15. In the first encamping beyond the Riuer was a great
and rich Citie called Caenae,Caenae, a Citie. Zabatus a riuer 400. footbroad. out of which the Barbarians transported Bread, Cheese, and Wine vpon flote-Boates made of Skins. After this they came to the Riuer Zabatus, which was foure Plethers broad, and there remained three daies,Distrusts be∣twixt the Gre∣cians and the Barbarians. and still they increased their iea∣lousies, but no manifest deceit or lying in wait of one against the other was perceiued. Therefore Clearchus thought it best to conferre with Tis∣saphernes, to allay, if he could, these distrusts, before they broke out into open hostilitie. And hee sent a speciall messenger vnto him to signifie, that hee desired to speake with him, who readily answered, hee might come, when he pleased. At their meeting Clearchus begun, and said: I know well, Tissaphernes,Conference betwixt Tis∣saphernes and Clearchus. that we haue sworne and giuen mutuall right hands not to infest, or annoy, one another. I see notwithstanding, you keepe narrow watch vpon vs, as vpon enemies, and we perceiuing it doe as much vpon you; But when, according to my poore vnderstanding,The speech of Clearchus. I looked into the matter, and could not finde, you sought to wrong vs, and knew for certain, that to wrong you was furthest from our thoughts, I desired conference, that thereby we might, as much as was possible, take each from other this diffidence. For I am not ignorant, that men fearing one another, whether out of sinister delations, or of iealousie, to the end rather to preuent, than to suffer, bring remedilesse euills vpon them, that neither seeke, nor thinke the harme, which they imagine is in∣tended. Conceiuing therefore, that such errours are easily laid asleepe by familiar conference, I come to you to signifie that you distrust vs without cause. For first and chiefly, our oathes forbid vs to be enemies, which whosoeuer neglecteth, I cannot account him happy, in what estate soeuer he flourish; considering that neither speed, nor darknesse, nor strength of place, can assure a man from the vengeance of the gods. All things are subiect to them, and nothing exempted from their power. This is mine opinion concerning the gods, and the oath, to which wee haue mutually bound our selues. Now for you, I hold you, for the pre∣sent, of all mortall things our greatest good. For with your helpe all wayes are open, all riuers passable, nor can we be destitute of prouision; without you all waies full of darknesse (for we know no foot of them) all riuers shut vp, all gathering of people together fearefull; and solitari∣nesse most of all, because it is full of difficulties. And say, we were so mad to seeke your life, what should wee thereby else doe, than by kil∣ling a man of such desert toward vs, bring the forces of the great King vpon vs, who would be your reuenger? Besides, for mine owne particu∣lar, I will in a word declare of how many, and how great hopes I should depriue my selfe, if I should goe about to wrong you. J sought the friendship of Cyrus in imagination, that he, of all that liued, had the grea∣test abilitie to doe good, to whom he pleased. Now I see the authoritie and countrey of Cyrus in your hands, ouer and aboue that, which you had before, and the Kings forces, which Cyrus vsed for warre deuol∣ued to you alone. This being so, who would be so senselesse not to de∣sire your friendship? I will adde the things, which put me in hope, you
will not refuse, nay rather endeuour to be our friend. I know the My∣sians are troublesome vnto you, whom with the forces, I haue, I make no question to humble at your feet. The like I know of the Pisidians. Be∣sides I heare, that many other nations are alwaies malicious and repi∣ning at your felicitie. As for the Aegyptians, whom you principally beare vpon the spleene, I see not with what aides you can better reuenge your selues vpon, then with the army vnder my command. Your neighbours, if you please to befriend any, you are of abilitie to doe it munificently of your selfe; in case they molest you, you may chastise them, as a ma∣ster, and that much the rather by our seruice, who will follow you not for pay alone, but more for thankfulnesse, in regard you haue preserued and brought vs home safe to our country. When I consider these things, it seemeth so wonderfull vnto me, that we should be distrusted, that I would faine heare his name, who is so powerfull in speech, as to per∣swade, that we lie in await for you. These were the words of Clearchus to Tissaphernes.Tissaphernes answer. Tissaphernes answered in this manner: It is a ioy to me, Clearchus, to heare your wise and discreet discourse. For seeing you vn∣derstand these things to be so, you cannot wish me ill, without being an enemy to your selfe. But that you may learne, you cannot iustly leaue and forsake the King, heare on the contrary side. If we had any intent, to ruine you, whether doe you thinke, we wanted meanes, hauing mul∣titudes of horse, and foot, and weapons to cut you in peeces, without any danger of ours? Imagine you, we wanted fit ground to fall vpon you? Passe you not with much labour many plaines, that are friend to vs? See you not, what mountaines you are to march ouer, which if we take before hand, your passage is shut vp? How many riuers are there, where we may make choice, and, as it were, cull out that number of you, with which we list to fight? There are also amongst them some, that you can∣not passe without our friendship and assistance. But say we had the worst in all these, yet hath fire the command of all fruit, that ariseth of the earth. Which if we burne, we shall oppose hunger against you in the field, with which you shall neuer be able to fight, were you neuer so va∣liant. How then hauing so many aduantages, and all without our owne perill, should we amongst the rest chuse such a kinde alone, as is impious against the gods, abominable before men, and such a one as befitteth them, that know not what to doe, and are circumuented with distresse, and ouerwhelmed with necessitie, and which is beseeming loose per∣sons, who care not so they may effect their designes, though it be with periury against the gods, and with vnfaithfulnesse toward men. Wee, Clearchus, are not so void of sense, or destitute of reason. When we might haue cut you off, why did we not? It proceeded out of my loue, that I might shew my selfe an entire friend to the Grecians, & by my well deseruing descend into my gouernment strong with those forces, with which Cyrus ascended, being assured of them, by reason of the entertain∣ment hee gaue them. You haue declared how many waies, you may stead me. But I know my selfe the chiefe and principall. It is not law∣full
for any, but the King, to weare his Tiara vpright vpon his head; But with your presence and assistance, perhaps another man may carry it vp∣right in his heart. Hauing spoken these words,Tiara was an attire that the Persians wore on their heads. he seemed to Clearchus to deliuer that, he thought. Considering then, quoth Clearchus, we haue such cause to be friends, are not they worthy to taste extreme punish∣ment, who by sinister suggestions endeuour to make vs enemies? If you, quoth Tissaphernes, and the Coronels and Captaines please openly to come vnto me, I will tell you, who they are, that informed me. By these words, and courteous entertainment, Tissaphernes preuailed to make him stay, and beare him company at supper that night. The next day Clear∣chus, after his returne to the quarter,Clearhus ouer∣reached by the cunning of Tis∣saphernes. declared publikely how well hee thought of Tissaphernes, and related, what he heard from him; and said, That it was fit, that they, whom Tissaphernes desired, should accompany him to Tissaphernes his campe: and likewise that they, who as traitors, and bearing no good affection to the Grecians, had slandered them with false suggestions, might haue their due punishment. He suspected Menon to be the tale-bearer, knowing he often resorted to Tissaphernes with Ariaeus, and that he opposed against him in his command, & sought to supplant him, to the end that gaining the leading of the army, he might shew himselfe a friend to Tissaphernes. For Clearchus would haue the whole army to cast their eyes vpon him alone; and sought to remoue all, that seemed discontent therewith. Some of the Souldiers spake against the sending of all the Coronels and Captaines, and said, No trust was to be giuen to Tissaphernes. But Clearchus laboured eagerly to the contrary, till hee brought to passe, that fiue Coronels and twentie Captaines were allowed to goe; two hundred Souldiers followed them,Fiue Coronels. vnder colour to buy victuall. When they were at Tissaphernes his doore, the Coronels were called in, to wit, Proxenus the Baotian, Menon the Thessalian, Agias the Arcadian, Clearchus the Lacedemonean, and Socrates the Achaean. The Captaines staid at the doore. Not long after, at one and the same signe hands were laid vpon those within,The Coronels taken prisoners by Tissaphernes. and those without were cut in pee∣ces, and some of the Barbarian hors-men scouring the Plaine, killed all the Grecians, they lighted vpon, free, and bond. The Grecians perceiuing these things out of the campe, maruelled at their manner of riding vp and downe, and doubted of the sequell, till Nearchus the Arcadian came running with his entrailes in his hands after a wound receiued, and told what had happened in the campe of Tissaphernes. Hereupon all the Grecians affrighted snatched vp their armes, imagining the Persians would presently inuade their campe. But there came no more, than Ariaeus, Artoasus, and Mithridates, men of chiefest credit with Cyrus. The interpreter of the Grecians said, He saw and knew Tissaphernes his brother amongst them. About three hundred Persians followed them in Cura∣ces. These, when they came neere, willed, if there were amongst the Grecians any Coronell or Captaine, he should come forth, and heare the Kings pleasure. Thereupon after assurance giuen, Cleanor the Orcho∣menian, and Sophenetus the Stymphalian, both Grecian Coronels, issued
out; and with them Xenophon the Athenian, to learne what was become of Proxenus. Cherisophus chanced then to be absent, being gone to a cer∣taine village to make prouision. Comming within hearing, Ariaeus said: Clearchus (ô Grecians) hauing falsified his Oath,False pre∣tences of a foule action. and broken the truce, hath his iudgement, and is dead. Proxenus, and Menon, are in great ho∣nour, because they reuealed his treason: and the King demandeth of you your Armes. He saith they are his, because they belonged to Cyrus his Seruant. The Grecians answered hereto by the mouth of Cleanor; O Ariaeus, the most execrable of men, and all ye, that were Cyrus his friends: Blush you not before the gods and men, that hauing sworne to vs to haue the same friends and enemies, you now seeke to betray vs with Tissaphernes a most godlesse and faithlesse man? and after you haue made away them, to whom you gaue your Oath, you goe about to de∣stroy the rest, and come with our enemies against vs. Ariaeus answered, Clearchus sought first to entrap Tissaphernes, and Orontes, and all of vs, that were with them.The falsenesse discouered. Hereunto Xenophon replied: If Clearchus haue against his Oath broken the truce, he hath his iudgement. For it is iust to punish periured men. But Proxenus and Menon hauing behaued them∣selues towards you as friends, being our Coronels, let them be restored vnto vs. For being friends to both, no doubt they will aduise you, and vs for the best. The Barbarians hauing long conferred together, departed without giuing answer hereto: but the Coronels so caught in the snare were deliuered ouer to the King, and ended their daies, being made shor∣ter by the head.A description of Clearchus his naturall dispo∣sition. Of whom Clearchus by consent of all, that had ac∣quaintance with him, was held a man of martiall disposition, and ex∣tremely desirous of warre. For as long, as warre continued betwixt the Lacedemonians and Athenians, he remained at home. Peace being made, he perswaded his Citie, that the Thracians wronged the Grecians. And vsing all meanes he could, obtained of the Ephori a Commission to be General & to goe against them, and shipped himselfe with purpose to in∣uade those Thracians,The Island in Thrace borde∣ring vpon Hel∣lespont. A towne lying vpon the same Sea. The narrow Sea beside Con∣stantinople. Lacedemon. which inhabit aboue Cherronesus and Perinthus. But after his departure the Ephori changed their mindes, and sent to call him home from Istmos; which message of theirs he obeied not, but continu∣ed his nauigation to Hellespont. Whereupon the Magistrats of Sparta condemned him, as a disobedient Subiect, vnto death. Being now a bani∣shed man, he iournied to Cyrus, whose friendship, after what sort he gain∣ed, I haue written else-where. Cyrus gaue him 10000 Daricks, which he spent not in idlenesse, but waging an Army therwith, made warre against the Thracians. And first he vanquished them in a battell, afterward har∣ried & spoiled their Countrey, and continued that warre, till Cyrus stood in need of his Armie. Then he departed with intent to follow the seruice of Cyrus. These therefore were the actions of a man that delighted in warre; who, when he might haue liued in peace without shame or dam∣mage, chose to be in warre; might haue rested in idlenesse, gaue himselfe to labour, and warre; might without danger haue enioied riches plen∣teously, bestowed them rather vpon warre. Such was his disposition to
warre, and he spent as willingly vpon warre, as if it had been vpon loue, or other pleasures. It appeared also, that he was of a warlike inclination, because he loued danger, and led his people as well by night, as by day against the enemie; and demeaned himselfe wisely and circumspectly,His diligence. when he was in perill, as all, that followed him, confesse. Besides, he was said to be an excellent Commander according to his manner. For,His skill. if any man else, Clearchus knew how to make necessarie prouision for his army, and to supply the wants thereof in time of need: and how to breed an opinion in his Souldiers, that Clearchus his command was not to be diso∣beied. This he effected by his sourenesse, and austeritie,Seueritie. being sterne in visage, and harsh in voice, and alwaies vsing extremitie in punishment, and somtimes with choler, so that the time was, when he repented of his hastinesse. He chastised his Souldiers of set purpose; thinking an Armie vnpunished to be of no vse. This saying of his is also reported; That a Souldier ought rather to feare his Commander, than his Enemie, in case he were to stand well to his guard, or to abstaine from spoiling his friends, or to goe without refusall against an enemie. Therefore the Souldiers heard him willingly, and required no other Commander in time of dan∣ger. They said, that sternenesse then seemed cheerfulnesse in his counte∣nance, and sourenesse a kind of strengthening against the enemie. So that now it was no more austeritie, but, as it were, a preseruatiue. When they were out of danger, & might follow other Commanders, many forsooke him. For he had nothing in him to win fauour; but was alwaies soure and cruell, so that Souldiers affected him as children doe their Schoole∣master. Neither had he any man, that followed him for loue; but whoso∣euer were put vnder his command either by the citie, or else by necessitie and want, they were wonderfully obedient to him; & after they had ouer∣come the enemy vnder his leading, his meanes were great to make his Souldiers seruiceable. For they marched against the enemy with great assurance, and the feare of punishment kept them in good order. Such a Commander was Clearchus. It was said, he had no great desire to be vn∣der an other mans command. Hee was about fiftie yeares old,Ambition. when he died. Proxenus the Boeotian sought euen from his childhood to become a man fit for great employments,Proxenus. and out of this desire he gaue enter∣tainment, and addicted himselfe a scholar to Gorgias the Leontine;His industry being young. and after he had conuersed with him a time, thinking himselfe now both able for gouernment, and also that being in estimation with the greatest, he should not faile of meanes to preferre himselfe, he went and ioyned with Cyrus in the same actions, imagining thereby to purchase a worthy name, and great power, and plentie of riches;His ends. and albeit his desires were such, notwithstanding it appeared euidently in his carriage,Modestie. that he wi∣shed not by ill meanes, but fairely and iustly, and no otherwise to come vnto them. He was able to manage matters of importance, and worth, but yet could neither raise reuerence,Remisnesse. nor feare in his Souldiers mindes toward him. Nay rather he reuerenced them, than they him; and shewed cleerely, he more feared their hatred, than not to haue them obedient to
him. He thought it sufficient to be, and seeme to be, to praise a well-de∣seruing souldier, not to commend him, that did amisse. The honester therefore, and better sort of Souldiers were well affected toward him; the other sought to circumuent him, as being easie to be ouertaken. He was about thirtie yeares old, when he lost his life. Menon the Thessalian made open shew,Menon. that he greedily coueted riches, and coueted rule there∣by to waxe worthier,His desire of wealth. and coueted honour to bring in gaine. He insinua∣ted himselfe into great mens fauour, to shelter his faults from punish∣ment. To forsweare, to lie, and deceiue, he held the next way to effect his desires:Impudencie. simplicitie and truth he accounted all one with dulnesse, and want of vnderstanding. It could not be perceiued, that he loued any man. To whom he made most shew of loue, him he sought to beguile. In his common discourse,Deceitfulnesse. he vsed not to deride an enemie; but scoffed al∣waies at them, with whom he conuersed. He neuer lay in wait for ene∣mies goods, because he iudged it hard to finger that, which was kept, but imagined, that he alone knew, that because the goods of friends were vnder no streight custodie, they might easily be surprised. Periured and wicked folke he feared, as men armed, and abused at his pleasure vp∣right, and well-minded men, scarce esteeming them for men. Menon no otherwise reioyced, in deceit, forging of lies, and deriding his friends, than another man would in godlinesse, truth, and iust dealing. He estee∣med him, that was no circumuenter, to be vnnurtured, and to want edu∣cation.Calumniation. In seeking great mens fauour, he thought there was no other way, than by accusing them, that stood in their speciall grace. He ende∣uoured to make his Souldiers obedient with societie of villany. He loo∣ked for respect, because in many things he had abilitie, and will to doe wrong. If any man forsooke him, he said he dealt kindly with him, for that he had not made him away. But the things concerning him, that are not so openly knowne, may seeme to be fained. Euery one knowes these, that follow. Being in the flower of his age he obtained of Aristippus the leading of the strangers in the army; and in the flower of his age he grew into the familiaritie with Ariaeus,Impudicitie. who was a Barbarian, and delighted in young boyes; and hauing yet no haire on his face, he fell in loue with Tharipus, that had a beard. When the other Coronels were made away, because they bore armes with Cyrus against the King, he scaped being in that same fault.Death. Yet after the death of the other Coronels was he puni∣shed and put to death by the King; not losing his head, as Clearchus and the other, (which seemeth to be the fairest and most honourable kinde of death) but he is reported to haue come to his end, as a wicked man, be∣ing put to continuall torments by the space of a whole yeare. Agias the Arcadian, and Socrates the Achaean, lost their heads at the same time, whom no man euer scorned as slacke and sluggish Souldiers, nor bla∣med as disloyall and vntrue friends. They were each of them about for∣tie yeares old. Finis Libri Secundi.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. WHat was done by the Grecians in their Ascent with Cyrus, vntill the battell fought, and what befell them after the death of Cyrus returning homeward in the companie of Tissaphernes according to the truce, is declared in the for∣mer discourse. After the Coronels were ap∣prehended, and as many of the Captaines and Souldiers, as followed them, slaine, the Grecians were forced into great streights and perpiexitie, especially when they considered, that they were at the Kings Gates, and round about them both Nations and Cities enemie, and from thenceforward no man would store them with prouision, and that their distance from Greece was more than 10000 Furlongs,About 1250 mile. that they had no guide of the way, that their returne was shut vp betwixt vnpassable Ri∣uers, and were betraied also by those Barbarians, that ascended vp with Cyrus, and left alone, hauing not so much as a Hors-man on their side, so that it was manifest, that albeit they gained the victorie, they should not be able to slay an enemie; in case they were beaten, no one of them should remaine aliue; weighing these things in their mindes,The distressed estate of the Grecians. and thereby being full of griefe, few of them tasted Food that euening, few kindled Fires, and not many tooke Armes the whole night; and euerie man laid himselfe downe to rest, there, where he chanced to stand, being vnable to sleepe for sorrow, and for desire of his Countrey, Parents, Wife, and Children, which he made account neuer to see againe. In this distresse they reposed themselues.Xenophon. There was in the Armie one Xenophon an Athenian, who followed the Campe, being neither Coronell, nor Cap∣taine, nor Souldier, but was sent for from home by Proxenus,Inuited to serue Cyrus. that was his
guest of old. He promised Xenophon, if he would take the paines to come, to make Cyrus his friend, who as he esteemed would be more to be prised of him, than his owne Countrey. Xenophon reading the Letter conferred with Socrates the Athenian about the iourney;Sorates his counsell to Xnophn. and Socrates misdoub∣ting, that to be Cyrus his friend, would turne him to displeasure with the Citie (because Cyrus seemed to ioine willingly in warre with the Lacede∣monians against Athens) aduised Xenophon to repaire to Delphos and aske counsell of the god concerning his iourney.To the Oracle of Apollo. Xenophon therefore going thither, demanded of Apollo, to which of the gods he should offer praiers and sacrifice, that thereby he might prosper, and doe well, and be preser∣ued from all dangers in the iourney which he conceiued in his minde. Apollo answered, he should sacrifice to the gods, to whom he ought to sa∣crifice.Mispropound∣ing his que∣stion. After his returne to Athens, he communicated the Oracle with Socrates: who, when he heard it, blamed Xenophon, because he demanded not, whether it should be better for him to trauell or to stay at home, but (as though he had alreadie resolued to goe) demanded, how he might best accomplish his iourney. But seeing you haue propounded your question in this forme, quoth Socrates, you are to doe that, which the god commandeth you. Xenophon therefore sacrificing, as the god had commanded, tooke shipping and sailed away, and found Proxenus and Cyrus at Sardes (who were now readie to take their iourney vpward) and was forthwith presented to Cyrus. Proxenus earnestly requested him to stay; and Cyrus did the like; but added, that as soone as the Armie was dissolued, he would immediately giue him leaue to depart. The iourney was noised abroad to be against the Pisidians. Xenophon there∣fore followed the warre being thus deceiued not by Proxenus (for nei∣ther he, nor any other of the Grecians, except Clearchus, knew of Cyrus his intent against the King) but when the Armie came into Cilicia, there was no man so simple, but he easily perceiued, that they were led against the King. And albeit they feared the length of the way, and were vnwilling to proceed further, yet the most part in regard of mutuall respect one to another, and of the loue they bore to Cyrus, continued on the iourney: amongst whom Xenophon was one.Xenophons griefe. And being now in this distresse, he was sorrowfull with the rest, but yet taking a little nap he fell into a dreame. It seemed to him, that in a thunder the bolt fell vpon his Fathers House,His dreame. and that the whole House was therewith set on fire. Being af∣frighted, he started out of his sleepe, iudging that the dreame was good in part, because being in trauell and danger he saw a great light proceed from Iupiter: In part he feared it, because it seemed to come from Iupiter being a King, and to shine in a circle; imagining he should not be able to get out of the Kings Countrey, but be inuironed on all sides with some one distresse or other. Now what the signification and effect of such a dreame was, might be easily perceiued by the sequell. For it fell out, that, straight after that he awaked,His discourse in minde. he entred into this cogitation with himselfe: Why lie I here? The night passeth away; and it is likely that the enemie will fall vpon vs, as soone as the day appeareth. If we come into the
Kings hands, what shall hinder, that hauing first seene with our eyes all manner of scornes, and next felt all kinde of torments, we die not after∣wards a shamefull and villanous death? Now no man maketh prepa∣ration for defence, nor so much as once thinketh vpon it: but we lie still, as though we were in securitie. What Commander therefore doe I ex∣pect out of any other Citie to direct vs? Or what age doe I looke to attaine vnto? If to day I betray my selfe to the enemie, I shall neuer be an houre elder. Hereupon he presently arose,His resolution. His speech to the Captaines of his owne Regiment. and first called together the Captaines of Proxenus his Regiment. Then he spake thus: Worthy Captaines, the consideration of our estate will neither uffer me to sleep (which I thinke is you case as well as mine) nor yet to lie still and giue my selfe to rest. Our enemies, vntill they imagined they had brought their designes to a wished end, forbore to offer open hostilitie. Of vs on the other side there is no man that casteth in his minde, how we may best come to fight, and defend our selues against the enemie. For if we yeeld and subiect our selues vnto the Kings power, what hazard shall we not incur? He cut off the head and hand of Cyrus, and fastened them to the Gallowes, who was his Brother both by the same Father and Mo∣ther, and alreadie dead. We then, who haue here no kinred, who tooke vp armes against him, who sought to establish his seruant in his Throne, and to make away the King himselfe, if it lay in our power, we I say, what may not we expect to suffer? Will he not vse all meanes possible to lay vpon vs extremitie of punishment, thereby to strike a feare into other, that they presume not to warre against him? Surely we are to trie our vttermost endeuours, that we fall not into his hands. For my part I ceased not, euen while the truce endured, to be∣moane our case, and to esteeme the King, and such as followed him hap∣pie, seeing with mine eyes, how large and goodly a countrey they enioyed, what plentie of prouision, what a number of attendants, how many carriage-beasts, what quantitie of gold, and of apparell they pos∣sessed; and on the contrary side, comparing the condition of our army, that enioyed nothing of value, but what was bought with mony (which I knew but few had) & was debarred of other means of prouision, by rea∣son of their oath and agreement. Casting, I say, these things in my minde, I feared then the truce more, than I doe now the warre. And conside∣ring the enemy himselfe hath broken the truce, I thinke, that both their insolencie and our suspitions are come to an end. For now all the ad∣uantages, whereof I spake, are laid in the middest, as it were, betwixt vs both, as rewards for those, that shall behaue themselues most valiant∣ly. The gods are Iudges, and giue successe to battells, who in all reason will be on our side. Our enemies in forswearing themselues, haue bro∣ken their faith vnto them: We contrariwise, hauing many faire aduan∣tages offered vs, constantly forbore to take them for our oathes sake made to the gods. So that, me thinkes, we ought to goe forth to bat∣tell with much more courage and assurance, than they. Further, our bo∣dies are more able to endure cold, and heat, and labours, than theirs,
and, by the fauour of the gods, our mindes more noble. Besides, they will be more subiect to wounds, and death, than we, in case the gods (as they haue done heretofore) vouchsafe to giue vs victory. But it may be, that other men harbour these cogitations, as well as we. For the loue of God let vs not expect, that other come and encourage vs to be braue and resolute, but let vs begin to excite other to valiance. Shew your selues gallantest amongst Captaines and most fit to command amongst Coronels. My selfe, if you shall be pleased to leade me, will follow; if you appoint me a leader, will not excuse my selfe by want of yeares, but rather conceiue that youth may strengthen and preserue me from many mischances.Apollonides a harsh counsel∣ler. Thus much he spake. All the Captaines hearing it, willed him to proceed, except one Apollonides, a man that clattered rudely in the Boeotian idiome. He said, they spake idlely, that sought to perswade, that there was any other hope of safetie, than in the Kings fauour, if it might be gained, and withall began to reckon vp the distresses, we were in. Xenophon in the meane time interrupting him replied: O strange man, that you are, who neither seeing know, nor hearing remember. You were present, when the King, proud of his victory, after the death of Cyrus sent vnto vs, commanding to deliuer vp our armes. When we refused, and marched forward in armes, and encamped close by him, what did he not to procure truce, sending Ambassadours, and deman∣ding cessation of hostilitie, and offering to furnish the army with proui∣sion. But after the Coronels and Captaines (as you now would haue vs) in confidence of the truce, went without armes to conferre with them; are they not now scourged, wounded, and scorned, and yet cannot die poore men, albeit, I perswade my selfe, they infinitely desire it? All this you see, and say notwithstanding, they speake idlely, that aduise to stand vpon our defence; and would haue vs to sue to the King anew to obtaine his fauour. For my part (Companions) I hold this fellow not on∣ly vnfit henceforward to be admitted into our societie, but also worthy to lose his Captaines place, and no otherwise to be employed, than as a carriage-beast; because in bearing this base minde, he both shames his countrey, and besides disparages the whole Grecian nation. Hereupon Agasias the Stymphalian replied: This fellow hath nothing in him at all, that sauours of Boeotia, or Greece. For I haue seene both his eares, which are boared thorow, like as are the Lydian slaues. And indeed they were so.Assembly of the army. . Therefore they droue him away. The rest going about the campe, where they found a Coronell aliue, called forth the Coronell, where he wanted, the Lieutenant Coronell, and where a Captaine was aliue, the Captaine. When all were assembled, they set downe before the place of Armes, and the Coronels and Captaines, that came together, were about a hundred in number.Ierome the Eleans speech. This fell out almost at midnight. Then Ierome the Elaean, the eldest Captaine of Procenus his Regiment, began to speake after this sort: We (worthy Coronels and Captaines) seeing the desperate estate of our present affaires, haue thought good, both to meet here our selues, and to call you together, to the end to aduise vpon some
good course of proceeding. Xenophon, quoth he, I pray relate to the as∣sembly the things, which you deliuered vnto vs.Xenophons speech. Xenophon hereupon be∣gan thus: We all know, that the King, and Tissaphernes haue laied hands vpon as many of vs, as they could, and that they lie in wait for the rest to cut them off. Therefore mine opinion is, that we leaue nothing vndone to auoid the snares of the Barbarians, nay rather to become their ma∣sters, if it be possible. And you cannot be ignorant likewise, that being so many, as you are here assembled, your demeanour will bring forth effects of great consequence. The eies of the whole army are cast vpon you. If they perceiue, that you faint in courage, you must expect the like from them. But if you appeare resolute against the enemy, and stirre vp the rest, and hearten them, you know well, they will follow, and en∣deuour to imitate your example. And doubtlesse it is reason, you should carrie brauer mindes than they; you are their Coronels,Taxiarchs are the Captaines of the light armed. Lochagi the Captaines of the armedfoot. you their Taxiarchs, and Captaines. In time of peace, you enioy more wealth and honour, than they; and now in time of warre it behoueth you to sur∣mount the multitude, and as need shall require, to goe before them in counsell, and paines taking. For the present, first I thinke, you will much aduantage the Army, in making choice of new Coronels and Captaines in stead of them, that are lost. For without rulers nothing that is good or profitable can be administred (in a word) any where, but especially in matters of warre. For as good order seemeth to preserue, so disorder hath ouerthrowne and vndone many. After you haue appointed so ma∣ny Commanders, as are needfull, if then you call the Souldiers toge∣ther, and confirme their mindes, you shall not doe it out of season, as J thinke. Now you perceiue as well, as I, how heauily, and drowsily they goe to Armes, how drowsily to the Watch; In which case, as long, as they remaine, I know not, what vse may be had of them night or day. But if a man stirre vp their mindes, and represent, not only what they are to suffer, but to doe also, it will greatly enhance their courage. For you know, that it is neither multitude, nor strength, that giueth victory in warre, but which side soeuer goe (by the fauour of the gods) into the field with brauer and gallanter resolutions, they for the most part preuaile. It commeth besides into my minde, that whatsoeuer he be, that seeketh by all meanes he can to saue his life in warres, he commonly dies a vile and dishonourable death. But they which know, that death is common and vnavoidable to all men, and that striue to die with ho∣nour, I see them much sooner reach to old yeares, and spend the remain∣der of their life in happinesse. Which we should doe well to consider, especially in this hard time, and both our selues be couragious, and also excite other to valour, and forwardnesse. So much he spake, and held his peace. After him Cherisophus spake and said:Cherisophus. Heretofore I knew you (Xenophon) thus farre, that you were reported to be an Athenian. Now I commend both your speech and actions, and could wish, we had many such, as you are. It would be a common good to all. It remaineth, that we slug not at this instant, but depart euery man to his quarter; and you
that want, choose your Commanders. When they are chosen, come and bring them into the middest of the campe, and present them vnto vs. Then will we assemble the rest of the Souldiers. And let Tolmides the Crier come likewise vnto vs. Hauing thus said, he arose, because he would not hinder the dispatch of things needfull to be doe. Then were the Coronels chosen:New Coronels. Timasion the Dardanian, in stead of Clearchus; in stead of Socrates, Xanticles the Achaean; Cleanor the Orchomenian, for Agias the Arcadian; Philesius the Achaean for Menon; and for Proxe∣nus,. Xenophon the Athenian. The day almost appeared before the election ended, and the Commanders came to the middest of the Campe,. and it was decreed, that a watch should be set before the Campe, and the Souldiers of the whole Armie called to the assem∣bly. When the rest of the Souldiers were come together, Cherisophus the Lacedemonian arose,Cherisophus his exhortation. and spake to this effect: My companions in Armes, we are fallen into great straights, being bereaued of such Coro∣nels,. Captaines, and Souldiers. Besides, the Armie of Ariaeus, which be∣fore were our confederates, hath betraied vs. Notwithstanding it be∣commeth valiant Souldiers to lift vp their heads, and to make way tho∣row these euils, and not to faint, but endeuour, as much as in vs lieth, to saue our selues by obtaining a noble victorie against the enemie, and if we faile thereof, to die an honorable death, and not to come aliue into their hands, lest we suffer such things, as, I pray God to turne vpon their owne heads. Next Cleanor the Orchomenian stood vp and said: You see (fellow Souldiers) the periurie and impietie of the King,Cleanor. you see like∣wise the falsenesse of Tissaphernes, who pretending he was a Neighbour to Greece, and that he would at any price be a meanes of our safetie, and hereupon himselfe giuing his Oath, himselfe his right hand, deceiuing vs himselfe, hath apprehended the Coronels, and not fearing Iupiter the protector of guests,. inuiting Clearchus to his Table, and thereby circum∣uenting the rest, hath put them all to death. As for Ariaeus, whom we would haue made King of Persia, to whom we gaue, and from whom we tooke assurance by oath, not to betray one another, he also neither fearing gods, nor men, nor reuerencing Cyrus, that is dead (being most of all other, whilest he liued, respected and honoured by him) reuolting to his greatest enemies, goeth about to worke vs mischiefe, who were Cyrus his friends. But the gods will reuenge our wrongs vpon such men. It behoueth vs, hauing these things before our eyes, to be no more ouerreached by them, but with our Swords in hand, and fighting valiant∣ly, to expect, whatsoeuer it shall please the gods to lay vpon vs. Then Xenophon stood vp, hauing apparelled himselfe as brauely, as he could, for the warre; conceiuing, if God gaue victorie, that the fairest furniture was most befitting victorie; if he should be slaine, it would not be amisse to end his daies in his best ornaments. He spake in this manner: Cleanor hath discouered vnto you the periurie and faithlesnesse of the Barbarians,Xenophon. which, I thinke, is also well knowne to your selues. If therefore we pur∣pose againe to treate with them by way of friendship, we must needs
doe it with great distrust, setting before our sight the miserable case of the Coronels, who vpon trust permitted themselues to their hands. But if we seeke reuenge by Armes for that, wherein they haue wronged vs, and hereafter prosecute all manner of warre against them, we haue, by the fauour of the gods, many and faire hopes of safetie. Whilest he was speaking these words, one of the Souldiers neesed:The superstiti∣on of the Gen∣tiles. which when the rest heard, all of them at one instant worshipped god: and Xenophon said; Seeing whilest we were speaking of safetie, a good foretoken of Iupiter the sauiour presented it selfe vnto vs, I hold it fit to make a vow to that god, that when we come into a Country, that is friend, we offer a health-offring vnto him; and sacrifice withall to other gods according to our abilitie. You, that are of the same minde, hold vp your hands. They held vp their hands euerie man, and made a vow, and sung the Paean. After all things appertaining to the worship of the gods were duly en∣ded, he thus began againe: I was euen now saying,A warlike song which they v∣sed when they went to charge the enemie. that many and faire hopes of safetie presented themselues vnto vs. For first we haue perfor∣med our Oaths, which we made before the gods, whereas our enemies, as periured persons, haue broken both the Truce and their Oathes. Which being so, there is no question but we shall finde the gods (who are of power sufficient both to humble the mightie, and on the suddaine to preserue the lowly, in what danger soeuer they be) aduersaries to our enemies, and assistants to vs. Next I will put you in remembrance of the noble acts of your ancestors, that you may know,Braue exploits of ancestors, a great incite∣ment to valour. Darius the Fa∣ther of Xerxes sent his Gene∣rall Datis with a great Armie which was o∣uerthrowne by the Athenians at Marathon. The Persians were slaine to the number of 6300. Herodotus lib. 6. But Iustin reporteth that there were slaine 200000. Herodotus lib. 7. it behooueth you by their example to be valiant, and that valiant men are by the gods preser∣ued from all dangers and distresse. For when the Persians and their alies came with a mightie Armie to destroy Athens, the Athenians being not afraid to meet them, fought with them and had the victorie. And ma∣king a vow to Diana, to offer vnto her so many Goats, as they killed enemies, when there were not so many to be found, they made a Decree to offer yeerely 500, which number they offer also at this present. Afterward when Xerxes, raising an Host without number, came against Greece, euen then also our Ancestors ouercame their Ancestors both by Sea and Land, whereof the Trophees erected are tokens. But the greatest testimonie is the freedome of the Cities, in which you were borne and bred. For you worship no man as Lord, but the gods alone, of such Ancestors are you descended. I speake not this, as though you degene∣rated from them. For many daies are not past, since ordering your selues in battell in the Field against these their posteritie, by the fauour of the gods you ouercame them being many more in number than your selues. And at that time you shewed your selues valiant to the end to make Cy∣rus King. Now when the fight is for your owne safetie,A man is nee∣rest to himself. you ought to be much more forward and resolute. Besides you ought to be more con∣fident now than at that time; for then hauing had no triall of them, albeit you saw their number infinite, yet you durst charge them with braue Grecian mindes; now finding by experience that, though their number were neuer so great, yet they had not the heart to abide you;Experience of an enemie.
why should you be afraid of them? And let it not trouble you, that Cyrus Souldiers haue forsaken you, that before tooke your part. They are greater cowards, than the other, you haue alreadie bea∣ten. It is true, they haue left you, and are fled to them, and for my part, whosoeuer beginneth first to run, I had rather see them with the enemie, than on your side. But if any of you faint in minde, because the enemy hath many, you haue no horse, let him consi∣der,Horse in the field. that ten thousand horse are no more than ten thousand men. For no man was euer slaine in battell by the biting or stroke of a horse. Men they are that performe, whatsoeuer is done in fight. As for vs, our mounting is much more firme, and stedfast, than theirs. They hang vpon their horse, and are not only in feare of vs, but to be shaken off also from their horses, and fall to the ground. We contrariwise haue sure footing, and shall be able with more assurednesse, to strike any man, that approcheth vs, & to direct our aime with more certainty. One aduantage the hors-men haue, that they may more securely run away, than we. But in case you feare not to fight, but mislike only that Tissa∣phernes will not be your guide,Scarcitie of prouision. nor the King prepare a market for you, you shall doe well to consider, whether is better, to haue Tissaphernes your guide, who euery where seekes to entrap you, or to take guides of your owne choice, who if at any time they proue false, offend against their owne soules and bodies. As for prouision, whether is it better to buy a poore pittance for much mony (which now, being out of pay, will grow scant amongst vs) out of a market, which they shall furnish, or hauing the victory, to vse what measure euery man thinketh fittest for his owne turne. But if you know these things to be so, and feare notwith∣standing the passage of riuers,Passage of Ri∣uers. thinking it will be deceitful and dangerous for you, consider if the Barbarians haue not herein also notably plaid the fooles; For all riuers, albeit farre from their springs they haue hard passage, yet at their heads a man may go ouer without wetting his knees. But say we can neither passe the riuers nor finde guides, yet are we not to despaire. For we know the Mysians, whom we cannot esteeme bet∣ter, than our selues, inhabite many and great, and rich cities in the Kings territorie,Seating in a strange coun∣trey. and that in despight of the King. As much we know of the Pisidians. As for the Lycaonians, our selues haue seene, that hauing won many strong places in the Plaine, they doe at this day enioy the fruits of the Kings country. And I would thinke it fitting, that we also should make no semblance of returning home, but so demeane our selues, as though our purpose were to inhabite here. For I know the King would giue the Mysians many guides,A goldē bridge is to be made for an enemy to runne away. See Diod. Sicul. l. 1.21. and the Lexicon, in : for the tree and fruit see Pliny, l. 13. c. 17. pag. 234. and many hostages for assurance of their departure, and would open them a way, yea, if need were, send them away in Chariots. The like I assure my selfe, he would doe to vs most willingly, if he perceiued, we prepared our selues to seat here. But I feare, in case we once learne to liue idlely, and in plentie of all things, and grow into acquaintance with the faire and tall wiues and virgins of the Medes and Persians, left after the manner of the Lotophages, we forget
the way homeward to our owne countrey.The fruit is so pleasant, that they that taste it, are loth to retrn to their owne county. Wherefore it seemeth vnto mee fit and reasonable, that we endeuour first to returne into Greece, to see our kindred and acquaintance, and to shew the Greci∣ans, that they willingly are poore, considering, they may, if they please, send the needier sort of their Citizens hither, where they may abound in all manner of riches and plentie. For whatsoeuer is good in the land it will be theirs, that win the victory. Now I will declare vnto you, how wee shall march with most securitie, and how, if need be, make our strongest fight. And first,Vnnecessarie cariage. I hold it necessarie to burne our Wagons, that our cariages be not our masters, and that we may haue full libertie to march, where it is fittest for the Armie. Then to burne our Tents, which it will be troublesome to carie them, and they profit nothing either to fight, or for prouision. Besides to leaue behind vs our vnnecessarie stuffe, and to take with vs only such as for warre, or for meat, or drinke we stand in need of, to the end that most of vs be in Armes, and as few, as may be, busie themselues with vnne∣cessarie cariage. For you know that they, which are ouercome, leaue all they haue to the spoile of others: being Conquerors, you must esteeme the enemies to be your cariers and purueiors. It remaineth to speake of that, which I take to be of most importance. For you see, that the ene∣mie durst not make open warre against vs, till they had laid hold vpon our Coronels, imagining, that so long as we had Coronels, and were obedient vnto them, we were able enough to goe thorow stich with the warre. After they had gotten our Coronels into their hands, they thought,Care of the Commnders.  of Souldiers. they might easily ouerthrow vs through default of command and of order. It behoueth therefore the Commanders, that now are, to be more carefull, than the former Commanders, and the Souldiers to be more orderly and obedient, than before. And in case any man oey not, if you decree, that whosoeuer is present with the Commander, shall haue authoritie to chatise him, the enemie will be much deceiued in his hopes. For they shall see in stead of one Clearchus ten thousand, who will giue no man leaue to play the coward. But it is high time to make an end. For it may be the enemie will presently be here. Whatsoeuer then of these things, you shall allow, let it be dispatched out of hand. If any other man, albeit but a priuate Souldier, conceiue of a better course, let him speake. For we all in common stand in need of safetie. Then said Cherisophus: If ought else be needfull besides the things, that Xenophon hath mentioned, it may be done hereafter: Those things, he hath spoken of, it seemeth fit, they should be decreed. All, that are of the same opinion, let them hold vp their hands. They all held vp teir hands. Then Xenophon standing vp againe, proceeded further, and said: Fellow Souldiers, heare now what in mine opinion you are to expect. It is cleere that we are to march thither, where we may finde prouision. I heare there are good and plentifull Villages not aboue twentie Furlongs hence. I will not therefore maruaile, as fearfull Dogs are wont, to fol∣low and bite, if they can, such, as passe by, and to run away from those
that turne again vpon them,A square hol∣low battell fit for a march when it is fea∣red, the enemy will charge round about. . Commanders of the Front, flanks & reare. if the enemy do the like pursuing our Reare. But then I hold that our march will be the safer, if we cast our selues into a Plesium, that the baggage & loose multitude may be conueied in more securitie. If now therefore it be agreed vpon, who shall leade the Plesium and order the Front, who the Flankes, who the Reare, we shall not be driuen to consult, when the enemie approcheth, but only execute that, which is concluded. If any man can aduise vs better, let vs giue eare to him; if not, let Cherisophus haue the leading, because he is a Lacedemo∣nian, two of the eldest Coronels command the Flankes, I and Timasion, as the youngest, be in the Reare. And from hence forward, after we haue made triall of this forme, we will vpon all occasions take counsell, what is best to be done. If any man can direct vs better, he hath libertie to speake. When no man spake against the motion, he said: They that allow of that, which is propounded, hold vp their hands. So it was de∣creed. Now, quoth he, you are to depart, and put the decree in execu∣tion. And whosoeuer he be amongst you, that desireth to see his kins∣men and friends, let him remember to shew himselfe a man of valour. For otherwise there is no hope thereof: and he, that desireth life, let him endeuour to ouercome. The Conquerors haue power to slay, the con∣quered are to expect nought else, but death. And if he couet riches, vi∣ctorie must be the meanes to obtaine them. They that are Masters of the Field, are Masters of their owne, and of their fortunes also, whom they subdue. Assoone, as these things were spoken, all arose and departing, set fire on the Carts, and Tents, and on the things, that might wel be spared. Some they parted with their friends, the rest they burned; and so went to break-fast. Whilest they were at break-fast, came Mithri∣dates with about thirtie Horses, and called out the Coronels to parley. He spake thus:Mithridates fai∣ned speech. I, ô Grecians, was (as you know) faithfull vnto Cyrus, as long as he liued, and now am a well-willer of yours, and therefore can∣not, but remaine in great perplexitie. If then I could see, you tooke any safe course, I would come vnto you my selfe, and bring my followers with me. Tell me then, I pray, what your purpose is, as to one, that is your friend, and wisheth you well, and resolued to proceed with you in the same iourney. The Coronels consulting together resolued vpon this answer, and Cherisophus deliuered it: Our purpose is, if we be not impeached, to returne home, and to passe thorow your Coun∣try endammaging it as little as may be: and if any man hinder vs, to open the way with our Swords. Mithridates sought to perswade, that without the Kings will and pleasure,He discouers himselfe by accident. it was impossible to de∣part in safetie. Whereby wee vnderstood, there was no great trust to be reposed in him. Besides it was obserued, that one of Tissaphernes his familiar friends was in his Traine to see, what was done. And thereupon it seemed good to the Coronels to make a Decree,Messengers from the ene∣mie. that hereafter no Messenger should be ad∣mitted from the Enemie as long, as wee were in the Coun∣trey. For with their entercourse they corrupted the Souldiers,
and corrupted one Captaine, to wit, Nicharchus an Arcadian, who in the night time fled to the enemie with about twentie men. When breakfast was ended, passing the riuer Zathe, we marched in good order,Zathe a riuer. Order of march in an open country. hauing placed the cariage, and loose multitude, in the middest of the battaile. We had not marched far, before Mithridates appeared againe, with 200 horse, and 400 archers and slingers, which were very nimble and light. He, as a friend, came close vp to the Grecians. Being neere, some of his horse and foot began vpon the sudden to shoot,Faire words turned into a storme of ho∣stilitie. other to sling, and so wound the Grecians. The reare of the Grecians were faine to endure all, yet could not annoy the enemy. For the Cretan bowe carieth not so farre, as the Persian; and the Cretan archers wearing no armes of defence, were glad to hide themselues within the body of the armed; and the darters were not able to reach the slingers of the enemy. Xeno∣pho therefore, hauing the reare,An errour of Xenophon. Aduantage of missiue wea∣pons. thought good to aduance and follow the enemy; and thereupon fell out with the armed and targetiers of the reare; but could not lay hand vpon any of them. For the Grecians had no horsemen, and their foot in so short a race could not ouertake the foot of the enemy, (which had the start so farre before) and it was not safe to giue chase farre from the body of the Phalange. Besides, the bar∣barian horsmen, as they fled, shot backward from their horse, and woun∣ded many that gaue chase. And as farre as the Grecians aduanced, so farre must they afterward retire, still maintaining the fight; so that the whole day they marched not aboue 25 furlongs, and yet by Sunne-set they came to the villages. There againe were they much discomforted, and Cherisopus and the eldest Coronels blamed Xenophon, in that he pur∣sued the enemie so farre from the Phalange, and put himselfe in danger, and yet no whit endangered the enemy. Xenophon hearing it, said, that they reprehended him not without cause, and that the action it selfe testified with them. But I was forced, quoth he, to doe, as I did. For I saw, that standing still we were sore distressed, and not able reciprocally to offend the enemy. And when we fell out, it was, as you say. For gi∣uing chase we little hurt them, and yet retired with great difficultie. The gods be thanked therefore, that I went not out with many, but with a few. So that I did no great harme, and yet haue found out that, which we stand in need of. For now we see by triall, that the enemy shoots and slingeth further, than either the Cretans, or our Darters can reach; and when wee fall out after them,Necessity mo∣ther of inuen∣tion. wee may not goe farre from the Phalange. If but a little way, let the Souldiers be neuer so nimble, he shall neuer be able to come vp to a foot-man, that is distant from him as farre, as a bowe can shoot. If therefore we will debarre them from annoying vs in our iourney, we must quickly prouide slingers and horse. I heare there are Rhodians in our Campe, of whom the most part are re∣ported to haue skill in slinging, and that their slings reach twice as farre,The Rhodian slings. as the Persian slings. For the Persians vse stones, that fill the hand, and therefore sling not farre, the Rhodians leaden bullets. If therefore we inquire, which of them haue slings, and reward them; and deliuer to
other money to make new slings,Means to pro∣cure readinesse to serue. and besides grant to them, that will serue in that kinde, some other immunities, it may be, we shall finde amongst them, that will be for our purpose. Besides I se horse in the Campe, some of mine owne, some left by Clearchus, and many, that haue beene taken from the enemy, and are now become cariage-beasts: If we make choice amongst these, and giue the owners cariage-beasts in exchange, and distribute the horse to horsemen, peraduenture they also will trouble these runners. These things were decreed, and the same night 200 slingers, and the next day 50 horsemen were furnished out,. to whom were giuen cassocks and curaces, and Lucius the sonne of Polystratus an Athenian was appointed their Captaine. The Grecians ta∣king their rest that day, and rising more early the next, marched forward. They were to passe a valley,. in which they feared the enemy would charge them, and being now gotten to the other side of it, Mithridates appeared againe, leading with him 1000 horse, and 4000 archers and slingers. For being insolent, because in the former incounter he with a few came off without harme, and yet, as he imagined, very much annoy∣ed the Grecians, he required and had so many of Tissaphernes, promising, if he obtained them, to deliuer the Grecians into his hands. The Grecians were past the valley 8 furlongs or thereabout,A vaine pro∣mise vpon an vnsure ground. A ile. when Mithridates passed likewise with his forces. The Targetiers and armed of the Grecians that were to fall out, were before hand appointed, and the horsemen had charge giuen them, not to be afraid in following the chase, because a sufficient number of foot was to second and attend them. By this time Mithridates wa come vp to the Grecians, and the Persian slings and bowes bestowed their flying weapons thicke amongst them, when a signe was giuen by trumpet, and immediatly the chosen foot sprung out together, and likewise the horse vpon the spurre. The enemy endu∣red not the charge, but speeded, all he could, into the valley. In this chase many of the Barbarian foot died,Omnia repentina terren. and about 18 horse were ta∣ken aliue in the valley. The Grecians without commandement mangled and dismembred the dead carcases, that the sight hereof might hence∣forward strike a greater feare into the enemie. After this conflict the enemie retired, and the Grecians marching on the rest of the day securely, came to the riuer Tygris, vpon which stood a great desolate city, the name whereof was Larissa. The Medians inhabited it of old time. The walls were 25 foot broad,Larissa a Citie. Bredth 8 yards one 25. part. Height 33 yards, one 100 part. Circumfe∣rence, miles seuen, & a half. 6 yards 2 foot. 200 yards. 400 yards. and a hundred foot high: and the circuit of all two Parasangs. It was builded of bricke, and the foundation of stone laid beneath the wall, was 20 foot deepe. The King of Persia (when the Per∣sians gained the Empire) besieging, and assaulting it, could not winne it by any meanes. But the Sunne hiding his head in a cloud appeared not, till the inhabitants forsooke it, and so it was taken. Neere to the Citie there is a Stone-Pyramis, the bredth whereof is 600 foot, the height 1200, into which many Barbarians conueighed themselues out of the neighbour-villages. From hence in one encamping they marched six Parasangs,22 mile and a halfe. as far as a great desolate castle hard by a Citie. This Cities
name was Mesphila; the Medians sometimes inhabited it.Mesphila a city. 16 yards, three 50 parts. 33 yards, &c. 22 miles and a halfe. The founda∣tion was of hollow carued stone, and had 50 foot in bredth, 50 foot in heighth. Vpon it was raised a stone wall 50 foot broad, and 100 foot high. The circuit of the wall was 6 Parasangs. It is said that Media the Kings wife fled hither, when the Persians wrung the Empire out of the Medians hands; and that the Persian King could not take it, either by time or force, till Iupiter sent a madnesse amongst the inhabitants, and so it was ouercome. From thence they marched 4 Parasangs in one en∣camping. Here Tissaphernes appeared with his owne horse,15 miles. Tissaphernes with horse. with the forces of Orontes (who had with him he Kings daughter) with the Bar∣barians that ascended with Cyrus, with those, that the Kings bro∣ther brought to the Kings aide, and with as many other, as the King gaue him. So that the Armie seemed huge and mighty. When he came neere, he ordered some of his troopes against the reare of the Grecians, some against the flanks: yet durst he not charge,Horse against the reare and flanks of the Plesium at once. nor had in minde to hazard battell. He commanded only his Souldiers to sling and shoot. When the hodians, that were here and there dispersed amongst the Gre∣cians, began to sling, and the Archers after the Scythian manner to shoot, and no man missed his marke (for he could not, though he would, in such a multitude) both Tissaphernes quickly retired out of danger, and his troopes likewise. The rest of the day the Grecians marched on, and the Persians followed; but yet forbore to skirmish any more. For the Rhodians slinged further, than the Persians could sling, and further than most of their archers shot. The Persian bowes are great, so that the arrowes, that were gathered vp, serued the Cretans to good purpose; For they vsed them much, and endeuoured by raising their compasse to send them a great distance.It is like they were heauier, than the ar∣rowes of the Cretans. In the villages thereabouts, both many Bow-strings were found, & much Lead, which they conuerted to the vse of slings. And so this day, after the Grecians had quartered in the villages, which they happened vpon, the Barbari∣ans departed hauing the worst in the skirmish. The next day they sate still, and made prouision of victuals; for there was plenty in the villages. The next day after, they marched forward thorow the Champeigne, and Tissaphernes followed skirmishing. Here they perceiued, that a Plaesium, or hollow battell with equall sides, was no good forme to march in,. the enemy following in the reare. For in case the wings of the Plaesium thronged together, either by reason of the straight way, or compulsion of mountaines, or of a bridge, the armed foot must needs be brought out of order, and march at small ease, being partly thronged, partly forced out of the place, they held, and in this disarray there would be no great vse of them. And when the wings were againe opened, they, that were so disordered, must needes be broken asunder, and the middest of the wings emptie, & the souldiers discomforted, especially the enemy being at their heeles. And if a Bridge were to be passed, or some such straight, euery man would haste desiring to be ouer first. So that the enemy had then a faire opportunity to giue on. The Coronels perceiuing this, fra∣med
six Companies, euery one consisting of an hundred men, and ap∣pointed Captaines ouer them,. and Penteconters, and Enomotarches. These Captaines, when the wings closed and thronged too neere in mar∣ching, staid behinde and kept without the wings for feare of disordering them.. It is to be vn∣derstood that these new Cō∣panies were led euery one in file, and be∣ing ioyned to∣gether they made sixe files. If then the breach in the Plaesium were small, they in∣serted the sixe files rank-wile to make it vp, if wider, they doubled againe the rankes of the Companies and so filled it with halfe files: if very wide, they doubled the halfe files and filled it vp with Enomoties. The remedy for light armed against forcing of the enemy. The heauie ar∣med vnfit for quicke and nible seruice. The higher ground com∣andeth the lower. Care of the wounded. When the sides of the square battell opened too wide, they filled the middest, if the space were narrow, by Companies, if a little wider by fifties, if very wide by Enomoties. So that the middest was alway shut vp and full. If a bridge or other straight were to be passed, there was no disorder, because the Captaines euery one led ouer his Company apart, and when a Phalange was needfull, sleeued vp one by another. In this manner they marched foure encampings: the fifth brought them to the sight of a Palace, and of many villages about it. The way leading to it was ouer high hills, which began from a mountaine, vnder which a village was situate. The Grecians were glad to see the hills, as was rea∣son, the most part of the enemies forces being Hors-men. But when marching out of the Champeigne they had gained the first hill, and de∣scending from thence raised their battell vp against the second, the Bar∣barians were forth with at hand, and cast weapons at them downe from the higher ground, being compelled with stripes to sling, and shoot; and they wounded many, and had the better of the Grecian light armed, and shut them vp within the battell of the armed: so that this whole day the Slingers, and Archers did little or rather no seruice, being glad to hide themselues amongst the vnarmed multitude. And when the Grecian ar∣med, being hardly laid vnto, sought to fall out, they had much adoe to climbe the hill in their armour, whereas the enemy retired with ease. Againe, when they retired to the rest of the armed, their danger was as great. Whereupon the Coronels thought good not to moue the army from the third hill. Notwithstanding they led certaine Targetiers from the right flanke of the square battell toward the mountaine. After these had gotten aboue the heads of the enemy, the enemy forbore to presse vpon such, as descended, fearing to be cut off by our Souldiers, that en∣closed them on both sides. Thus marched the Grecians, the rest of the day, some by the way vpon the hills, other some right ouer against them on the side of the mountaine, till they came to the villages: where they appointed eight Physicians, because many of the Souldiers were hurt. Here they staied three daies, both to fauour the wounded, and al∣so for that much victuall was found, meale, wine, and barley, which last was laid vp for horses in abundance. All these things were stored and laid vp for the ruler of the Prouince. The fourth day they descended into the Champeigne; where when Tissaphernes had ouertaken them with his forces,Experience the mistresse of alterations in matters of warre. he taught them by necessitie to encampe in the first village, they reached vnto, and to march no more fighting. For many were vn∣fit to fight by reason of their wounds, many by carrying the wounded, and no lesse they, that had the armes of both charged vpon their backes. After they had taken vp their lodging, the Barbarians comming to the village offered skirmish, in which the Grecians had a great deale the bet∣ter.
For it was much easier to sally, and so represse the enemy, than to march fighting with them, as they followed at their backes. When it was night, the enemy was to depart. For the Barbarians, fearing to be assailed by night,7 Miles and a halfe. The manner of the Persian en∣camping. neuer encampe lesse than sixtie furlongs from the Gre∣cians. Their manner of encamping is dangerous also in the night. Their Horse are tied, and for the most part fettered, left being loose they might happen to run away. And if any tumult arise, a Persian must saddle, and bridle, and put on his Curace, and so get vpon his Horse. All which are hard to be done in the night, especially in a tumult. When the Grecians perceiued, that the enemy purposed to depart, and had giuen open no∣tice thereof, they proclaimed in the hearing of the enemy, that the army should make readie to march. The Barbarians hereupon staid awhile; but the night beginning to draw on, they went their waies. For they hold it not expedient to march, and come to their quarter by night. Af∣ter the Grecians saw plainly, that they were departed, they also trussing vp their baggage, began to march, and iourneied sixtie furlongs;7 Mile and a halfe. The Grecians march by night. and the space between the armies was so great, that neither the next, nor the third day the enemy could come vp to vs. The fourth day the Barbarians ad∣uancing forward by night, seised vpon a high place, by which the Greci∣ans must passe of necessitie; namely, vpon a mountaine, vnder which the way lay, which led into Champeigne.The Persians by night seise vp∣on a passage. When Cherisophus saw the height of the mountaine possessed by the enemy, he called for Xenophon from the Reare, willing him to bring his Targetiers with him, and come to the Front. Xenophon brought not the Targetiers with him (for he saw Tissa∣phernes and his whole Armie appeare at their backes) but himselfe speeding came, and asked Cherisophus, why he sent for him. You may see, quoth he. The hill hanging ouer our way, is before hand taken by the enemy; and we cannot continue our march, vnlesse he be beaten from thence. But why brought you not your Targetiers with you? Because I thought it not good, quoth he, to leaue the Reare vnguarded, especially the enemy being in sight. But it is time, quoth Cherisophus, to aduise, how we shall driue these folks from the hill.Meanes to dis∣lodge the ene∣mie, that pos∣sesseth a straight. Here Xenophon marked, that the top of the mountaine was ouer the head of our Armie; and that from thence a way led to the hill, where the enemy stood, and said: Me thinks, Cherisophus, it should be best for vs with all speed to gaine the top of the mountaine; which if we once haue, they cannot keepe their ground ouer the way. I will goe, if you please to stay with the Armie; if you please to goe, I will stay here. I giue you the choice, quoth Cherisophus. And I because I am the younger, quoth Xenophon, will choose to goe. Onely he required,Iuniores ad labo∣res. that he might haue Souldiers of the Front to accompanie him; for it was too long to wait for any from the Reare. Cherisophus sent with him the Targetiers of the Front, and those, that were in the middle of the hollow square battell; he willed also the chosen 300 men, which he had about him in the Front, to follow Xenophon. Then they hasted, all they could, to get vp the Mountaine. The enemie vpon the Hill perceiuing that their intent and proceeding
was to possesse the height of the Mountaine, began in emulation forth∣with to post thither. There was a great cry in the Grecian Armie, a great cry in the Armie of Tissaphernes, each inciting and animating those of their owne side. Xenophon riding from one to another, exhorted the Soul∣diers: Now Companions you striue for Greece, now for your wiues and children, now taking a little paines, we shall cleere the rest of our iourney from fight. Soteridas the Sicyonian answered: You and I, Xenophon, stand not vpon like termes of marching. You ride, I am on foot, & by reason of the weight of this Target, haue much adoe to get vp the Hill. Xenophon hearing this, alighted from his Horse, and taking from him his Target, thrust him out of his Ranke, and marched on with all speed possible. He had on at that time a hors-mans Curasse, werwith he was heauily laden, yet proceeding, he exhorted the formost to mend their pace, and those in the Reare (who had much adoe to march) to hasten after. The other Souldiers beat and threw at, & reuiled Soteridas, till they compelled him to take his Target againe, and to march on. Xenophon mounting againe to Horse, rid as farre, as the ground would giue him leaue. When it began to be rough, and not passable for a Horse, he hasted forward on foot. By this time they had gained the top,The top of the Hill gained. and preuented the enemie, who vpon sight thereof, forsooke their ground, and fled euerie man, as he could. The Gre∣cians made good the top. Then the Armie of Tissaphernes and Ariaeus de∣parting diuerted another way, but Cherisophus descending into the Plain, quartered in a Village, that had plentie of good prouision in it. In this Plaine were many other rich Villages situate by the Riuer Tygris. When it was now night the enemie suddenly shewed himselfe in the Paine,Carelesnesse of Souldiers in seeking prey. The enemie burneth his own countrey. and cut in peeces some Grecians, that were dispersed here and there unting after prey. For many Herds of Cattell, transported ouer the Riuer, were here intercepted. Tissaphernes, and they that were with him, di all they could to fire the villages; and many of the Grecians were muc discom∣forted therewith, conceiuing they should hardly recouer victuall, if the villages were thus burnt and destroied. Cherisophus had sent out some of his people to succour their companions against the enemy, who retur∣ned, as Xenophon descended from the Mountaine. With these Xenophon meeting, rid from ranke to ranke, & said: You see, fellow Souldiers, that the enemy confesseth the Country is none of theirs. For in the truce they capitulated with vs to preserue the Kings Country from burning, now they burne it themselues, as if it were not their owne. But doe, what they list, if they haue victuall for themselues in any part, they shall soone see vs there for our portions. But Cherisophus, quoth he, me thinkes, we should doe well to giue aid, as to our owne Country, against these burners. I am not of that aduice, quoth Cherisophus, but rather I would burne for com∣pany to make them the sooner giue ouer. When they came to the campe, the rest busied themselues about prouision,Consultation about their march. the Coronels and Captaines assembled together in counsell. Here was disputing & aduising, what to doe. On the one side were high Mountaines, on the other a riuer so deep, that the water couered the ends of Pikes, wherewith the bottome was
sounded. While they were in consultation a Rhodian came vnto them, and said: I will vndertake to carie you ouer by 4000 at once,A bridge ored. if you fur∣nish me with such things, as I want, & giue me a Talent for reward. Being asked, what things he wanted; I want, said he, 2000 water-budgets, and I see here many Sheepe, Goats, Kine, and Asses, whose skins being flead,A bridge with∣out boats or Ships. and blowen, will easily giue vs meanes of transportation. I shall need also the bands, which you vse about your cariage-beasts. With these I will binde your water-budgets, and fit them one to another, and hang stones vpon them, and let them downe like ankers, & laying them vpon the wa∣ter, and fastening them on both sides, I wil throw Rise vpon them, & then earth; and that you shall not sinke, you will easily perceiue, in that euerie budget will be able to beare vp two men; and the Rise & earth wil keepe the budgets from tottering, and make them lie firme & stable. When the Coronels heard this, the inuention seemed witty, but the thing it selfe not possible to be performed, by reason there were many hors-men on the o∣ther side of the riuer, who would hinder the formost, & not suffer them to proceed in their worke. Therefore they retired the next day in the way, they came (which led to Babylon) to the vnburnt villages, setting afire the villages, where they last quartered, so that the enemie offered not to charge, but became lookers on, wondring what way the Grecians meant to take, & what their purpose was. The Coronels & captaines assembled again, & calling together the captiues, enquired of the countries round a∣bout, what they were, & of their nature & qualitie. They reported that to∣ward the South the way led to Babylon & to Media, and was the way by which they came;Two prouinces of Persia. Mountaines neere to Arme∣nia. toward the East to Susa & Ecbatana where the king was said to passe the summer & spring; ouer the riuer to Lydia and Ionia; ouer the mountaines & towards the north to the Carduchans; who, they said, inhabited the mountaines, & were a warlike people, and refused to obey the king; and that the king somtimes sent against them an army of 12 My∣riades of men,Euerie Myriade 1000, the whole number 120000 men. of whom none escaped & returned back by reason of the roughnesse of the countrie, & that since the Satrapa, or ruler, of the next Prouince, made truce with them, they had free entercourse of trade one with another. The Coronels hearing this, set apart by themselues those, that tooke vpon them seuerall knowledge of these things, not declaring what way, they meant to hold. But their resolution was to passe ouer the mountaines against the Carduchans. For the captiues said, after they were come beyond the mountaines, they should enter into Armenia, a large, and rich countrey, of which Orontes was ruler, and from thence finde the way open & readie to goe, whither a man would. This conclusion being had, they sacrificed to the gods, that they might haue no impeachment, when it was fit to set forward (for they feared the tops of the mountaines might be anticipated) and commanded, assoone as supper was past, that euerie man should haue his things in a readinesse, and giue himselfe to rest, and after follow in the iourney according to direction. Finis Libri Tertij.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. WHat happened in the Ascent of Cyrus till the battell, and what after the battell in the truce, which the King and the Grecians (that ascen∣ded with Cyrus) had concluded: and after that the King and Tissaphernes had broken the truce, what warre was made vpon the Grecians, an Armie of Persians still pursuing them, is alreadie discoursed. Now when they had proceeded thus farre, and found, that the Riuer Tygris was vnpassable by reason of his depth and great∣nesse, and that there was no other way to follow,Tygris. because the Carduchan Mountaines being abruptly steepe, lay directly hanging ouer the same Riuer; It seemed good to the Coronels, to continue their march ouer those Mountaines. For they vnderstood by the Captiues, that, after they had once trauersed the Carduchan Mountaines, they might passe ouer the Fountaines of Tygris in Armenia, if they list, if not, they might fetch a compasse about them; and the Fountaines of Euphrates were said to be not farre off from the Fountaines of Tygris, and that there were some straights in the way. Therefore they marched toward the Cardu∣chans, partly in hope to steale away vnespied, partly to preuent the ene∣mie, in case he went about to seise vpon the tops of the Mountaines, and stop their march. It was now about the last watch, and so much night left, as would giue space to passe ouer the Plaine. The Grecians euen then rising and vpon a signe beginning their march, came by breake of day to the Mountaines foot. Cherisophus led the Vaunt, taking with him his accustomed Troopes, and all the light Armed; Xenophon and the Reare-Commanders brought vp the Reare with the Armed alone,
hauing neuer a light-armed man with them. For it seemed, the reare was without danger to be charged in the ascent. Cherisophus attained the top of the hill,Disposing of the light-ar∣med where need was. before any enemy perceiued it, and he leading on the rest of the armie, followed towards the villages, which were situate in the vallies and windings of the mountaines. The Carduchans forsaking their houses,The Carduchans and taking with them their wiues and children, fled to the mountaines. Great plentie of prouision was found here, and the houses garnished with many brasen vessels, which the Grecians left vntouched. Besides, they gaue chace to none of the Carduchans, of purpose to see, if they might gaine a friendly passage thorow the Countrey, especially see∣ing both the Carduchans and Grecians were enemies to the King. Yet be∣ing in necessitie they spared not the prouision, which euery man fortu∣ned to finde. The Carduchans, albeit kindly entreated, would neither heare of parley,Obstinacie of the Carduchans. nor yet shewed any other token of friendship. Whilest the reare of the Grecians descended from the height of the mountaines to the villages, it being now darke (for by reason of the straitnesse of the way, the whole day was spent in ascending the hill, and descending to the villages) some of the Carduchans, albeit but a few (for the Grecians fell vpon them at vnawares) gathering together charged the Grecians, and killed some of them,The perill of the Grecians. and hurt other some with stones and arrowes; and if many of them had beene assembled, they had no question cut off the most part of the army. That night therefore they lodged thus in the vil∣lages. The Carduchans on the other side lighted many fires in a circle on the mountaines, and so they looked one vpon another. By day breake, the Coronels and Captaines of the Grecians came to counsell, and de∣creed,Good order in passage of straights and of mountains. that the carriage-beasts necessary, and such, as were best able to endure the hardnesse of the way, should be led on by their owners, the rest left behinde, and that the slaues lately taken, and remaining in the army, should all be cast off. For the carriage and captiues being many, made the march very slow, and cumbersome. And many of them, that rode, were such, as fought not, and the multitude of people being great, double prouision and carriage was requisite in comparison of that, they should otherwise haue needed.Execution of the order takē. These things being so decreed, pro∣clamation was made for the execution. Hauing dined, they marched for∣ward, and the Coronels staying in a straight of the way, wheresoeuer they found any of these things not cast off, tooke it away. The Souldi∣ers were very obedient, vnlesse any man being in loue with a boy, or a woman of the fearest fashion, conueied them away by stealth. And so for that day they proceeded in their march, one while fighting, and another while giuing themselues to rest. The next day fell a sharpe storme, and yet a necessitie was laid vpon vs to continue our march, be∣cause our prouision failed. Cherisophus led the Vaunt, Xenophon brought vp the Reare, and the enemy pressed vs sore; and the Countrey being full of straights, they came vp close, and plied vs wirh arrowes and stones out of slings, so that the Grecians sometimes giuing chace, some∣times retiring, were forced to march on slowly. It fell out often, that
Xenophon sent word to that Vaunt to stay, especially at that time, being roundly put to by the enemy. Cherisophus,Why the Front oftentimes made Alt. that at other times vpon the receit of such messages made vsually Alt, made not Alt then, but led away apace, and commanded the rest to follow. So that it appeared, there was some great occasion, and yet there was no leisure to send and know the cause. The march seemed to the bringers vp to be a plaine run∣ning, and there was then slaine Cleonymus a braue, and valiant Lacede∣monian, being strucken into the side with an arrow thorow his target,Hee had no Curace on. and Souldiers coat; and Basius an Arcadian pierced in the head. When they were come to their quarter, Xenophon attired, as he was, stepped forth∣with to Cherisophus, and blamed him, he made not Alt, whereby he for∣ced them in the Reare to fight in their flight; and now, quoth hee, we haue lost two gallant and worthy Souldiers, and were neither able to bring them off, nor yet to bury them. Cherisophus answered; Looke vp, quoth he, to those mountaines and behold how vnpassable they are. There is no way, but that steepe one, you see, and vpon it you may dis∣cerne the huge multitude, which haue taken, and doe guard the passage. The cause of my speeding, and not staying for you, was to trie, if by any meanes I might preuent their seising vpon the height. For the guides affirme, there is no other way but this. But I haue two guides, quoth Xenophon; For when they ceased not to molest vs, I laid an ambush,Ambushes laid in a march, and why. whereby both we found way to breathe, and also killed some of them, and some other wee endeuoured to take aliue, for this cause especially, that we might vse such, as knew the Countrey, for guides: and imme∣diately bringing forth the men, they examined them apart, whether they knew any other way, than that, which was in sight. One of them, albeit he were diuersly put in feare, would not confesse. When they could get nothing out of him, that was to purpose, they slew him, the other looking on. Hee, that remained aliue, said, that his Companion would confesse nothing, because he had bestowed a daughter of his in mariage to a man dwelling thereabout. But I, said he,About the passage. will teach you a way, thorow which the very carriage may easily passe. Being demanded, If that way had no impediment or incumbrance, he answered, There was a top of a hill, which vnlesse it were possessed, it would be impossi∣ble to proceed further. Hereupon it was thought good,How to giue vpon an enemy that possesseth a straight vpon a hill. to call for the Captaines of the Targetiers, and of the armed Foot, and to impart vn∣to them the estate of the present affaires; and to aske, if any would shew himselfe a gallant, and willingly vndertake the iourney. There offered their seruice, Aristonimus an Arcadian of Methydria, and Agasias another Arcadian of Stymphaly. Callimachus a Parrhasian Arcadian,Emulation in seruice. and this Aga∣sias were alwaies at emulation and stroue one with another in all imploi∣ments. He offered himselfe vpon condition he might be permitted to take with him the voluntaries of the whole army; For I know, quoth he, that many of the youth will follow, if I haue the leading. Then they asked, if any of the light-armed,Taxiarches of the light-ar∣med. or Taxiarchs would beare the armed Company. Aristarchus the Chian, a worthy man, and one that in the like
case had often heretofore done good seruice to the army, presented him∣selfe. It was now late, and the Souldiers were commanded to sup, and presently to march away.The ordering of a guide, that is enemy. The guide was deliuered bound vnto them, and order giuen, that if they tooke the top of the hill, they should make good the place that night, and as soone, as it was day, giue a signe with the trumpet, and descend and charge the forestallers of the knowne way, and the rest of the army beneath ascend, and ioine with them in as great speed, as was possible. This order being taken, there marched out to the number of two thousand.How to diuert the enemies thoughts, and to coceale our intentions. . In the meane time fell much raine. Xenophon, hauing with him the Reare-commanders, led toward the knowne pas∣sage, to the end the enemy might be intentiue vpon that way, and those that were appointed to take the top, might the better passe by vnespied. When the Reare was come to a hollow bottome, thorow which they must needs passe ere they came to ascend the steepe hill, the Barbarians tumbled downe round stones, of which euery one was of weight suffici∣ent to load a waggon, and many other great and little stones, which rol∣ling and beating vpon the rockes, came bouncing with such force, as if they had beene sent out of a sling, and made it impossible to come neere the way. Some of the Captaines seeing that way shut vp, sought to finde another. This continued till it was darke. The Grecians when they ima∣gined, that their departure could not be discerned, went hence to sup∣per. For the Reare had not dined that day. The enemy ceased not the whole night to send downe stones, which might easily appeare by the continuall sound and noise of the fall. In the meane time those, that had the guide,The Grecians gain the height of the moun∣taine. fetching a compasse, fell vpon the enemies guards, as they sat by the fire; and killing some, and giuing chace to the rest, themselues maintained the place that night, as if they had gained the top. But they were deceiued; for there remained yet a little knop aboue them, neere which the straight it selfe was, where the enemies guards did sit. There was indeed a passage from thence, that led to the enemy. That night therefore they spent there. As soone as day appeared, they aduanced silently, and in good order against the enemy. They were neere, before they could be descried, because of a mist, that fell at the same instant. When they saw one another the trumpet sounded, and the Grecians gi∣uing a shout, aduanced against the enemy; who receiued not the charge, but forsaking the way, and flying, lost some few of their people. For they were light-armed. The rest of the army with Cherisophus, hearing the sound of the trumpet, made all haste to ascend by the common way. Some of the Coronels tooke by-pathes, euery one, as it came to hand, and climbing, as they could, drew one another vp by the pikes, and so they were the first, that ioyned with them, that had won the top. Xeno∣phon, with halfe the Reare, followed the way, that the guide had showne to the first (for it was the easiest for the carriage-beasts) the other halfe he ordered after the carriage-beasts.The carriage in the middest. Marching forward, they chanced vpon a hill hanging ouer the way, which was held by the enemy; by rea∣son whereof they were driuen to a necessitie, either by force to dislodge
the enemy from the place and cut him off, or else to be secluded from the rest of the army. The souldiers might haue followed the way, that the rest held, & so haue freed themselues from danger, but the carriage could be led no other way. Exhorting therefore one another, they charged vp the hill, ordering their Companies euery one in File,Raising of for∣ces against a hill. . not incompassing the enemy, but giuing them roome to flie, if they were so disposed. The Barbarians seeing them ascend each one, as he could make shift for himselfe, did neither shoot nor sling at them, as they approched the way; but presently forsooke the Hill. This Hill the Grecians tooke,The Hill taken. and seeing another before them held likewise by the enemie, they resolued to goe against that also. Notwithstanding Xenophon reputing in his minde, that, if he should leaue the Hill alreadie gained without a Guard, the enemie seising againe vpon it, might distresse the cariage in passing by (for the cariage by reason of the straights were extended into a great length) he left vpon the Hill the Captaines Cephisodorus the Sonne of Kephisophon an Athenian, and Archagoras a banished Argiue;Securing of that Hill. himselfe with the rest continued his march against the second Hill, which also was taken after the same manner. There remained yet another Hill more steepe, than the two former, euen the same, that the night before, was by the first as∣cenders won from the enemies Guards, that sat by the fire; to which when the Grecians approched, the Barbarians forsooke it without fight; which made the Grecians wonder, and imagine, they feared to be round encompassed and charged on all sides; but the truth was, that descry∣ing from the top, what was done behinde, they hasted away to fall vpon the Reare. Xenophon, and the youngest sort of Souldiers had gotten vp the Hill, and he commanded the rest to follow, till the last Captaines were come vp, and then he willed them to march forward in the way, and when they came to euen ground to lay downe their Armes.. At this instant came Archagoras the banished Argiue, and brought newes that they, whom Xenophon left behinde, were beaten from the first Hill, and that Cephisodorus, Amphicrates, and as many other, as leaped not from the Rocke, and saued themselues amongst the rest of the Reare, were slaine. The Barbarians hauing wrought this feat, conueied themselues toward the Hill opposite against the top, where Xenophon was; and he by an Interpreter treated with them about truce, and about recouering the dead bodies out of their hands. They answered,Conditions of recouering the dead bodies of the Grecians. they were readie to deliuer them vpon condition, the Villages might be spared from fire: to which Xenophon accorded. In the time while this parley was in hand, the rest of the Armie passed by, and were freed from danger of the place. The enemie staied there; and when the Grecians began to descend from the top to the place, where the formost had laid downe their Armes,. they in great number and tumult ran vpward, and hauing gained the height, from whence Xenophon descended, rolled downe stones, and broke a leg of one of the Souldiers. Xenophons Target-bearer was then away with his target, which Eurylochus the Arcadian borne at Lusium, a heauy armed Souldier, perceiuing, came running vnto him, and retiring by little and
little protected both himselfe and Xenophon with his Target. So they all came vp to the vant which stood in order of battell. Now were all the Grecians come together, and they quartered in many faire houses hauing large prouiion, and plentie of all things. There was much Wine kept in Cisternes,The Grecians carefll of the buill of their dead. Honour of buriall. plaistered with morter. Afterward Xenophon and Cherisophus so wrought with the Barbarians, that they recouered the bodies of the dead in exchange for the Guide, whom they deliuered vp; and they bu∣ried them with as great honour, as was possible to be giuen to worthy and valiant Souldiers. The next day we marched on without a Guide. The enemie fighting with vs, and taking the straights, which lay in our way, endeuoured to hinder and shut vp our march. But when they op∣posed against the Vant,Mutuall assi∣stance of the Vant and the Reare. Xenophon from the Reare ascending the Moun∣taines and gaining the vpper ground remoued all the impediments, the enemie could cast vpon the way: when against the Reare, Cherisophus ascending tooke the vpper ground likewise, and freed the way for them, that came behinde. So they alwaies succoured and had mutuall care one of another. Sometimes also the Barbarians, after the Grecians had got vp to the heights, annoied them spightfully in their descent. They were light-Armed, and comming close vp they might easily shift away at their pleasure, because they caried no other furniture, then Bowes, and Ar∣rowes,The Carduchans good archers. Their bowes and arrowes length. The force of their ot. and Slings. They were excellent Archers, and had Bowes well nigh three Cubits, Arrowes more than two Cubits long. When they shot, they drew the string applying their hand somewhat toward the nether end of the Bowe, and etting their left foot forward. With their Arrowes they pierced both Curaces and Targets. The Grecians putting thongues to the middest of them, sent them backe againe at the enemies in stead of Darts. The Cretans were verie vse-full in these places; Strato∣cles the Cretan was their Commander. They quartered that day in the Villages,Centrites a riuer. . which lay vpon the Plaine neere the Riuer Centrites, the bredth whereof is 200 Foot, and this Riuer parteth Armenia and the Carduchans Countrey. Here the Grecians rested. The Riuer is distant from the Car∣duchan Mountaines about some six or seuen Furlongs.Three quarters of a le, or thereabout. They quartered here with great pleasure both in regard of the plentie of all things, which they found, and also because they gladly remembred their trauell ouer∣gone. For in seuen whole daies, in which they marched thorow the Carduchans Countrey, they were put to continuall fight, and suffered more distresse, than whatsoeuer the King and Tissaphernes could worke them. Being therefore freed from that danger they slept and tooke their rest with great content. Assoone, as it was day, they might discerne be∣yond the Riuer Armed horse, that seemed readie to hinder their passage, and Foot-men ordered vpon the bankes aboue the Horse to stop their entry into Armenia.The Chaldeans. These were Armenians, Mygdonians, and Chaldeans Mercenaries to Orontes, and Artuchus. The Chaldeans were said to be a free Nation and warlike.. Their Armes were long wicker Targets and Speares. The banks, vpon which they were embattelled, were distant some three or foure Plethers from the Riuer;A Plether 100 Foot. and no way ouer but one
could be discerned, which led vp to the higher ground, and seemed to be made with hand. The Grecians sought to passe that way. But making triall, and finding the water to reach vp aboue their breasts, and the Ri∣uer rough with many great, and slipperie stones, and perceiuing, that they could not hold their Armes in the Riuer, which by reason of the swiftnesse, and violence of the streame, would force them out of their hands, and in case a man caried them on his head, he should remaine na∣ked against the enemies missiue weapons, they returned and encamped neere the Riuer. The place, where they rested the night before, they might easily see to be full of Armed Carduchans. It caused great melan∣choly amongst them, both because they saw the hard passage of the Ri∣uer, and the enemie opposing against their passage, and also the Cardu∣chans prest to fall vpon their Reare. Remaining therefore in great anguish of spirit, this day, and the night following, they spent in the place. Xenophon is the meane time dreamed, that he was bound in fetters,Xenophons dreame. and that they broke and fell off of their owne accord, so that being loose, he was at libertie, to goe where he list. Earely in the morning he went to Cherisophus, and told him, he hoped all should be well, and communica∣ted his dreame with him, who was much delighted therewith; and as day appeared, all the Coronels assembled, and offered sacrifice, and at the verie first the sacrifice promised good successe; and the Coronels and Captaines departing to their quarters commanded the Souldiers to dine. Whilest Xenophon was at dinner, there came running vnto him two young men (for euerie man knew, they might haue free accesse vnto him both at dinner and supper, and that they might in sleepe awake him, and impart any thing, that should seeme to tend to the good of the march) and told him they chanced to be a gathering sticks for firing, and that amongst the Rocks, on the other side the Riuer, they espied an old man, and a woman, and young maids laying vp (as it were) bundles of Clothes tied together in a hollow Caue of the Rocke. Which when they saw, and conceiued withall, there was no danger in the passage, considering the enemies Horse could not by any meanes come there, they pulled off their Clothes, and taking their drawne Daggers in their hands, they entred into the Riuer in purpose to swim ouer, if they could not otherwise passe. But going on they found themselues ouer, before they had wet their priuities; so that taking with them the gar∣ments which were hidden they returned, and came safe to this side back againe. Xenophon hearing this, dranke a health, and commanded the Cup should be filled to the two young men, and to pray to the gods (who had reuealed the dreame and passage) to finish the remnant of all, that should appertaine to the good of the iourney. Assoone as the health was ended, he led the young men to Cherisophus, and declared vnto him the newes, which they brought. Who hearing these things, drunke also a health; after which commanding the Souldiers to trusse vp their baggage, and calling the Coronels together, they aduised about the best meanes of passage, and of repulsing them, that opposed the Front,The passage of a Riuer. and of
auoiding the danger of those, that were like to fall vpon the Reare. The resolution was, that Cherisophus should leade the Vant, & passe ouer first with halfe the Armie; the other halfe should remaine behinde with Xeno∣phon, and the cariage, and vnarmed multitude, should be conueied in the middest. When these things were thus determined, they began to march. The young men led the way hauing the riuer on their left hand. The way which tended to the Foord,Halfe a mile. was about foure Furlongs in length. As they marched forward on one side, the enemies Hors-men embattelled mar∣ched against them on the other. After they were come to the Foord, and bancks of the riuer,. they laid downe their armes; and first Cherisophus crowning himselfe, and stripping off his apparel, tooke vp his armes and commanded the rest to do the like; and directed the Captaines euery one to cast their companies into a file,. & to march some on his right, some on his left hand. The South saier offered sacrifice at the riuers side; and the enemy, albeit they plied vs with bowes & slings, yet could they not reach ouer vnto vs. The sacrifice was faire, & the Grecians sang the Paean, & gaue a shout. The women also shouted, for there were many whores in the campe.. So Cherisophus passed ouer, and they with him. Then Xenophon ta∣king to him the lightest of the Reare, ran back againe with all speed to the passage, which led to the Ascent of the Armenian Mountaines, making countenance, as if he meant to passe ouer there, & cut betwixt the horse, that guarded the banks, & the rest of their companions. But the enemy seeing Cherisophus his forces easily wade thorow the Riuer,Halfe the ar∣my ouer. and Xenophon with his Souldiers speedily returning backe, fearing to be shut in betwixt both, fled, as fast as they could, from the riuer to the way, that led vp∣ward; & as soone as they came there, held on toward the mountaine. Lu∣cius, that commanded the horse, & Aeschines, that led the targetiers about Cherisophus, when they saw them so cowardly run, followed hard, and gaue chace. The Souldiers cried out to them not to giue ouer, but to ascend the mountaine together with the enemy. After Cherisophus had gained the passage, he followed not the horse, but presently vpon the bankes side led against the foot, that held the higher places; who being aboue on the higher ground, and seeing their horse flying, and the armed Grecians making head against them, forsooke also their ground, by the riuers side. When Xenophon perceiued now all things on the other side of the riuer, to be in good plight, he returned speedily to the forces, that were passing ouer. For the Carduchans were seene by this time to descend the mountaines, and to come into the Plaine, as though they purposed to charge the Reare. By this time had Cherisophus taken the higher ground, and Lucius following the chace with a few, won the carriages of the Reare of the enemy, and withall rich apparell, and much plate. The carriage and vnarmed multitude of the Grecians passed ouer the ri∣uer with all diligence.There were 4 Enomoties in e∣uery company. . And Xenophon turning toward the Carduchans op∣posed his armed against them; and directed his Captaines euery one to order his Companie into Enomoties, and to face to the left hand, and to lead vp and to ioyne the Enomoties together in front; and that the Cap∣taines
and Enomotarchs should make head against the Carduchans,When they or∣dered then cō∣panies into E∣ooties, this was the man∣ner, they dou∣bled the front to the left hand, euerie Enomtarch leading vp his Enomote, & ioi∣ning to the other in front; so that the bat∣tell was 25 deepe, and the Enomotarchs stood all in front. Light armed in the riuer to fa∣uou the pas∣sage of the followers. the bringers vp be behinde next to the riuer; The Carduchans, when they saw the Reare left by the vnarmed multitude, and making shew but of few, singing certaine songs after their countrey manner, fell on, and charged. In the meane time Cherisophus, hauing set his owne affaires in safetie, sent the Peltasts, and Slingers, and Archers ouer to Xenophon, willing them to doe, what he commanded. When Xenophon perceiued, they passed the riuer, hee dispatched a message to stay them, where they were, till they saw him and his troopes enter into the water, and then to meet him on both sides, and make as though they purposed to returne ouer againe, the Darters with their fingers in the thongs of their darts, the Archers with their arrowes nocked; yet should they not come much further, than they were in the riuer. And he gaue order to his owne people, that as soone, as they were within the reach of slings, and had beaten with their pikes vpon their targets, to sing the Paean, and run forth against the enemy. And when the enemy was put to flight, and the trumpet sounded a charge from the riuer, the bringers vp, facing about to the pike, should leade, and the rest follow, and with all speed get the passage, euery one in the order he held, to the intent they hin∣dred not one another; And added he would account him the best Soul∣dier, that first could gaine the other banke. The Carduchans seeing but a few now left behinde (for many appointed for the Reare were shifted away, some being carefull of the carriage-beasts, some of the baggage, some of their whores) fell on boldly, and began to sling and shoot. But when the Grecians singing the Paean ran out against them, they for∣sooke their ground. For they were armed, as the mountaine fashion is,Armour for a stedfast fight. sufficiently to skip vp and downe, and run away, but not to come to hands in a stedfast fight. The trumpet now gaue the signe, which made the enemy flie the faster,. Facing about. and the Grecians facing about to the contrarie side hasted, all they could, to passe the riuer; which some of the enemies seeing, came running againe to the riuer, and hurt a few with their ar∣rowes; but the most of them might be discerned to continue their flight, a good while after the Grecians had gained the other banke. Some of our people, that first charged the enemy, and being too valiant,Following the chace too holy & following on further, than at that time was fit, got ouer a good while after the other, that were with Xenophon; and some of them also were wounded. The Grecians, being all passed ouer about noone-tide, put themselues in order and marched thorow Armenia no lesse than fiue Parasangs,18 miles and 3 quarters in the afternoone. the countrey being all plaine, and arising sometimes in little hillockes. There was no village neere the riuer, by reason of the warres against the Carduchans. The first village, they came to, was both great,The calamitie of warre. and had also in it a royall Palace for the Vice-roy of the countrey; and the houses, for the most part were built with Turrets, and were stored with plentie of prouision.18 miles and 3 quarters in a day. From thence they iourneied forward ten Parasangs in two encampings, till they came ouer the springs of the riuer Tigris. From thence they continued marching 15 Parasangs in 3 encampings,As much a day. as
farre as the riuer Teleboas,Teleboas a riuer. which is a faire riuer, but not large. About this riuer are many villages; and the place is called West Armenia. Teri∣bazus the Kings fauourite was gouernor of this country;Teribzus go∣uernour of Ar∣menia, who, if he were present, no man else might set the King on horsebacke but he. This man came riding forth vnto vs, hauing hors-men about him, and sending an interpreter before signified,Desireth par∣ley. that he desired to parley with the Comman∣ders: The Coronels resolued to heare, what he would say. So they came and met him, and being within hearing, they asked, what he would haue with them. He said his desire was to make truce with the Grecians, to the end,Maketh truce with the Greci∣ans. that neither he should wrong them, nor yet they burne the houses of the countrey, but onely take such victuall, as they needed in their march. The Coronels agreed hereunto, and so the truce was con∣cluded. From thence they marched thorow the plaine countrey 15 Parasangs in 3 encampings.18 mile three quarters a day. Teribazus followed with his forces, keep∣ing aloofe about ten furlongs.A mile and a quarter. They came to a Palace, which had many villages about it full of large prouision. While they encamped there, fell abundance of snow by night. It was therefore decreed in the mor∣ning,Snow causeth quartering in villages. that the Companies and Coronells should quarter in the villages. For they neither saw enemy, and it seemed to be good and safe against the snow. Here they had all things fit for vse, namely sacrifice, wheat, old wine of excellent sauor, raysons, and all kinde of pulse. Some, that wandred from the Campe,The plentiful∣nes of Armenia. reported they saw an army, and many fires kindled in the night. Therefore it seemed good to the Coronels not to suffer the souldiers to lie here & there dispersed, but to bring them to∣gether againe into one campe.Quartering when an ene∣my is feared. So they came together again, and thought it best to lie in the field. Whilest they held this course, the snow fell so vehe∣mently in the night, that both armes and men were couered with it. The cariage-beasts also seemed, as though they had bin fettered with the snow and had much ado to arise;Inconuenien∣ces of Snow. and the Souldiers, that lay vpon the ground, vpon whom the Snow fell, and slid not off, became miserably distressed. Now when Xenophon arising vp vnarmed began to cleaue wood, streight wayes one, and then another stood vp, and taking the hatchet from him, fell a cleauing likewise. Hereupon other in semblable manner arising kindled the fire, and anointed themselues. For they found much matter of oyntment there, which they vsed in stead of Oyle Oliue, as namely, Hogs grease, Oyles of Sesamin, of bitter Almonds, and of Turpentine. There was found also sweet oyntments made of the same stuffe. After this it seemed best and most conuenient to quarter againe in villages vn∣der the roofe of houses; and the Souldiers with cheerefull cries and great delight entred into the houses, and there tooke their prouision; onely those, that at the last dislodging out of houses had set them on fire, were punished with lying abroad in hutts,Disorder in Souldiers pu∣nished. and with such other ill lod∣ging. From hence Democrates the Temenite, hauing Souldiers with him, was by night sent out to the mountaines,Scouts to dis∣couer. where the straglers reported they saw fires. For in former imployments he was thought to bring certaine newes concerning things discouerable, either that they were, or
were not. He going forth and returning said, he could descry no fires, but he brought in a prisoner hauing a Persian bowe, and a quiuer, and a weapon called Sgaris, such as the Amazons beare.A kinde of weapon hea∣ded like a hat∣chet. Teribazus his falsenesse. This prisoner being demanded, what country-man he was, said, he was a Persian, and came from Teribazus his Campe to seeke prouision. Being asked againe, how great the Armie was, and why assembled; he answered, that Teribazus was there in person with his owne Armie, and with the mercenary Gha∣libians and Taochans, and was determined to set vpon the Grecians in the streights, that were on the mountaine tops, where there was but one way. The Coronels hearing these things found it good to assemble their troopes, and leauing sufficient guards for the Campe,Preuention of danger by see∣king the ene∣mie first. and Sophonaetus to be their commander, they forthwith marched on, taking the prisoner for their guide. They had now passed the mountaine, when the Peltasts aduancing first, and discouering the enemy, gaue a shout, and ran in vpon their Campe, not staying for the armed. The Barbarians hearing the noyse, forsooke the place wherein they were, and led immediatly;The enemie defeated. notwithstanding some of them were slaine, and 20 horses taken; and withall the Tent of Teribazus, in which were beds with siluer feet, and plate, and some that said, they were Bakers, and Butlers. These things being so happily atchieued, the Coronels held it best to returne with all speed vnto the Campe, lest perhaps some enterpise might be made vpon those, that were left behinde,Diligence in auoiding dan∣ger. and forthwith by trumpet giuing a signe of retreat, they dismarched, and came to the Campe the same day. The next day they thought it good to proceed with all celerity, before the enemies Armie could againe be rallied, and possesse the streights. There∣fore they trussed vp their baggage, & hauing many guides, marched forth thorow deep Snow, and the same day getting ouer the tops, where Teri∣bazus purposed to haue charged them, they set downe and encamped. From thence in three encampings in the wildernesse they reached to the riuer Euphrates, which they waded thorow not wetting themselues fur∣ther than the Nauill.The Grecians wade ouer Eu∣phrates. 18 mile and more a day. The fountaines of this riuer were reported not to be farre off. From thence they proceeded 15 Parasangs in three en∣campings through much Snow, which couered the plaine country. The third encamping was laborious and hard, the north wind blowing stiffe against vs, and scorching and befreezing the limbes of the Souldiers: whereupon one of the Soothsayers said,Miserable ido∣latry. he would offer sacrifice to the wind to appease it, which being accordingly performed, there was no man, but held opinion, that the furie of the storme was much stilled and abated. The Snow was in this place a fathom deepe;Snow a fathom deep. so that many ca∣riage beasts, and slaues were lost, and as good as 30 Souldiers. They maintained fires the whole night, by reason that there was great quanti∣tie of wood in the place, where they encamped; and yet they, that were benighted found no wood; neither would those that first were quarte∣red, giue the late commers accesse to the fires, vnlesse in recompence they imparted vnto them wheat, or some other victuall, such as they had. So was there amongst them a mutuall communication of their commo∣dities.
After the Snow was melted, there appeared great pits vpon the earth, where the fire was made, by which a man might easi∣ly iudge of the depth of the Snow. From thence they marched through Snow the whole next day, and many of the Souldiers were ta∣ken with the disease called Boulimia. Xenophon bringing vp the Reare, and raising those Souldiers, that lay vpon the ground, was ignorant what the disease meant, till one, who had experience, told him, that it was a plaine Oxe-hunger,Oxe-hunger,  and that they would immediatly stand vp, if they had any thing to eat. Therefore going to the cariage-beasts, if he saw any drinke, or victuals, he distributed it either by himselfe, or by such as were able to runne about, to those that were pinched with hunger, and they had no sooner eaten, but they stood vp, and marched. In this march Cherisophus about twilight came to a Village, where he found women and maids drawing, and carying water before a Fort. The Interpreter told them in the Persian tongue, that they came to the Viceroy from the King. They answered, the Vice-roy was not there, but about a Para∣sang from thence.Three mile & three quarters. Cherisophus, because it was late, entred with the water-bearers into the Fort vnto the Gouernour, where he, and as many as the place was capable of, quartered that night. The rest of the Souldi∣ers, that could not reach to the iournies end, lodged that night without meat or fire, so that some of them perished there. There were of the enemy, that gathered head, and followed the Reare, and taking the ca∣riage-beasts,Distresse of the Grecian souldi∣ers. such as were vnable to trauell, fell foule together about the diuision of them. Some also of the Souldiers, whose sight was perished with the Snow, or had their toes rotted off with the cold, were left be∣hinde.Remedie a∣gainst Snow or sight. For the feet. The remedy against the Snow for the eyes was the wearing some blacke thing before them, while they marched: for the feet, continuall mouing and resting no where; and in the night time putting off their shooes from their feet. As many as slept shod, the strings of their shooes were imprinted in their feet, and their shooes fast frozen to them. For there were some, that after they had worne out their old shooes, made themselues countrey shooes of raw hides newly drawne from the Oxe. Some therefore of the Souldiers were left behind inforced by such ne∣cessities; who casting their eyes vpon a peece of ground that was black, by reason the Snow was gone, they imagined it was melted there. And it was indeed melted by a Spring, that sent out vapours in a wooddy val∣ley not farre from thence. Thither they turned, and said they would march no further.The souldiers vnable to march. Their danger. As soone as Xenophon, that had the Reare, percei∣ued it, he prayed them, and vsed all art and endeuour to perswade them not to remaine behinde, alledging that the enemy being assembled in great number followed at their heeles. At the last, when he profited no∣thing, he began to be angry; they bid him kill them, if he would; for they were able to goe no further. Hereupon it was thought best, to put a feare, if it might be, into the enemy that followed. The darknesse was now come, and the enemy approached with much tumult and contro∣uersie amongst themselues about the prey they had taken. There they of
the Reare, as many as were in health, rising vp, ranne vpon the enemy: the other, that were weary, shouting as intirely as they could, beat their pikes vpon their targets.The enemy scared. Wherewith the enemy being affrighted cast himselfe into this Valley thorow the Snow, and thence forward was not so much as a word heard from any of them the whole night. Xenophon and the Souldiers with him marched on, and he told them that were weary, that he would send some to visit them the next day. They had not gone foure furlongs, but they hapned vpon other Souldiers, that rested in the way vpon the Snow, being also couered with it, and had put out no watch or guard. He made them stand vp, and they gaue him to vnderstand, that the Vaunt moued no further forward. Himselfe there∣fore passing by, and sending the ablest of the Peltasts to the Vaunt, wil∣led them to bring word, what the impediment was. They brought word, that the whole Armie rested in the same manner. Therefore they that were about Xenophon, setting out such guards as they could, lodged that night without fire or supper. When it was toward day, Xenophon sent the youngest Souldiers about him vnto the sicke, commanding to raise them from the ground, and to compell them to march on. In the meane space were certaine men dispatched away by Cherisophus, to inquire how it was with the Reare; who saw them gladly, and deliuered the sicke men vnto them to be conueighed to the Campe. Themselues marched on, and after 20 furlongs march came to the Village,Two mile and a halfe. where Cherisophus quartered; and all being come together, they resolued they might safely quarter in the Villages thereabout. Cherisophus remained where he was. The other casting lots for the Villages they saw,Lots for quar∣tering. euery one went and tooke possession of his owne. Polycrates an Athenian Captaine asked leaue to goe before, and taking with him the light-armed, and hasting to the Village, that fell to Xenophons lot, found within it all the inhabitants, and the Comarch, or chiefe Ruler of the Village, and 17 Colts, that were fed as a tribute for the King, and the daughter of the Gouernour, who had beene maried some nine daies before, whose husband was then ab∣sent hunting the Hare, and so came not to be taken in any of the Villages. The houses were vnder ground,Houses vnder ground. and the doore of them like the mouth of a Well, but broad and large beneath. The entry for cariage beasts was digged, men ascended by ladders. In the houses were goats, sheepe, oxen, and birds with their young ones by them.Plenty of pro∣uision in them. All the beasts were fed within doores with fodder. There was besides wheat and barley, and pulse, and wine (in great vessels) made of barley.Beere, or ra∣ther Ale. The barley filled the vessels to the very top, and there lay vpon it Reeds without knots, some great, some little. If a man were thirsty, these Reeds were to be taken into the mouth and sucked; and it was a strong drinke, if vnmingled with water, and very pleasant to them that were acquainted with it. Xe∣nophon tooke the Comarch vnto him, and that night set him at his owne table, and willed him to be of good cheere,Xenophons cur∣tesie to the Co∣march. assuring him he should not lose his children, and that if he would shew himselfe a friend to the Gre∣cians in leading and directing their Army, till they came to another
Countrey, he would at his departing fill his house with all things fit for vse. The Comarch promised he would, and in token of loue, shewed the place where wine was stored vnder the earth. So the Souldiers being thus lodged, passed the night in abundance of all things they could de∣sire, hauing the Comarch in their custody, and his children before their eyes.Banqueting of the Grecians. The next day Xenophon taking the Comarch with him went to Cherisophus, and passing thorow the Villages in his way, visited them that were lodged there, and found them banqueting and merry in euery place; neither would they suffer him to depart, vntill they had set din∣ner before him; and in all houses the tables were furnished with lambe, kid, porke, veale, fowle, and with much bread, some made of wheat, some of barley. If any man of curtesie would drinke to another, he drew him to the vessell,. to which he was to stoope, and drinke supping like an Oxe. They gaue the Comarch leaue to take what he list, yet tooke he nothing, vnlesse he espied by chance any of his kinsmen, whom hee caried away with him. When they came to Cherisophus, they found all the Souldiers in the houses crowned with hay garlands, and Armenian boyes clad in Barbarian apparell waiting vpon them; to whom, when they would haue any thing done, they were faine to make signes, as to deafe men. After Cherisophus and Xenophon had beene merry together, they asked the Comarch by an Interpreter, what the Countrey was. He answered it was Armenia. Againe they asked him, for whom those hor∣ses were bred and kept;Horse bred vp for the King. he answered, they were the Kings tribute. The next Countrey, he said, was the Chalybians countrey, and shewed them the way that led thither. After this Xenophon brought him home to his house, and the old horse (which he had taken) he gaue him to be reser∣ued for a sacrifice. For he heard, that he was consecrated to the Sunne, and feared he would die,The Persians sacrificed hor∣ses to the Sunne. The horse of Armenia. because he fainted in the iourney. He himselfe tooke to him one of the Colts, and distributed the rest to the other Co∣ronels and Captaines. The horse of that Countrey are lesse than the Per∣sian horse, but much more deedy, and full of metall. The Comarch also taught them,Remedie for beasts that tra∣uell, against the Snow. as often as their horse or cariage-beasts were to be driuen thorow the Snow, to binde little bags about their feet; for without these bags, they fell vp to the belly in Snow. When the eight day was come, Xenophon deliuered the Comarch to Cherisophus to be their guide, but left all his houshold to him, except only one of his sonnes, who was lately come to mans estate. Him he deliuered to Episthenes the Amphipolitan to be kept vpon condition, that if he guided the Armie well, he might take his sonne home with him at his returne. Besides they conueighed into his house as many things as they could, and so rising with their whole Campe, they marched forward. The Comarch guided them vn∣bound, because of the Snow: and now they were in the third encam∣ping,The errour of Cherisophus about the Guide. when Cherisophus waxed angry with the Guide, because he con∣ducted them to no Villages. He answered, that there were none there∣about. Cherisophus beat him, but bound him not, by reason whereof he shifted away by night, leauing his sonne behinde him. This was the only
difference and distaste betwixt Cherisophus and Xenophon during this whole iourney. For the Guide was ill intreated, and yet not looked vn∣to, nor made fast. Episthenes was in loue with the boy, and carrying him home into Greece, found him alwaies after exceeding faithfull and trustie. After this they marched forward seuen encampings; fiue Para∣sangs euery day, euen as farre as the riuer Phasis, which is a plether broad.18 mile and more a day. 100 foot. 18 mile and more a day. From thence they marched 10 Parasangs in two encampings. The Chalybians, Taochans, and Phasians shewed themselues on the top of a hill, from whence the descent into the Plaine lay. Cherisophus after he perceiued the enemy on the height of the hill, made Alt about thirtie furlongs off,Three ile and three quarters. . In a march how to bring the troopes to a Phlnge. A counsell how to dislodge the eny from a mountaine. being loth to approach them with his army led in a wing, & he gaue the word, that the following Companies should sleee vp by the first, to the end the army might be formed into a Phalange, or broad fronted battell. When the Reare was come vp, immediately he called a Court of Coronels and Captaines; and spake thus: he enemy, as you see, hath taken the top of the mountaine; It is time for vs to ad∣uise, how we shall most commodiously come to fight with them. Mine opinion is, therefore, that we first command the Souldiers to dine, and then in the meane space consult, whether it be best to passe ouer the mountaine to day or to morrow. And mine opinion is, said Cleanor, that after dinner we presently arme, and with all celeritie goe against them. For if we linger this day, the enemy, that beholds vs now, will wax bolder, and other animated with their boldnesse, will ioyne vnto them. After him Xenophon spake, and said: I conceiue thus; that if we must needs fight, we are to prepare our selues to fight with the greatest aduantage, we are able. But if we desire to passe the hill with least trou∣ble, we ought to consider, how to receiue fewest wounds, and lose fewest men. The hill, which we see, is more than 60 furlongs in length,7 miles and more. and men no where appeare to hinder vs, but onely vpon the way, of our march. It is better therefore to endeuour priuily, to steale, if we can, and to lay bold of, and, as it were,A double dis∣aduantage. to snatch away by preuention a peece of the void mountaine, than to fight both against a strong place, and against men ready, and resolued to trie their fortune. For it is much more easie to mount a steepe passage without fight, than to trauerse a Plaine beset on euery side with enemies; and a man not fighting shall by night better discerne any thing before his feet, than by day, if he be in fight; and rough places are more euen to his feet, that fighteth not, than plaine ground to him, whose head is in danger. And it seemeth to me not im∣possible to steale some part or other of the hill, in regard, that we haue both the benefit of the night not to be seene, and my vse such circuit in ascending, that the enemy shall neuer perceiue vs;A shew diffe∣rent from our intent. and if we make a shew, as though we meant to passe the way, we are in, we shall finde the rest of the mountaine more cleere and void of resistance, because it is likely, he will make good the place, which he holdeth, with all his forces. But what doe I talke of theft before you Cherisophus. For I heare that you Lacedemonians, as many of you, as are of the equalls,. meditate from
your childhood how to steale; & that it is no shame, but a praise-worthy thing to steale such things, as the law forbiddeth not to steale, & to the in∣tent, you steale and conceale your theft with more cunning, the law or∣daineth, that if you be taken with the manner, you shall be well whipped for your paines. Now therefore it is a fit time for you to shew your edu∣cation, and to beware that in stealing the mountaine we be not taken with the manner, lest we be beaten with many stripes. Cherisophus replied: And I likewise heare, that you Athenians steale the riches of your State most artificially, albeit it be no small danger for him that stealeth; and that the best of you, if the best desire to beare rule in the State, are guilty of this crime. So that it is good time for you also to shew your education. I, quoth Xenophon, am ready after we haue supped, to goe with the Reare, and seize vpon the top of the mountaine; Guides I am prouided of. For our light-armed tooke some of the theeues that followed to surprise vs; and I heare, that the mountaine is not vnpassable, but is fed with Goats and Neat. So that if we take any part thereof, we shall finde also a way for our cariage-beasts; and I hope, the enemy after we haue once gained the height, and are in euen ground with them, will no longer maintaine the place, the rather because they haue no great minde to descend now vnto vs into the Plaine. Yea, but what need you goe, quoth Cherisophus, and leaue the Reare. Rather, if no man be willing to goe of himselfe, let vs make choice of some one or other. Hereupon Aristonymus the Methy∣drian came vp, and presented himselfe with armed foot, and Aristaeus the Chian with light-armed, and Nicomachus the Oetaean likewise with light-armed;The signe. and the signe was agreed vpon, namely, to make fires, after the top was taken. All things being thus concluded, they dined. Then Cheri∣sophus led the Army forward toward the enemy some 10 furlongs,A mile and a quarter. as though he had a purpose to continue his march that way. When they had supped, and it was night, those that were appointed proceeded on, and tooke the top of the mountaine; the rest of the Armie remained in the place, where they were. The enemy perceiuing that the top of the moun∣taine was taken, watched and made fires all the night. By breake of day Cherisophus offered sacrifice, and led the Armie in the way, they marched before, and they, that had wonne the hill, and the height thereof, made head against the enemy, who in greatest number remained vpon the or∣dinarie way that lay toward the top,The Grecians beat the ene∣mie. but a part of them aduanced against the Grecians, that had gained the height, who came to hands, before the whole Armie ioyned; in which conflict the Grecians had the better, and followed the chace vpon the enemy. In this meane time the Peltasts of the Grecians that were in the Plaine, ran vp the hill to their companions, that had the victory.Haste without disorder. Cherisophus with the armed followed as fast as he could, without disordering their troupes. The enemy, that lay vpon the way, when they saw their companions beaten on the height of the hill, abandoned the place, and fled. Many of them were slaine: and they left behinde many wicker targets, which the Grecians cutting in peeces with their swords made for euer after vnprofitable, and of no vse. When
they came to the top of the mountaine, they offered sacrifice, and ere∣cting a Trophey descended into the Plaine,A Trophey is a monument of victorie. and into Villages stored with plenty of all things. After this they marched toward the Taochans, 30 Parasangs in fiue encampings. Their victuals here began to wax scant, because the Taochans inhabited strong holds,22 mile and a halfe a day. into which they had con∣ueighed all their vsefull prouision: they crept into a Hold, that had nei∣ther city, nor house in it, and in it men, and women, and many beasts were gathered together. Cherisophus presently marched against it, and so dis∣posed his troupes, that when the first was weary,The order of an assault. another streight succee∣ded, and then another. For they could not with their whole forces be∣set the place round, because it was prerupt in all the circuit. When Xeno∣phon came vp with the Reare both Peltasts and armed, Cherisophus told him he was welcome. For the place, said he, must needs be forced, be∣cause henceforth we shall haue no prouision for the Armie, if we omit this Hold. Hereupon they aduised in common; and when Xenophon asked what impediment there was, why it might not be entred, Cheri∣sophus answered: There is no other way, but this one, that you see; and when any man proffereth to ascend, they tumble downe stones from the high rocke hanging ouer, and vpon whomsoeuer the stones light, thus is hee serued; and withall shewed many Souldiers that had their legs and sides crushed, and broken a peeces. But when the stones are spent, quoth Xenophon, what other impediment shall we haue? For we see but these few oppose against vs, and of them but two or three armed men. And the space, which is so dangerous, is not aboue three halfe Plethers;150 foot. 100 foot. and thereof about a Plether is be∣set with a thicket of great Pine trees, after which the Souldiers stand∣ing, what hurt can they haue, either from stones throwne, or tumbled downe? There remaineth then but halfe a Plether,50 foot. which must be passed running in the time, whilest the stones cease. But, quoth Cherisophus, we can no sooner moue toward the thicket, but the stones come rowling downe in abundance. So should it be, quoth Xenophon; for so they will the sooner be spent. But let vs, if we can, haste thither, from whence least way remaines afterward to run, and from whence, if we be disposed, we may retire with most ease. Then Cherisophus and Xenopho, and Callima∣chus the Parrhasian Captaine (for he had the leading of the Captaines of the Reare that day) began to aduance.. The rest of the Captaines re∣mained in safetie in the place where they were.Turnes of Captaines in marching. Then about 70 Souldi∣ers got to the trees, not thronging together but one by one, each of them heedfull to auoid the danger, as he could. Agasias the Symphalian, and Aristonymus the Methydrian, who were also Captaines in the Reare, and some other stood behinde the trees; for it was not safe for more than a Company to shelter themselues there.A 100 men. Here Callimachus put in pra∣ctise a deuice of his owne. Hee ranne two or three steps from the tree, behinde which hee stood, and when the stones came row∣ling downe, hee quickly retired. Vpon euery stepping forth of his, were spent more than ten waggons of stones. When Agasias
saw, what Callimachus did, and that it was in the sight of the army, fea∣ring he would be the first, that should enter the hold, neither signifying any thing to Aristonymus, that stood next him, nor yet to Eurylochus the Lusian (who were both his Companions) nor to any other, he put for∣ward, and outwent all the rest. Callimachus seeing him passe by caugt hold of the circumference of his Target. In the meane time Aristony∣mus the Methydrian, and Eurylochus the Lucian came by (for all these were at contention and strife amongst themselues, which of them should be esteemed the most valiant) & in this emulation they entred the place.An honest and worthy emula∣tion. No sooner had one of them entred, but the tumbling downe of stoes was staid. A grieuous spectacle was thence-forth there to be beheld. The women, after they had cast downe their children from the Rocke, threw themselues after; and so did the men. There also Aeneas the Stymphalian Captaine seeing one, that had on a faire garment, running to cast himselfe downe, laid hold vpon him to saue him. But the other drawing him on, both tumbled headlong downe together, and immedi∣ately died of the fall. In this place were few men, but multitudes of Oxen, Asses, and Sheepe taken. From thence they marched thorow the Chalybias Countrey 50 Parasangs in seuen encampings.28 mile and more the day. The Chalybians. Their valour. Their armes. That Na∣tion was the valiantest of all, that the Grecians passed thorow, and such as durst come to handie blowes with them. They bore Linen Curaces, that reached downe to their bellies, and in stead of wings had thicke ropes wound and fastened together. They had besides Greaues and Head-peeces,. and on their Girdle a short Sword like a Lacedemonian Cemiterie, wherewith they slay them, whom they ouercome; and cut∣ting off their heads returne to their friends singing and dancing, espe∣cially if it be in the enemies sight.. They haue furthermore a Pike of about fifteene Cubits long, armed at one end with a head of Yron. They remained in Townes, and when the Grecians passed by, they followed them still skirmishing. Afterward they remoued into strong places, and conueighed their prouision thither. So that the Grecians could get no∣thing there, but were faine to feed vpon the cariage-beasts, which they tooke from the Tacchans. From thence they departed to the Riuer Harpa∣sus,Harpasus a ri∣uer. 400 foot. 18 mile and mor a day. The Sythinians. a Riuer of foure Plethers bredth; and then thorow the Scythinians Countrey 20 Parasangs in foure encampings. It was a plaine Countrey, and in it they found villages, in which they remained three daies making prouision of Corne. From thence they proceeded in foure encampings 20 Parasangs,18 mile & more a day. Gymnias a citie. and came to a great, wealthy, and well inhabited Citie na∣med Gymnias. The Lieutenant of the Country sent the Grecians a guide to leade them thorow the enemies Countrey. Himselfe comming vnto them told them, that he in person would within fiue daies bring them to a place, from whence they should see the Sea; if not, he refused not to be put to death. When he was come into his enemies Countrey, he willed them to burne and destroy the Land. Whereby appeared, that no good affection, he bare them, but the losse of the enemie was the only cause, he came vnto the Grecians. The fifth day they came to the holy
Mountaine, which was called Theches.Theches the ho∣ly Mount. The Grcians see the Sea. Assoone as they first came to the top of the Mountaine and saw the Sea, there was much shouting and hollowing. Xenophon and the Reare hearing it, imagined that some enemie gaue vpon the Vant. For there were, that followed them out of the Countrey, which they had fired, and of them some were taken, others slaine, by the Reare, which laid an ambush for them, and they got besides 20 wicker Targets couered with raw and hairie hides of Oxen. When the cry grew more and more, and those, that came after, still ran with all speed to the other, that cried in the Vant, and as more trooped together, the cry the more increased; Xenophon conceiued it was not without great cause. Therefore getting to hors-backe, and taking with him Lucius and the Horse, he speeded on to succour. They heard streight way the voices of Souldiers comforting one another, & crying, The Sea, the Sea; whereupon they ran all forward, both they, that came in the Reare, and also the cariage-beasts, and Horses. When all were come to the top of the Mountaine, they fell to embracing both of one another, and also of the Coronels and Captaines, and that not without teares, and presently, it is not knowne by whose commandement, the Souldiers ca∣ried together stones, and raised vp a great heape, and laid thereon a num∣ber of Targets couered with raw Oxe hides, and of staues and of wicker targets taken from the enemy. The guide himselfe cut asunder the wicker targets, & perswaded the rest to do the like. After this the Grecians sent a∣way their guide hauing giuen him a Horse, a siluer bowle, a Persian sute of apparell, & 10 Daricks. Aboue all other things he desired the rings,6. li. - 10. s. they wore, & had a great many giuen him by the Souldiers. And so shewing them a village, wherein they might lodge, and the way, that led to the Ma∣crons, assoone as the euening approched he departed, holding on his iourney by night. From thence the Grecians marched forward thorow the Macrons Countrey 10 Parasangs in three encampings.12 mile & more a day. The next day they came as far, as the riuer, that diuideth the territories of the Macrons, & of the Scythinians; on their right hand they had a very steep mountaine hard to ascend, on their left another riuer, into which the riuer, that diuideth the countries, did run; and thorow that riuer they must needs passe. It was be∣set with thick trees, albeit not standing very closely together.Passing ouer a riuer. These trees the Grecians cut down, when they came to the riuer side, making as great diligence, as they could, to rid themselues out of the Countrey.Macrons. The Ma∣crons. armed with wicker targets, with pikes and coats made of haire, stood imbattelled on the aduerse side of the riuer, incouraging one another, and casting stones into the riuer, which notwithstanding reached not the Gre∣cians, nor hurt any man. There one of the targetiers came to Xenophon, and told him, that he had serued as a slaue in Athens, & added, that he seemed to know the language of the enemy, & I thinke, quoth he, that this is mine own country; and, if you thinke good, I would faine speake with them. You may do it freely, quoth Xenophon, if you lift; and know of them first, what people they are. They answered, they were Macrons. Aske them a∣gaine, quoth he, why they oppose against vs in armes, & desire to be our
enemies. They answered, because you go about to inuade our countrey. The Coronels willed the interpreter to say, they came not to offer wrong, but hauing made war against the king, they returned into Greece, and would faine come to the Sea. The Macrons asked the Grecians againe, whether they would giue assurance of that,Assurance of a Truce. they said; Who answered, they were readie to giue, & take assurance. Hereupon the Macrons gaue to the Grecians a Barbarian speare, and the Grecians a Grecian speare to them. For they said, that this was the manner of assurance amongst them. But both parties called the gods to witnesse. After assurance giuen the Ma∣crons helped the Grecians to cut down trees, & leuelled the way to further our passage, & came and conuersed with the Grecians furnishing out such a market, as they were able, and led them forward three daies iourney, till they had set them vpon the Colchan mountaines.The Colchan Mountaines. There was in that coun∣trey a high Mountaine, but yet passable, vpon which the Colchans had ranged themselues in battell. At the first the Grecians ordered their troops against them in a Phalange, as if they purposed to inuade the Mountaine in that forme.The manner of ascending a mountaine. Companies drawne into one File apeece. Xenophon aduised them, that laying aside the forme of a Phalange, the best course would be to put themselues into single Compa∣nies drawne out in File. For a Phalange, said he, will soone be broken by reason of the inequalitie of way, which in some part of the Mountaine will be easie enough, in other parts hard to ascend. And it will quickly discourage the Souldiers, to see the Phalange disordered, in which they march. Furthermore if we aduance in a large Front, the enemie, that ex∣ceedeth vs in number, will ouer-front vs, and vse his multitude to most aduantage; if in a narrow Front, it will be no maruell to see our Phalange cut in peeces with the number of missiue weapons and with multitude of men, that will fall vpon it; which comming to passe in any part, the whole Phalange will be distressed. Therefore, as I said, I hold it best to order our selues in companies stretched out in file or depth, euery com∣panie hauing such distance from other,The distance betwixt com∣pany and com∣pany. Ouer-fronting the enemie. that the out-most companies may ouer-front, and be without the points of the enemies wings. So shall we both gain the aduantage of ouer-fronting their army, & marching on the companies being in file, our best men shall first giue on vpon the enemie. And let euerie companie make choise of the fittest way for ascent. Now for the spaces betwixt each companie it will not be easie for the enemie to enter them, the companies flancking euerie space, nor yet to cut off a companie aduancing in such depth. And if any companie chance to be distressed, the next companie is to succour it. And in case any one of the companies attaine the top of the Hill, assure your selues no enemie will keepe his ground. The aduice was approued by all, and they drew their companies euerie one into a File. Xenophon going from the right wing to the left, said to the Souldiers; These, ô Souldiers, whom you see, are the only hindrance of our passage thither, whither we haste with so great desire. If it be possible, we must deuoure them raw. When euerie man was in his place, and euerie companie in File, the companies of the ar∣med amounted to about 80 in number, and euerie companie contained
well-neere 100 men.8000 Armed. Ordering of the light-armed. The Targetiers and Archers were diuided into three parts. One part marched without the left Wing, another without the right, the third in the middest. Then the Coronels commanded the Souldiers to pray. When they had praied, they sang the Pan, and so aduanced forward; and the enemie made head against them. Cheriso∣phus, and Xenophon, and the Targetiers with them, being without the points of the enemies battell marched on. The enemie perceiuing it, sought to meet them, and some of them drawing to the right, some to the left hand, they rent their Phalange asunder, and left much void space in the middest. When the Arcadian Peltasts, whose Captaine Aeschines the Acarnan was, saw them distracted, and seuered, they imagined they fled, and ran on with as much speed, as they could. They were the first, that gained the Mountaine. The armed Arcadians commanded by Cleanor the Orchomenian followed at their heeles. The enemie stood firme in no place, after they saw them come running on, but fled, some one way, some another.The Grecians win the Hill. So the Grecians ascending the Mountaine quartered in many Villages replenished with all things necessarie. In other things there was no cause of maruell, only there were many Bee-hiues, the Hony-combes whereof whosoeuer eat, they became euerie man mad,Strange hony. and scoured vpward and downeward, and none was able to stand vpon their feet. They that eat but a little were like drunken, that eat much like mad, and some like dead men; and there lay so many vpon the ground, that a man would haue thought an ouerthrow had been receiued from an enemie: which caused much discouragement amongst the Troopes. The next day there was no man found dead, and they came to their right sense about the same houre, they fel into their malady. The third & fourth day after they arose, as if they had receiued some medicine. From thence they marched seuen Parasangs in two encampings, & came to the sea side to Trapezond a Grecian city well inhabited, which is situate vpon the Eux∣ine Sea, being a Colonie of the Sinopeans planted in the Colchan Countrey. They remained about 30 dayes in the Colchan countrey spoiling & prey∣ing it. The Trapezuntines exhibited a Market to the Campe, and gaue the Grecians gifts of hospitalitie, viz. Oxen, Meale, and Wine, entertaining them kindly. They transacted likewise for the next neighbour Colchans, especially for those, that inhabited the Plaine, from whom also were sent gifts of hospitalitie, which were for the most part Oxen. Here the Armie prepared the sacrifice, which they had vowed (for a sufficient number of Oxen was sent vnto them) to Iupiter the sauiour, & to Hercules,Superstitious, but yet zealous mindes. who had so well guided and protected them in their whole iourney. They praied likewise to other gods. Besides they ordeined Games of exercise in the Mountaine, where they encamped,. Games. & chose Dracontius the Lacedemonian (who being yet a boy fled his Countrey for killing another boy with the stroke of a Cimitery against his will) to order the running, and to be pre∣sident of the Games. When the sacrifice was ended, they gaue the beasts skins to Dracontius, & willed him to leade to the place which he had ap∣pointed for the race. He shewed them the place, where they stood, saying:
This Hill is the fittest place to run in, chuse what part thereof you will. They replyed: Who can wrestle in so rough and wooddie a ground? The more, quoth he, will be his paine, that taketh the fall. The boies, that were prisoners, did for the most part run the Furlong. More than 60 Cretans,A race of a furlong. A race of 24 furlongs, or three mile: some say of 12 fulongs. , consisting of 1. Pgillatto. 2. Cusus. 3. Saltus. 4.Discus. 5. Lucta. ran the race called Dolichon. Other wrestled, and fought with fists, and vsed the Quinquertian exercise; so that it was a pleasant sight to behold them. For many put themselues into the Exercise, and much emulation arose by reason their companions looked on. The horses also ran, and they were appointed to gallop downe the steepe hill to the Sea with high speed, and againe to returne vp to the alter. So many of them tumbled from the height downeward one vpon another; and when they were to returne vpward, they had much adoe, though neuer so leisurely, to raise themselues against the huge steepnesse of the place. Here you might heare great cries, laughter, and incouragements of one to another. Finis Libri Quarti.
THE FIFTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. IT is formerly discoursed, what the Grecians did in ascending with Cyrus vp to the higher Countries, and in their returne as farre as the Euxine Sea, and how they came downe to Trapezond a Grecian Citie, and sacrificed (according to their Vowes made for their safe returne) as soone as they came to a Countrey that was friend. Afterward meeting together, they consulted about the remnant of their march homeward. Antileon the Thurian was the first that stood vp, and he spake in this man∣ner: I, my companions, haue hitherto wearied my selfe in trussing vp baggage, in going and running and bearing Armes, and keeping order in marching, in guarding, and in fighting. Now, seeing we are come to the Sea, my desire is, laying these trauels aside, to saile forth the rem∣nant of my iourney, and as Vlysses did, lying downe, and stretching my lims out at full length, to sleepe till we come into Greece.Their resolu∣tion to goe by Sea. The Souldiers hearing his words gaue an applause, as if he had spoken well; and after∣wards another, and almost all, that were present, repeated the same words in generall. Then Cherisophus stood vp and said: Anaxibius, that hath the command of the Nauie, is my very good friend. Wherefore,The Lacedemo∣nian Admirall. if you send me to him, I shall returne, as I conceiue, with Gallies and Ships sufficient for your transportation; your selues, since you are resolued to goe by Sea, stay here, till you heare of me againe. I will returne as soone as I can. The Souldiers hearing this, were exceeding ioyfull, and decreed that he should presently take his iourney. After him Xenophon stood vp, and spoke to this effect: Cherisophus is sent away, and we must
remaine here till he returneth. I will therefore aduise with you, what will be our best course,Safe forraging. till he returnes. For neither is our market plen∣tifull enough, nor yet haue we wherewith to buy, excepting only a few, and the Countrey is enemy, and we in danger to lose many Souldiers, if to bring in prouision, we straggle out of our Campe carelesly, and with∣out guard. Therefore mine opinion is, that it will be expedient for vs to make incursions into the Countrey, to the end to furnish our selues with things needfull, but not to wander abroad negligently, left you come in danger; and these things I would haue left vnto our care. It was so decreed. You may, if you please, heare besides, what I am further to say: Some of you, no doubt, will goe out to bring in prey. I hold it therefore best,Notice whi∣ther. that whosoeuer is disposed to issue forth, signifie so much vnto vs, and withall whither he purposeth to goe, that we may see both how many issue out, and how many remaine at home, & also make our selues readie for all euents, and that if it be needfull to giue aide, we may know, whither to addresse our selues. And that if any, that haue no great experience, vndertake an enterprise, the matter be referred to our deliberation, to the end we may enquire, of what power and strength they are,In what place. against whom the enterprise is intended. These things also were so decreed. I pray thinke vpon this likewise, quoth he, that because we haue taken away the enemies riches, they also will do, what they can, to prey vpon vs, and vpon any fit occasion lie in wait, and seeke to en∣trap vs;Sētinels about the Campe. I thinke it therefore meet to put out Sentinells round about our Campe. For if we diuide our selues into small parties, and so guard and scout, it will not be so easie for them to hunt vs. Furthermore, conside∣ration must be had of this: If we were assured, that Cherisophus would returne, bringing sufficient shipping with him, it would be needlesse to speake that, which I am about to speake; but seeing his returne is vn∣certaine, I am of opinion, that we ought here also to make prouision of shipping.Prouision of shipping. For if he returne, and there chance here to be more ships, than we need, we shall saile away with greater ease. But if he bring none, then may we vse them, which we haue prouided here. For I see ships often times passing by. If then requesting long ships of the Trapezuntines, we take these passengers, and keepe them, laying aside their Ruthers, till the number arise great enough for our purpose, it may be, we shall not faile of such a transportation, as we desire. These things were also decreed. You may be pleased also to consider, whether it be not reason vpon common cost to maintaine such, as we shall finde in the ships, so long, as they shall remaine here through our occasion, and to giue them wages, that as they profit vs, so also they may profit themselues by vs. This was in like manner decreed. I conceiue further, quoth he, if shipping sufficient faile, it will be expedient for vs, to command the Cities of the Sea-coast to make the wayes, by which we are to passe, plaine and euen, (for they are reported to be rough,Reparation of Wayes. and hard to march in) and I make no question, but they will easily assent, both because they are in feare, as also because they would gladly be rid of vs. Here the Souldiers cried out,
that there was no cause to speake of preparing the wayes. Xenophon mar∣king their indiscretion, made no decree hereof, but perswaded the neigh∣bour Cities to make the passages readie, alledging they would sooner be gone, if the waies were prepared. They had also a ship of fiftie owers from the Trapezuntians, ouer which they appointed Captaine Dexippus, who dwelt not farre from Lacedemon.Dexippus a run∣away. He not much regarding the pro∣uision of shipping, sailed away, and fled out of Pontus with the ship. Af∣terward, notwithstanding he suffered iust punishment, being put to death by Nicander the Lacedemonian, for seeking to raise a commotion in Thrace against Seuthes. They had besides a ship of thirtie owers ouer which they made Captaine Polycrates the Athenian. Who when he tooke any ships, brought them to the Campe, where the merchandise was ta∣ken out, and keepers set to preserue it safe for the owners. The ships themselues were retained for the iourney. Whilest these things were do∣ing, the Grecians went abroad to seeke the prey of the Countrey, and some of them sped, other some missed of their purpose.Miscarrying of carelesse for∣ragers. Clenetus lea∣ding forth his owne and another Company to a place rough and dange∣rous, was slaine himselfe, and many other with him. When there was no more prouision to be got within such a distance, as that the Souldiers going out a foraging, might returne to the Campe the same day, Xeno∣phon taking guides from the Trapezuntians, led out halfe the army, into the Countrey of the Drylans, the other halfe he left to guard the Campe.The Drylans. For the Colchans, being driuen from their owne houses, were many in number, and sat downe on the top of the hills. The Trapeztians gui∣ded them not to the place, where prouision might easily be made, be∣cause that part of the Country was their friends; but against the Drylans, from whom they had suffered hostility, against a mountainous country, & hard to passe thorow, the inhabitants whereof are accounted the most warlike people of all, that liue in Pontus. After the Grecians were come into the high countrey, the Drylans setting afire all the holds, that see∣med easie to be forced, went their waies; neither was any thing found in the country, but a hog, or an oxe, or some such other cattel, as escaped the fire. There was a Fort, that was called their mother Citie, or Metropolis,A Fort of the Drylans. whither they all fled. Round about it was a hollow bottome strongly deepe, and the accesse to the Fort was hard. The Peltasts speeding on some fiue or six furlongs before the armed, passing the bottome, and espying there many sheepe and other riches, went on against the Fort; and were seconded by many Speare-men,. that followed to make proui∣sion for the Campe; So that the number of those that passed ouer the bottome, was more, than two thousand men. When they could not force the place (for there was a deepe dich cast about it, and sharpe stakes fixed on the ascent of the rampier, and many woodden Towers raised) they began to make their retreat, and the enemy fell out vpon them. Now when they could not well retire (for the descent from the Fort to the bottome,Rashnesse to aduance fur∣ther than a man may well come off. was capable of no more than of one man at once) they sent to Xenophon, who led the Targetiers. The messenger said, that the
Fort was replenished with much riches, but they could neither take it, by reason of the strength thereof, nor yet come off without danger, be∣cause the enemy was fallen out, and fought with them, and the place, thorow which they were to come off, was narrow. Xenophon, when he heard this, leading on to the brinke of the hollow bottome, comman∣ded the armed to lay downe their armes:. Himselfe passing ouer with the Captaines, aduised, whether it were better to bring off those, that were already in the Fort, or to passe ouer the armed also, which he led, to try if the Fort might be won: For the Captaines held, that the retreat could not be made without the losse of many, and that the Fort was not impregnable; to whose opinion Xenophon assented, the rather because of the sacrifice. For the soothsayers signified, that they must vndergoe a fight, but the issue would be good, and such as was to be desired. There∣fore he sent backe the Captaines to bring ouer the armed; himselfe re∣mained behinde, and gathering together the Peltasts suffered none to send a missiue weapon at the enemy. After the armed were come vp, hee willed the Captaines to order their Companies, euery one, as they thought fittest for fight. For the Captaines stood neere together, betwixt whom there was alwaies an emulation about manhood and seruice. The Captaines did accordingly; and Xenophon gaue commandement to all the Peltasts to goe with their fingers inserted into the thongs of their darts, and the Archers with their arrowes nocked, and the light-armed,Commande∣ment is no∣thing without execution. with their leather bags full of stones, that they might be readie when a signe was giuen; and he chose out fit men to see these things exe∣cuted. When all were in readinesse, and the Captaines, and Lieutenants, and they, that accounted themselues nothing inferiour to them, had ta∣ken their places, and looked one vpon another (for it was a gallant sight, to behold the army standing so imbattelled in the field) they be∣gan the Paan, the trumpet sounded, the army gaue a shout, and the ar∣med ran on with all speed. Now the missiue weapons began to flie at all hands, darts, arrowes, bullets and stones out of slings, and many stones from hands.. There were also that threw fire. The enemy oppressed with multitude of missiue weapons, forsooke both the Rampier and the Tow∣ers; so that Agasias the Stymphalian, and Philoxenus the Pelenian, laying downe their weapons,. ascended the Rampier in their coats alone, and one drawing and helping vp another, and many entring the Fort seemed now to be taken, and the Peltasts and light-armed ranging vp and downe, fell a spoiling all they could. Xenophon stood at the gate keeping out the armed. For there appeared other enemies vpon some strong heights of the mountaines. Not long after a cry arose within, and the Grecians fled, some with things taken in the Fort, some being wounded, and the throng about the gate was great. Those, that ran out of the gates, being asked what the matter was, said, There was a Citadell within, and a multitude of enemies which fell out, and charged the light-armed, and Peltasts. Wherupon Xenophon proclaimed by Tlmides the crier, that who∣soeuer would haue his part in the prey of the Fort, should enter. Many
therefore entred, and beat backe those, that salied out, and again shut vp the enemy into the Citadell. The Grecians spoiled and carried away all,. Act. c. 9. v. 40. that was found without the Citadell. But the armed laid downe their armes partly by the Rampier, partly at the way that led to the Citadell. Xenophon and the Captaines in the meane time cast their eies about to re∣solue, whether the Citadell were possible to be taken, or not. For so all should be safe, otherwise the retreat must needes be full of danger. After they had viewed it, they held it impregnable.The manner of the retreat. Thereupon they put themselues in order for retreat, and euerie man pulled vp the stakes of the Rampier as they came in his way. The vnseruiceable were sent out with the prey, and most of the Armed, euerie Captaine retaining on∣ly such, as he trusted. Assoone as they began to retreat a multitude of enemies armed with wicker Targets, and Speares, and Greeues and Paph∣lagonian head-peeces salied out of the Citadell.Fight in a street. Many other climed vp on the Houses which stood on either side the street, that led to the Cita∣dell; whereby it grew dangerous to giue chace toward the Gates of the Citadell. For they threw downe mightie Timber logs from aboue, and made it vnsafe either to stand still, or goe off; and the night approching brought terror with it. Fighting in this sort, and irresolued what to doe, some God gaue a meanes of safetie. For suddainly a House on the right hand, it was vnknowne by whose kindling, burst out into a flame.. Fire to fauour a retreat. The House no sooner fell, but the enemies, that were gotten vp to the Houses on the right hand shifted away. When Xenophon saw this worke of For∣tune, he commanded the Houses on the left hand to be likewise fired; which being made of Wood caught fire quickly, whereby the enemie forsooke the Houses on that side also, and the Armie was annoied only by those in Front, who, doubtlesse were like to fall vpon the Reare, in their retreat and departure. Here Xenophon gaue order, that all,A meanes to retreat. who were without the reach of missiue weapons, should bring Wood, and lay it betwixt the enemie and them, and when the store was sufficient, it was set on fire. The Houses were also fired, that stood next the Rampier of the Towne ditch, that the enemie might be busied on all sides. So by the helpe of fire betwixt the enemie, and them, they made a hard retreat. With this fire were consumed the whole Citie, the Houses, Turrets, Rampier, and all things else, except the Citadell. The next day the Gre∣cians hauing gained sufficient prouision retired toward their Campe: but because they feared the way, that led toward Trapezond, as being steepe and narrow, they laid a false ambush. There was in the Campe a Mysian by nation and name,A false ambush. who taking vnto him foure or fiue Cretans remained in a wooddy plat of ground, making semblance to the enemie, as though he meant to hide himselfe. Their Targets being of Brasse cast glimmering light here and there thorow the Wood, which the enemie descrying feared as much, as if it had been a true ambush. In the meane time the Armie was descended into good ground, and the Mysian, think∣ing they had now gained way enough, gaue the word to his companions euerie man to shift away amaine, and immediatly he & his consorts fled.
The Cretans forsaking the ordinarie way (for they said the enemie might out-run them and take them prisoners) and conueying themselues into Woods, and tumbling downe thorow steepe and rough Forrests, came safe to the Armie: but the Mysian flying in the ordinarie way, cried out for succour. He was rescued & brought away wounded, and the Souldi∣ers, that rescued him, retired by little and little, casting Darts, hauing also amongst them a few Cretans, who shot at the enemie. So they came all safe to the Campe. When neither Cherisophus returned, and no more prouision was to be found for the Campe, they decreed to proceed on their iourney,They continue their iourney by Land. and put on ship-board the sicke, and those that were aboue fortie yeeres of age, and children, and women, and vessels vnnecessary for the iourney; and shipping likewise Philesius and Sophonetus the eldest of the Coronels, they committed the charge of all to them. The rest went on by Land. The way was prepared and made plaine and euen; and in three daies march they reached as farre as Cerasunt a Grecian Citie standing vpon the Sea, being a Colonie of the Sinopeans situate in the Colchian Countrey. Here they remained ten dayes, and tooke a muster of Armes and of the number of their people, and found 8600 men. So many were left of the 10000 or thereabouts, that ascended with Cyrus into Persia; the rest were consumed by the enemies hand and by Snow, and some by sicknesse. Here also they diuided the money, that arose out of the sale of Captiues,Tythes amōngst the Gentiles. and the Coronels tooke into their hands the tenth part, which was seuered as an offering to be made to Apollo, and Diana of Ephesus▪ euerie one keeping and preseruing a share for the gods. Neon the Asinean was appointed to receiue the portion, which should haue been deliuered to Cherisophus.Xenophon care∣ful to discharge the trust repo∣sed in him. Xenophon therefore making readie the offering for Apollo, bestowed and hallowed it in the treasurie of the Athenians at Delphos, and inscribed thereon both his owne name, and the name of Proxenus the Baeotian, who was put to death with Clear∣chus. For Proxenus was Xenophons Host. The offring for Diana of Ephe∣sus, because himselfe was like to incurre hazard at such time, as he depar∣ted out of Asia toward Baeotia with Agesilas;For this depar∣ture, see Xenop. in vita Agesilai. 657. & Hist. Graec. lib. 4.513. B. he left with Megabyzus Dia∣naes Priest, and willed him in case himselfe escaped the danger, to make restitution to his owne hands; if he miscaried, to consecrate it to Diana, and bestow it in such sort, as in his opinion should be most acceptable to the goddesse. But aferward, when Xenophon was banished his country, and dwelled now at Scylunt,Scylunt. which Towne was built by the Lacedemoni∣ans neere to Olympia, Megabyzus came to Olympia to see the Games, and restored to Xenophon the money left in his custodie: and Xenophon recei∣uing it bought a portion of Land for the goddesse in a place designed by Apollo, thorow which the Riuer Sellenus runneth. At Ephesus also there runneth a Riuer Sellenus hard by Dianaes Temple, and either of these Riuers nourisheth both other fish,The land con∣serated to Diana. & fish with shels. But in the Scyluntine portion of Land there are beasts of all sorts fit to be hunted. He built a temple also, and an altar with the consecrated mony; and from thence∣forth gathering alwaies the tenth of the fruits growing on the
land, he offered sacrifice to Diana; and all the Citizens and neere-dwel∣lers, as well men, as women, are partakers of the feast. The goddesse al∣loweth them that come, meale, bread, wine, and iunkets, and a portion of the flesh of those beasts, which are either taken from the consecrated ground, and sacrificed, or else killed in hunting. The sonnes of Xeno∣pho, and of other Citizens exercise the hunting against the time of the feast; and other men also hunt with them, such as are desirous of the sport. There are taken partly out of the Holy-land, partly out of Phaloe, wilde Boares, Goats, and Red-deere. The place lieth in the way, as you goe from Lacedemon to Olympia, distant about twentie Furlongs from the Temple of Olympian Iupiter. There are in the consecrated ground, groues and mountaines stored with trees sufficient to nourish hogs, and goats, and sheepe, and horses; so that the carriage-beasts of such, as come to the feast, are largely prouided for. About the Temple it selfe there is a groue of fruit-trees of all kindes, that are fit to be eaten, after they wax ripe. The Temple it selfe, as much, as a little one may resemble a great, is like to the Ephesian Temple, and the Image made of Cypres, like to the golden Image at Ephesus. By the Temple is a pillar erected & inscribed with these words: The ground consecrated to Diana. He that hath the pos∣session and vse of it, let him pay the tenth of euery yeares increase, and with the ouer-plus repaire and maintaine the Temple. In case he neglect this, the goddesse will take order for her owne. From Cerasunt they, that were before shipped, held on their course by Sea, the rest made forward by land. When they were come to the borders of the Mosynecans, they sent vnto them Timosithes a Trapezte (who was their guest) to de∣mand,The Mosyne∣cans. whether they should passe thorow their countrey, as friends, or as enemies. They trusting to the strength of their countrey, answered; It would be all one to them, which they did. Timositheos after this answer returned, gaue the Grecians to vnderstand, that there were other Mosyne∣cans dwelling further off, that were enemies to those, whereupon it was thought good to send vnto them to see, if they would enter into fellow∣ship of warre with the Grecis. Timositheos being sent, returned, bringing with him the chiefe Magistrates. After their arriuall,Aide against a common ene∣mie. they and the Grecian Coronels assembled together, & Xenophon began in this manner, Timosi∣theos being his Interpreter. We, ô Mosynecans, because we want ship∣ping, are desirous to passe into Greece on foot. They who hinder vs, as we vnderstand, are your enemies. You haue now an opportunitie pre∣sented vnto you, if you lift to imbrace it, by entring into societie of war with vs, to be reuenged of them for all the wrong, they haue any time hereofore done you, and to make them henceforth your vassals. If you at this present let vs passe by without taking the opportunitie, consider with your selues if euer hereafter, you are like to haue the like forces ioine with you in league. The chiefe Magistrate of the Mosyncans an∣swered▪ he was desirous to effect the proposition, and to ioyne in society of warre with the Greci. Goe to then, quoth Xenophon, wherein will yo imploy vs, if we become your confderates? and you, what aide can
you giue vs to further our passage? They replied, We are of strength enough to enter our common enemies countrey on the further side, and to send you shipping and men, both to assist you in the field, and to be guides of your iourney. Vpon this taking and giuing assurance they de∣parted. The next day they came with 300 boats, euery boat made of one peece of wood.. In each boat were three men, of whom two landing laid downe their armes in order, one remained behinde in the boat; And they which remained in the boats sailed away straightwaies, the other staied behinde, and embattelled themselues in this manner: They stood a hundred deepe,. The order and armes of the Mosynecans. like as the stage-dancers are wont, filing them∣selues one opposite to the other, hauing all Wicker Targets couered with white hayrie oxe-hydes, the Targets in forme like to an Iuie leafe. In the right hand each man held a dart of about six cubits long, armed with a head before, the stele being round. They had coats, that coue∣red their knees,. & were as thicke as a hempen cord, that you binde a co∣uerlet withall. Vpō their heads they had leather head-peeces like to them, which the Paphlagonians weare,. in the middest whereof ariseth a Cone resembling the forme of a Tyara. They bore iron hatchets besides. After this one of them beginning, all the rest sung and marched forward by measure, and passing through the rankes and armes of the Grecians, forthwith aduanced against the enemy toward a Fort, which seemed ea∣sie to be won. It lay before the Citie, which is called the Metropolis, or mother Citie, and is held in chiefe estimation amongst the Mosynecans, and for it they warred one against another. For they, who enioyed it, had their feet vpon the neckes of the other Mosynecans. They said, that the present possessours had no right nor lawfull possession, but being common to all, they had done wrong in entring & detaining it to them∣selues alone. Some of the Grecians also followed them, not by order or appointment of the Coronels, but in greedinesse of pillage. The enemy held himselfe coy a while, but when he saw them neere the Fort, he salli∣ed out, and putting them to flight killed a great number of the Barbari∣ans, and some of the Grecians, thatascended with them; and followed the chace, till he might see the army of the Grecians ready to come to reskue. Then turning about he retired; and cutting off the heads of those, that were slaine, shewed them to the Grecians, and to their enemies, and with∣all danced, singing a kinde of measure. The Grecians were much grieued, that by this action the enemy was emboldned, and that the Grecians in good number were seene to flie, which they neuer did before in all this iourney. But Xenophon calling the Souldiers together, spake vnto them in this sort: Be not dismayed, (O Souldiers) with that, which is happe∣ned. The good of it is as great, as the euill. For first of all you now know certainly, that those, that shall be our guides, are enemies to them, vnto whom of necessitie we must be enemies. Then those Grecians, that see∣med to contemne our order▪ and thinking themselues to be able to o as much with the Barbarians▪ as with vs, feele the smart of their owne folly, & will hardly hereafter be brought to leaue our company. But you must
prepare your selues to shew the Barbarians your friends, that you are bet∣ter men, than they, and to let the enemy know, that they haue at this pre∣sent to do with another sort of people, than with those, who fought dis∣orderly with them of late. This day therefore they rested. The next day after they had sacrificed, and the sacrifice portended good fortune, they dined, and ordering their companies in file,. and placing the Barbarians on the left hand, they aduanced against the enemy, hauing the Archers be∣twixt the companies▪ that were in file, somwhat more backward than the front of the armed. For some of the light-armed of the enemy ran forth, and cast stones; which quickly were repressed by our Archers & Peltasts. The rest aduanced leisurely first toward the Fort, from which the day before the Barbarians and Grecians were put to flight. For there the ene∣mie stood embattelled, and made head against the Grecians. And first they fought and made good the place against the Peltasts, but when the armed approached, immediatly they turned their backs. The Peltasts followed with speed, giuing chace vpward toward the mother City or Metropo∣lis, the armed moued forward in order. When they were come vp to the houses of the Metropolis, the enemies ioyned and fought all together, and threw darts: and hauing thicke and long pikes, such as a man could hardly weild, with those they endeuoured to defend themselues hand to hand. When the Grecians gaue no ground, but ioyntly pushed forward, the Barbarians fled, and all of them forsooke the Fort.The Fort ta∣ken. Their King that was in a woodden Tower built in the Citadell (whom in common they nourish, as long as he remaineth there, and guardeth the place) sought not to escape away, nor they that were in the Fort before taken in, but were burnt together with the woodden houses. The Grecians rifling and spoyling the place,Bread a yeare old. found in the houses treasures of bread heaped and hoorded vp, as the Mosynecans reported, the last yeare, according to the manner of the countrey. The new corne with the straw lay by it selfe, the most part whereof was eared. There was found also peeces of Dol∣phins salted, and laid vp in vessels, and also the fat of Dolphins,Fat of Dolphins Chesnuts. which the Mosynecans vse as the Grecians doe oyle, and many and great chestnuts in garrets, which haue no manner of cleft in them. They boyle these, and vse them in stead of bread. Wine was found likewise, which being vn∣mingled seemed sharpe by reason of the sowrenesse, being mingled it had a good sauour, and was pleasant in taste. The Grecians hauing dined here marched forward deliuering vp the City to the Mosynecans their confe∣derates. Of other Forts belonging to the enemy, which they passed by, some of the weaker sort were forsaken, other some willingly yeelded, and gaue themselues into the Grecians hands. The most part of them are of this kinde.10 English mile. They stand distant one from another 80 furlongs more or lesse. When the country people cry out one to another, they heare it from City to City by reason of the height and hollownesse of the coun∣trey. After they were come to the borders of their confederate Mosyne∣cans, they shewed them boyes (rich mens children) that were fed and fatted with sodden Chestnuts, which boyes were exceeding tender and
white, and not much lesse in bredth than in length, hauing their backs various, and all the foreparts rased and marked with diuers formes of flowers. They sought also openly to vse the whores, which the Grecians brought with them: For that is their manner. All both men and women are white of complexion.The barba∣rousnesse of the Mosynaecans. They that were in this iourney, held the coun∣trey more barbarous, and more differing from the Grecian rites of liuing, than all the rest they passed thorow. For they doe openly and before a multitude, that which other men doe, and dare not doe but in priuate; and being alone they demeane themselues, as if they were in company. They speake to themselues, laugh to themselues, and dance, whereso∣euer they become, as though they sought to please other mens eyes. Thorow this countrey both friend and enemy the Grecians marched in eight encampings, and came to the Chalybes. These are a people but few in number, and in subiection to the Mosynecans, and liue the most part of them vpon iron works.The Tibarenes. From thence they passed to the Tibarenes, whose countrey is more champaine, and hath Forts situate by the Sea side, that are not very strong. The Coronels resolued to fall vpon this countrey, to the end to gaine some riches for the Army. Therefore they tooke not the hospital gifts which the Tibarens sent, but bade them stay till they had taken counsell by the sacrifice which they offred. After they had offred many, at last all the Soothsayers told them plaine, that the gods allowed not of the warre. Therefore they accepted the gifts of hospitality, and marching as thorow a countrey, that was friend, they came to Cotyora, a Grecian Citie, a colony of the Synopaeans, situate in the Tibaren territory. Thus far the Armie marched on foot.The retreat of the Grecians was 1352 mile and a halfe to Cotyora. The length of the descent of the way from the place in the Babylonian territory, where the battell was fought, to Cotyora, was 122 encampings, 620 Parasangs, 10820 furlongs: of the time eight moneths. They staied at Cotyora 45 dayes. During this abode they first sacrificed to the gods, and then made shewes euery one according to the manner of his countrey, and proposed games of exer∣cise, and tooke their prouision partly out of Paphlagonia, partly out of the territory of the Cotyorites. For they neither exhibited a market, nor receiued the sicke within their gates. About this time came Ambassadors from the Sinopaeans, fearing the danger that might befall the Cotyorites, both in regard of their City (for it was theirs, and paid them tribute) and of their territory, which as they heard was spoiled; and comming into the Campe,Embassage of the Sinopaeans. they spake thus by the mouth of Hecatonymus, who was their Spokesman, and reputed a good Orator. The City of Sinopis (ô Souldiers) hath sent vs vnto you, partly commending you, that being Grecians you haue ouercome the Barbarians, partly to congratulate with you,Accuseth the Grecians of wrong. that you are returned safe out of so many perils and dangers, as we are informed you haue beene in: But we that are Grecians desire of you, that are also Grecians, that your comming may bee profitable and not preiudicial vnto vs, considering to this day we neuer did you any wrong. These Cotyorites are our Colonie, and we are the men that conquered their Territory from the Barbarians, and gaue it to them to inhabite and
manure. For which cause they pay vs a tribute imposed vpon them, as doe likewise the Cerasuntians and Trapezuntians; so that what wrong soeuer you doe them, we imagine we suffer it our selues. We heare then, that entring into the City by force some of you quarter in the houses, other take what they thinke good, out of the Country against the owners wills. If you hold on this course, we shall be forced to craue aid of Cory∣las and the Paphlagonians against you, and of any else that we can make our friends.The defence of Xenophon. Here Xenophon standing vp spake thus in the behalfe of the Souldiers: We (ô Sinopaeans) are come into these quarters ioyfull and glad, that out of so many perils we haue preserued our liues and armes. For to bring away spoile enriching our selues, and withall to fight with the enemy, was impossible. And now after we came to Grecian Cities, in Trapezund, wee bought such things, as we stood in need of (for they gaue vs a Market) and whereas they honoured vs, and sent vs gifts of hospitality, we did our best to honour them, and not only abstained from the Barbarians, that were their friends, but also harried and wasted to the vttermost of our power, those Barbarians, against whom they led vs. They whom the City sent in friendship with vs, as Guides, are present here, aske them, I pray, how we behaued our selues toward them. But whithersoeuer we come, and haue no Market either in the Territorie of Barbarians or Grecians, we take things necessary, not out of insolency, but forced by necessitie. We accounted the Carduchans, Chaldeans, and Taochans enemies (albeit no Subiects to the King, and yet men to be fea∣red) because they gaue vs no Market, and we could not want needfull prouision. The Macrons, albeit Barbarians, in regard they furnished vs such a Market, as they could, we dealt friendly with, and tooke nothing from them by force. If the Cotyorites, who you say are yours, haue not the like friendship, they may thanke themselues: For they behaued them∣selues not as friends vnto vs, but shutting their gates, neither receiued vs into their City, nor yet gaue vs a Market without. The cause hereof they lay vpon your Gouernour. But where you say, that we entred, and now lodge in the City by force, the truth is, we requested them to receiue our sicke men into their houses. When they opened not the Gates, we, offe∣ring no other violence, entred there, where they would haue kept vs out. The sicke men lodge indeed in their houses, but yet they liue of their owne without charging their Hosts a penny. And wee set guards vpon the Gates, left our sicke men should haply be at the mer∣cy of your Gouernours, and not in our power to take to vs, when we are disposed. The rest of vs, as you see, are orderly encamped in the Field, readie to gratifie thos that desere well at our hands, and to defend our selues against such, a offer vs iniurie. But where you threatned, that you would make Corylas and the Paphlagonians your friends to ioine with you against vs, Know, that if we must needs▪ we care not to warre against you bot (for we haue alreadie ought with umbers farre exceeding yours) but, if we list, we can as well gaine the friendship of Corylas and the Paphlagonians, as you. For e are giuen to vnderstand, that he
would faine become owner of your Citie, and of the Fortresses ioining to the Sea. We can then by furthering his desire, make him our friend.After these words the fellow Embassadors of Hecatonymus declared, that they were thoroughly agrieued, with that, which Hecatonymus had spo∣ken, and one of them stepping forth said: We come not to denounce warre, but to shew, we are your friends; and we will honour you with gifts of hospitalitie, if you please to come to the Sinopaean Citie. For the present we will enioine our people here to furnish you with what they are able, because we see, all is true, which you haue spoken. Afte this the Cotyorites sent gifts of hospitalitie,Cotyora a City. and the Grecian Coronels entertai∣ned the Sinopaean Embassadors with feasts and bankets, and they confer∣red about many things with all friendship and good liking; and sought to informe themselues in other things, but principally in the remainder of their iourney, and in such matter, as concerned them both. This was the end of that day. The next day the Coronels called the Souldiers together,Consultation about the re∣mainder of then iourney. and it was thought expedient to consult in the presence of the Siopaeans about the rest of the way into Greece. For if they were to set forward on foot, the Sinopaeans seemed to be good guides (for they had much experience of Paphlagonia) if by Sea, they might stand them in stead, seeming alone able to furnish out shipping enough for the whole Armie. Calling therefore the Embassadors vnto them, they consulted together and praied them being Grecians to assist them being also Grecians with their best affections, and aduice. Then Hecatonymus standing vp =excused himselfe in that, he spoke concerning the making of the Paphla∣gonian friend, and added it was not his meaning to make warre against the Grecians, but albeit it were in their power to enter into friendship with the Barbarians, yet would they in loue prefer, and much more esteeme the respect of the Grecians. When he was required to deliuer his opinion, after he had made his praier to the gods, he begun in this sort: If I shall aduise you that, which my minde perswdeth me to be best and fittest for you, I pray the gods I may haue many good and pros∣perous fortunes: If otherwise, let the contrarie befall me. For I take this, if any other, to be of that kind of counsell, which is accounted holy: and if I shall now giue you good aduice, many of you will loue and commend me; if ill, as many will detest and curse me. This then I am assured of, if you iourney by Sea, the trouble will be ours, in regard that we must furnish you out shipping. If you hold on by Land, you your selues are the men, that must make way with your Swords. I will not∣withstanding deliuer those things, which lie in my knowledge. For I am well acquainted with the Countrey of Paphlagoia, and wth their For∣ces. Both this and that Countrey haue large Plaines and high Moun∣taines, and I know the way which you must of necessitie hold, and to say truth there is no other way then to passe along, where the Mountaines on both hands lift vp themelues with huge and exeding lotie hores▪ which a few men hauing taken and possessed▪ may ily maintaine, nei∣ther is there any multiud so great, that can dislodge them, or gaine the
passage. This will I make manifest to any, whomsoeuer you shall be pleased to send with me. From hence there follow large Champaignes, and the inhabitants are furnished with such a power of Horse, as the Bar∣barians themselues esteeme to be better, then all that serue the King: and albeit the King sent for them, yet they absolutely refused to goe, their Gouernour carying too loftie a minde to be vnder any other mans com∣mand. But admit you can by stealth and preuention gaine the Moun∣taines, and likewise beat their Horse and Foot, which are in number aboue twelue Myriades, yet are you to passe ouer Riuers:120000. First Thermo∣d a Riuer of three Plethers in bredth,30 Foot. which I conceiue you will hardly get ouer, especially a multitude of enemies opposing against you on the further side, and many likewise pursuing you behinde. The second Iris of three Plethers of bredth likewise.300 Foot. The third Halis two Furlongs broad, which cannot be passed without shipping,1200 Foot. and who will furnish you with Ships? I may say the same of Parthenius, to which you must come, after you are ouer Halis. For my part therefore, I say not, that the iourney will be hard, but I say, it will be altogether impossible. But if you take your selues to Sea, you may without difficultie saile hence to Sinope, and from thence to Heraclea. From Heraclea you may goe on easily enough either by Land or Sea. For there is sufficient shipping at Heraclea. After he had thus discoursed, some suspected, that his speech tended to gratifie and retaine the frienship of Corylas (for he was his Guest) other, that he did it in hope to gaine reward for his counsell; some other, that he so discoursed, because he feared lest the Sinopaean Countrey should sustaine losse and spoile, if the Armie continued their march by Land. The Grecians decreed to hold on their iourney by Sea.Resolution to goe by Sea. This conclusion being made, Xenophon said: You see (ô Sinopaeans) that the Armie is readie to hold the way, which you aduise them to Yet must you vnderstand thus much, that we are so determined to take Sea, if we shall finde such sufficiencie of shipping, that not one of vs shall need to be left behinde. But in case some of vs be to saile, other to re∣maine here, assure your selues, we will not goe, nor stirre a foot from hece. For this we all know, wheresoeuer we shall be the stron∣ger, we shall be both able to saue our selues from danger, and to command such things as shall be needfull for vs. Where we are found the weaker, our condition will be no better, then if we were Slaues. When the Embassadours heard this, they aduised them to send Embassadours to the Sinopaean; and they sent Callmachus the Arcadian, Aristo the Athenian, and Samolas the Achaian. So they tooke their iourney. Now at this time, when Xanophon considered  himselfe, and saw, that there were present in Pontus many armed Grecian, many Peltasts, many Archers and Slingers, and Horse, all of them very sufficient, by reason of their long vse in armes, and that the like power could not be raised with a small expence▪. Intention of planting a Colonie. he esteemed it a thing honourable to adde so much territorie and power vnto Greece, by plting a Colonie there. The Colonie he imagined would be great,
when he weighed in his minde, their owne multitude, and the number of the inhabitants of Pontus round about. Hereupon calling to him Sila∣nus the Ambraciote, who had beene Cyrus his Diuiner, he asked counsell of the gods by sacrifice, before he acquainted the Souldiers with the matter. Silanus fearing the sequell hereof, and that the army might hap∣pily remaine there, spread abroad in the army, that Xenophon had in pur∣pose to stay them, and to build a Citie, and to purchase himselfe a name, and great power and gouernment. Silanus himselfe was desirous to re∣turne into Greece with all speed. For he kept by him vnspent the 3000 Daricks,A Daricke, a peece of mony with Darius image vpon it: the value of the peece 13. s. A slight of those of the contrary opi∣nion. which Cyrus gaue him, when sacrificing hee foretold the ten daies, before the end of which no battell should be offered by the King. When the Souldiers heard hereof, some were of opinion, it was good to stay, other of the contrary. Timasion the Dardanian, and Thorax the Baeo∣tian told certaine Heraclean and Sinopaean Merchants, which were in the Campe, that vnlesse they gaue pay to the Souldiers, to prouide things necessary for Nauigation, it would be danger, lest so great forces should remaine in Pontus. For this is Xenophons aduice, quoth they, and he ex∣horteth vs as soone, as shipping comes, to say to the army out of hand: We see you now (ô Souldiers) destitute both of meanes to prouide for Nauigation, and also to buy and carry with you, any thing to gratifie your friends at home. But if it please you to make choice to inhabite some part of the country, that lieth here round about in Pontus, and giue free liberty to any man, that is disposed, either to depart to his owne countrey, or to remaine here, shipping is readie now, and at your deuo∣tion, and you may on the sudden fall vpon what part you are resolued. The Merchants hearing this, made report to their Cities. Timasion the Dardanian dispatched away with them, Erimachus the Dardanian, & Tho∣rax the Boeotian, to signifie as much by word of mouth. As soone as the message was deliuered, the Sinopaeans and Heracleots sent immediately to Timasion to spare for no money, but at what price soeuer to bring to passe, that the army might ship it selfe and saile away from thence. He willingly heard their answer, and after spake thus in the assembly of the Souldiers.Timasions speech, that desired to goe to his owne countrey. There is no reason (fellow Souldiers) to harken to any stay here, nor to preferre any thing before your returne into Greece. I vnder∣stand, there are some, that aske counsell of the gods about this businesse, and yet neuer make you acquainted with it. But if you will heare me, and after the new Moone be pleased to saile away from hence, I promise to giue euery one of you a Cyzicene the moneth, and will bring you to Tro∣as,A Cyzicen is 18. s. from whence I am banished; and my countrey will, no question, giue you good entertainment, being glad of my returne; and I will bring you thither, where you shall haue good store of spoile; For I know Aeis, and Phrigia, and Troas, and all Pharnabazus his gouernment; the last, be∣cause it is the place of my birth; the other, because I haue serued there vnder Clearchus and Dorcyllidas. Then Thorax the Baotian (who euer con∣tended with Xenophon about the Coronels place) stood vp presently, and said: That if they were disposed to goe out of Pontu, they might  in
Cheroesus, a faire and rich countrey; in which he that would,Thorax the Bootian. might stay and inhabit, he that was otherwise minded might returne home. But it was ridiculous, seeing there was land enough and plentifull to be had in Greece, to seeke to nestle and plant themselues amongst the Barbarians. And in the meane time, while you come there, I, quoth he, as Timasion hath done, doe promise you pay. Thus he spake, not being ignorant, what had passed betwixt Timasion and the Heracleots and Sino∣pans concerning taking ship, and sayling out of the Countrey. All this while Xenophon held his peace. Then two Achaeans, Philesius and Lyc standing vp, said: It was not to be suffered, that Xenophon had both pri∣uately perswaded the army to stay there,. and without their knowledge asked counsell of the gods about their stay, and now, when the matter came in publike question, was mute, and would say nothing. Hereupon Xenophon was enforced to stand vp, and speake thus;Xenophons speech. I for my part (O Souldiers) as you see, aske counsell of the gods as often, as I can, both concerning you, and concerning my selfe, that I may speake, aduise, and doe that, which may be most for your and mine owne honour and pro∣fit. And now I haue sacrificed about this very businesse, to know, whe∣ther it would proue better for me to speake to you, and to enter into it, or altogether to forbeare, and not meddle withall. Silanus the sooth∣sayer answered me, that the inwards, which is the matter of most impor∣tance, were faire (for he knew, that by reason of my continuall vsance to be at sacrifice, I my selfe was not vnskilfull therein:) But he added, that a deceit and ambush against me, might well be discouered in the sa∣crifice: for he knew very well his owne resolution to accuse me to you. And hee gaue out in the Campe, that I aduised with my selfe to effect these things without your consent. For my part, if I saw you in want, the scope of my thoughts should be, to bring to passe, that after you had ta∣ken one Citie or other, he that was disposed might presently saile away, he that was otherwise minded might remaine here, till he had prouided some matter of profit for his friends. But now since the Heracleots & Si∣nopaeans will both send you shipping, & there are, that haue promised you pay after the new Moone, I hold it a thing of no small moment, that you haue meanes to bring you in safety to the place you desire, and withall to receiue pay for your iourney. And not onely I my selfe desist from my former opinion, but also tell them, who come to me otherwise-minded, it will be better, if they also change theirs. For being many to∣gether, as now we are, you will be both honoured and esteemed of all, and besides want no furniture of things needfull; because in your strength will be included power also of possessing the riches of him, that is weaker than your selues. But if you diuide your selues, you will neither be able to make prouision of victuall, nor yet depart hence in the safety you desire. So that I am of your opinion to continue our iourney toward Greece. And in case any man remaine behinde, or forsake the Armie before it be wholly in safety, I hold him worthy to be punished as an offender. Whosoeuer is of this opinion, let him lift vp his hand.
All held vp their hands. Silanus hereupon cried out, and went about to perswade, that euery man of right ought to haue liberty to depart at his pleasure. But the Souldiers would not heare him, nay they threatned, if he were taken shifting away, he should pay for it soundly. Afterward, when the Heracleots vnderstood that the Armie was resolued to saile away, and that Xenophon had agreed thereto, they sent shipping, but the money that they promised to Timasion and Thorax for pay, they sent not. From that time forward, they who promised this money, were much perplexed, and began to stand in feare of the Armie. And taking to them the other Coronels, in the number of whom were all, but Neo the Asinite, Cherisophus his Lieutenant (for Cherisophus was absent) and communi∣cating with them, what they had negotiated, they came to Xenophon, and told him they repented of their former opinion, and now they thought it best for the Armie to saile to Phasis, and to take into their hands the Phasian territorie. The sonne of Aeetas reigned ouer the Phasians at that time. Xenophon answered, he would propound no such thing to the Ar∣mie: you, if you please, may call an assembly, and make the motion your selues. Timasion the Dardanian deliuered then his opinion, which was not to call an assembly of the Armie, but euery Coronell to deale with his Captaines, and to seeke to perswade them seuerally to be of that opi∣nion. So they parted, and laboured to put this resolution in practise. In the meane time it came to the Souldiers eares, and Neo gaue out, that Xe∣nophon hauing drawne the other Coronels to his party, plotted how to deceiue the Armie, and bring them backe againe to Phasis. The Souldi∣ers tooke it in very ill part, & gathered together, and stood in rounds, and it was to be feared, they would do as they did before to the messengers of the Cholcans, and to them that had the ouerseeing of the prouision of the Market, of whom they stoned all, that escaped not to the Sea. When Xenophon perceiued it, he thought it fit to warne a publike meeting with all speed, and not to suffer them to come together of themselues; and he commanded the Cryer to summon the assembly. No sooner heard they the Cryer, but they came together with all speed. Here Xenophon accused not the Coronels in that they came vnto him, but spake in this manner: I heare (O Souldiers) that there is a man who accuseth me, and giueth out, that I seeke to deceiue you, and bring you backe againe to Phasis. Heare me therefore for Gods sake; and if I shall seeme to wrong you, my selfe will hold my selfe vnworthy to depart hence, be∣fore I suffer punishment for my deserts. But if you finde them, that slander me, to be in the wrong, vse them I pray you, as you shall thinke they deserue. You know, I make no question, in what quarter of heauen the Sunne ariseth, and where he setteth, and that in case a man were to goe into Greece, he is to iourney Westward; if backe againe to the Bar∣barians, toward the East. Can any man then deceiue you, as though the Sunne should arise and set in a contrary quarter of heauen? Besides, we see that the North wind carieth vs out of Pontus into Greece, the South inward toward Phasis. And it is a common speech amongst you: The
North wind bloweth, we haue now a faire passage into Greece. If then a man sought to deceiue you, he were to put you a boord, when the wind bloweth South. Yea but I meane to ship you, when it is calme. Well then, shall not I saile in one ship, you in a hundred at least? How can I then either compell you against your will, or lead you on by decei∣uing you? But say you were beguiled and bewitched by me, and so brought to Phasis. We shall then land there, and you will easily perceiue, that you are not in Greece, and I shall be but one man, that deceiued you, you neere 10000 that are deceiued, and all in Armes. How then can any one man cast himselfe into more certaine danger, then by such coun∣sell about himselfe and about you? But these are the speeches of oolish men, and of such as enuie me, because I am honoured by you. And yet they enuie me without cause. For which of them doe I hinder either to speake, if he can, that which is for your good, or to fight for you, if he be disposed, or to watch and be carefull for your safetie? Doe I oppose against any man in the election of Commanders? Nay, I giue way to all; on Gods name command he that will; only let him doe that which shall tend to your good. I haue spoken enough concerning these things. If any of you thinke, that either himselfe or other are deceiued by these words of mine, let him come forth, and shew wherein. Now because you haue heard enough hereof, depart not hence, I pray, till you be partakers of a matter, which I see is begun in the Armie already, and i it creepe fur∣ther, and shall be found such, as is reported, it will be time for vs to take aduice concerning our selues, that we seeme not the vilest and most execrable creatures that euer were, both towards the gods, and towards men, and towards our confederates, and towards our enemies, and at last grow into an vniuersall contempt of all men. The Souldiers hearing this, wondred what it might be, and bid him tell it out plainly. Then he began againe: You remember that in the Barbarian mountaines there were certaine Villages allied in friendship with the Cerasuntians, from which mountains there were that descended, and sold vs beasts for sacri∣fice, and such other things as they had. I thinke some of you also went to the neerest of those Villages to buy necessaries, and afterward retur∣ned to the Campe. Clearatur a Captaine of ours, vnderstanding that one of the Villages was small, and vnguarded, because it was reputed to be comprehended within our League, acquainting none of vs with his ppose, went against it in the night, thinking to make boot of it. His resolution was, in case he surprized the Village, no more to retue to the Armie, but entring the ship, in which his companions ran along the shore, and putting into it, what he had rifled, to saile away and get him out of Pontus. His companions and he, as I now vnderstand, were re∣solued vpo this point. Assembling therefore such, as he had brought to his lure, he led them against the Village. The day preuented his march, and the inhabitants flocking together, and sending missiue wea∣pons, & striking and wounding from the higher ground, slew Clearatus, and many other. Some of the Souldiers got to Cerasunt. These things
fell out the same day we marched hither on foot. Some of those, that came in the ship, were yet at Cerasunt, not ioyned with their compani∣ons. After this, as the Cerasuntines report, there came from the same Village three ancient men, which desired to haue accesse to vs in gene∣rall. When they found vs not there, they told the Cerasuntines, they wondred much what we meant, to come in that manner against them. The Cerasuntines answered, it was not the fact of the whole Armie. They were glad thereof, and said they would come to vs by ship, and informe vs how things were caried, and giue libertie to such as would, to burie the dead. Some of the Grecians, that saued themselues by flight, were yet at Cerasunt, and perceiuing whither the Barbarians intended to goe, were so bold, as not only to cast stones at them themselues, but incited other to doe the like. So the men died, being three in number, Ambassa∣dors stoned to death. After this fact the Cerasuntines came vnto vs, and certified vs of all that had hapned; and we the Coronels hearing it, were much grieued, and aduised with the Cerasuntines, how the dead bodies of the Grecians might be buried; and sitting without the place of Armes, we heard vpon the sudden a great vprore and cry, Strike, strike, throw, throw; and by and by we might see a great number run∣ning together, some hauing stones in their hands, other some stooping to take vp stones. The Cerasuntines, which saw what was done in their Citie, for feare fled to their ships. There were also amongst vs, which were not without feare. I went out and asked, what the matter meant. Some knew nothing, and yet had stones in their hands. At last I hit vp∣on one that knew, who told me that the Commissaries for victuall had infinitely abused the Armie. In this meane time one had spied Zelarchus, a Commissarie, going toward the Sea, and presently cast out a great cry. The other as soone as they heard it, ran against him, as if a wilde Boare, or Hart had presented himselfe. The Cerasuntines, when they saw them runne, imagining they were bent against them, tooke thmselues to their heeles and tumbled into the Sea. Many Grecians did the like, and as many as could not swim, were drowned. Now what thinke you of these men? None of them committed any offence, but feared that a madnesse had fallen vpon vs, as it vseth vpon dogs. If therefore these things shall be so caried, see in what case our Armie will be. First, the whole body will not be Masters to make warre or peace with whom they thinke meet, but euery priuate man that will, may leade an Armie whither and against whom he list. Then in case Ambassadors come to vs for peace, or for ought else, they that will, may by killing them, debarre you from hea∣ring what message they bring. Besides, what respect can your Comman∣ders haue amongst you, when whosoeuer chooseth himselfe Coronell, and list to say, Throw▪ throw, shall be able to put to death, whom hee pleaseth, Commanders or priuate men, and that vncondemned, especi∣ally hauing followers to execute his commands, as it now came to passe? Further consider, I pray, what these Coronels of their owne choice haue done for you. Zelarchus the Commissarie, if he haue wronged
you, is by shipping escaped without punishment; if he haue not wron∣ged you, he is fled from the Armie fearing he should suffer death iniuri∣ously, and without sentence or iudgement. And the stoners of the Am∣bassadors what haue they done? Forsooth they haue brought to passe, that you alone of all Grecians can haue no safe being at Cerasunt, vnlesse you come thither by force. As for the dead bodies, which heretofore were offred to buriall by those that slew them, now we cannot safely bu∣rie them with a Herald. For who will goe as a Herald,. that hath him∣selfe beene murderer of Ambassadors? Yet haue we desired the Cerasun∣tines to haue a care of their buriall. You your selues be Iudges, whether these things be sufferable or no, lest in the middest of these villanies euery man be driuen to prouide a guard for his owne securitie, and seeke to seat his tent in high and safe places. But if you conceiue that such facts, are the facts of wilde beasts, and not of men, take into your considera∣tion, how they may be remedied. Otherwise how shall we with a good heart sacrifice to the gods, when we commit such impieties? or fight with our enemies, when we kill our selues? or what Citie, as friend, will receiue vs, when they see such lewdnesse in our conuersation? or who dares furnish vs with prouision, when we are found in such horrible crimes? If we hope for praise, who will praise vs, that carry our selues in this manner? This I am assured of, if any other should runne into the like behauiour, you your selues would be the first, that should condemne them as wicked and detestable men. After this all standing vp said with one consent, that the authors of these facts were to be punished, and that order was to be taken to preuent the like offences in future time, and whosoeuer committed them, was to be adiudged to death; and that the Coronels should appoint Iudges, who should haue authoritie to call in question all offences since the death of Cyrus. The Captaines were cho∣sen to be Iudges.. The Armie also was hallowed by the admonition of Xenophon, and by the aduice of the Soothsayers. It was further decreed, that the Coronels might be called to account for the time past; and be∣ing called to account, Philesius and Xanticles were condemned, for pur∣loyning twenty pound of the money arising out o the custome of shps: Sophenetus, because being chosen to that office, he refused to execute it, was condemned in ten pound: Some charged Xenophon that he had bea∣ten them, and brought as it were an action of iniury against him. Xenophon standing vp bid the first accuser tell, where he was beaten. He answered, there, where we almost died for cold, and where there was abundance of Snow. Xenophon said, if the Winter were such, as you affirme, and victuals ailed & wine was so scant, that we could not refresh our selues so much as with the smell thereof, and many fainted vnder their trauell, & the ene∣mie was at our heeles, if in such a season I iniuried you, I confesse, I was more wanton then an Asse, who, as they say, by reason of their wanton¦nesse are neuer wearie. Yet, I pray tell me, vpon what occasion were you beaten? whether did I aske you any thing, and because you gaue it not, did I beat you, or required I againe any thing of mine owne, that
you had? or fought with you about loue matters? or did I abuse you, when I was in Wine? None of all these, quoth he. Xenophon asked againe whether he were one of the Armed. No, quoth he. Are you one of the Peltasts? Neither, quoth he, but being a free-man borne, I droue a Mule by the appointment of my Camerades. Xenophon here remembred him and said: Are you he, that caried the sicke man? The same, quoth he, for you forced me to doe it, and to cast away the baggage of my Came∣rades. This casting away, quoth Xenophon, was in this manner. I gaue it to other to carie, and after to restore it to me; and receiuing it safe, as∣soone as you shewed me the sicke man, I restored it to you againe. Heare, I pray, how the matter stood, for it is worth the hearing. There was a Souldier left behind, being not able to continue his march: I knowing the man to be of our companie, compelled you to carie him, lest he should perish. For, as I remember, the enemie followed vs close; He confessed all this to be true. Therefore when I sent you before, comming vp with the Reare, did I not finde you digging of a pit, as though you meant to burie the man? and did not I commend you therefore? But when the Souldier bowed his legge in all our presences, did not all cry out, He liues? and when you spoke at your pleasure, and flatly denied to carie him, I beat you, I confesse; for it appeared, you knew, he was not dead. What then, quoth he, did he not die▪ after I shewed him to you? For we must all die, quoth Xenophon, must we therefore be throwne into a hole aliue? Here the whole assembly cried, that the man was not beaten enough. Then he desired some other to stand vp and declare the cause, why he was beaten. When no man arose, Xenophon spake thus: I confesse (ô Souldiers) I strooke many for forsaking their Ranks. It may suffice them, that they owe their safetie to you, who alwaies marched, and when need was, fought in order. They forsooth would be in better case than you, and leauing their place run before to harrie and spoile at their pleasure. If all had done the like, we had all been lost and cast away long ere this. I must confesse, I once beat one and forced him to march, who for slouth would not stand vp, but would needs betray himselfe to the enemie. For on a time after I my selfe had in the extremitie of Win∣ter a good while set me downe on the ground▪ staying for some, that had not trussed vp their baggage, I found my selfe scarce able to rise, scarce able to stretch out my legs. Taking therefore herein experience of my selfe, I no sooner perceiued other men to squat downe, and giue them∣selues to slouth, but I forced them to arise, and to march on. For I p∣ceiued, that motion and manly stirring engended warh, and nimble∣nesse in the ioints, where sitting still on the other side, and quietnesse congealed the blood, and endangered the toes to rot off, which many of you know to be true by experience in your selues. Another that resd on the ground and loitered behinde, and both hindered you of the V, and vs of the Reare to march on, I strooke with my fist, lt the enee should haue strooken him with his Speare. Now they are in saete they may call me to answer for any thing, wherein I haue wronged
them. But if they had fallen into the enemies hands, what remedie could they haue had of their sufferings, were they neuer so grieuous? My speech is simple. For if I haue punished any for his owne good, I desire to vndergoe the same sentence, that Fathers should for their Children, Masters for their Schollers. Physitians also both burne, and cut, for the health of their Patients. But if you conceiue, that all these things pro∣ceeded from me out of a wanton humour, consider, I pray, that, by the helpe of the gods, I dare doe more now than at that time, and that I drinke more Wine now, than I did then. For I see, you are now in faire weather; but when there is a storme, and the Sea goeth high, marke you not that the Master of the Ship in the Prowe, the steeres-man in the Poupe are angry with the passengers for the lest stirring in the world? For small errors at that time ouerthrow all. But your selues also deemed, that in beating these men, I swarued not from right. For you stood not with Beanes, but with weapons in your hands,Beanes they vsed for voices to absolue or condemne in many Cities. and it was in you to haue succoured them, if you had thought good. But you neither succoured, nor with me punished any man for forsaking his Ranke, and by suffering them to be disobedient, you gaue the greater power to their misdemea∣nours. For I thinke, if you shall be pleased to make a true estimate, you shall finde the same men to haue been then the most disorderly, and now the most deboshed. Boiscus the Baeotian wrestler striued then, all he could, vnder pretence of sicknesse, not to carie his Target: Now, as I vnderstand, he hath robbed many of the Cotyorites. Therefore, if you be wise, you will deale with him after another manner, than they doe with Dogges. Dogges, that are curst, men vse to tie vp in the day, and let loose in the night: Him it were not amisse to let loose in the day, and to shut vp in the night. But, that which I most wonder at, is, that you remember and passe not ouer with silence any thing be it neuer so small, wherein I seeme to haue giuen you offence. If I haue succoured any man against cold, or saued him from the enemie, or releeued him in sick∣nesse, or in want, no man once remembreth it. And if I haue commen∣ded any man for a thing well done, or according to my abilitie honoured him for his valour, neither doe you remember that. And yet it is honest and iust, and holy, and pleasant, that remembrance be had rather of that which is good, than of the bad. After this the assembly broke vp, and repeated in minde, what had passed, and all things came to a faire end. Finis Libri Quinti.
THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. FRom hence-forth during their aboad there, some eat and liued of things, that were brought to the Market, other of the spoile they purchased out of Paphlagonia. The Paphlagonians likewise sought tricks and ad∣uantages against the straglers, and by night attempted to entrappe and molest them, who lodged any distance from the Campe. By reason whereof they grew into greater enmitie one against another. But Corylas, who at that time had the rule of Paphlagonia sent to the Grecians Embassadors, who were furnished with faire Horse and braue apparell. They deliuered, that Corylas nei∣ther desired to wrong the Grecians, nor yet to be wronged by them. The Coronels answered, they would propound the matter to the assem∣bly, but they feasted them, and inuited such as they thought fit to beare them companie; and sacrificing some of the Oxen taken in prey, and other beasts, they made them a plentifull banket sitting vpon Carpets, and drinking out of horne-Cups, which they found in the Countrey. After the healths were drunke and the Paean sung, the Thracians first arose and danced in Armes to the Flute, and capred aloft & nimbly,The Thracian daunce. and vsed Swords. At the last one strooke another in such sort, that one of them fell, and euerie man conceiued, that he was deadly wounded. But the stroke was artificially giuen, at which notwithstanding the Paphlagonians cried out, as men are wont to doe in feare. After he that strooke the other taking the spoile of his Armes, departed singing a Thracian Song, which they call Sitalca. Other Thracians taking the body of him, that fell, caried it out, as if he had beene dead, whereas indeed he had no
manner of harme.The Aeian and Mnetian dance. . Next after them the Aenians and Magnetians arose and danced the dance, commonly called the Seed-dance, in their armes. The manner of the dance is this: One of them laying by his armes sow∣eth the land, and driueth on his Oxen in the plow, looking often backe, as though he were afraid. The theefe approacheth. The other as soone as he seeth him, snatcheth vp his armes, and fighteth with him before the Plow. All this is performed in measure to the Flute. At the last the theefe bindeth the Plow-man, and driueth away the Oxen; and some∣time the Plow-man bindeth the theefe and fastneth him to the Oxen, his hands tied behinde him,The Mysian dance. and so driueth away. After this a Mysian came in, bearing in each hand a Target, and sometimes he danced, making semblance, as if he opposed against two, sometime he vsed the Targets, as it were against one man, sometimes he whirled about in a circle, and tumbled ouer his head, holding the Targets still in his hands: So that it was a pleasant sight to behold him. Lastly, he danced the Persian dance, clapping his Targets together one against another;The Persian dance. and kneeled downe, and straightwayes stood vp againe; and all this he did by measure to the sound of the Flute.The Mantinaean dance. Then the Mantinaeans, and some other Arcadians stood vp armed as seemingly, as they could, and moued in measure, the Flute sounding a point of warre, and sung the Paean, and danced, as the manner is in supplications to the gods. The Paphlagonians seeing this, wondred that all dances were performed in armes: The Mysian, to in∣crease their wonder, after hee had gotten the assent of an Arcadian, that had a dancing woman, in his possession, brought her in, arming her as gorgeously, as he might, with a light Target in her hand. She danced the dance called Pyrrhice with great agilitie and nimblenesse. Hereupon there arose a great clapping of hands,The Pyrrhice. It was a Lace∣demonian dance in armes, in∣uented by one Pyrrhicus a La∣cedemonian. Athenaeus 630. E. and the Paphlagonians asked whe∣ther women also were their companions in fight. To whom answer was made, that the women were they, who beat the King of Persia out of the Grecian Campe. This was the end of that nights sport. The next day they brought the Ambassadours to the Army: and the Souldiers de∣creed, that the Paphlagonians should doe them no wrong, nor they any to the Paphlagonians: So the Ambassadours departed. The Grecians, when they imagined they had sufficient store of shipping gathered toge∣ther,The Grecians take ship. went aboord, and sailing forward that day and night with a faire gale, they left Paphlagonia on their left hand, and the next day they came as farre as Sinope, and cast anchor before Harmene, a Port of the Sinopae∣ans.Sinope. The Sinopaeans inhabite a part of Paphlagania, and are a Colonie of Milesians. They sent hospitall gifts to the Grecians, 3000 Medimnes of meale,A Mdimne is about a bushel. mphra, a mesur of 30 gallons, or thereabouts. of wine 1500 Amphores. Thither came Cherisophus with some gallies, which he had prouided. The Souldiers expected him, and were in hope, that when he came, he would bring them some good i∣dings. He brought them only newes, that Anaxibius the Admirall, and the rest commended them much, and that Anaxibius promised they should haue ready pay, if they would come out of Pontus. The army re∣mained at Harmene fiue dayes. The neerer they seemed to come to
Greece, the more carefull they were to get, and to furnish themselues with something before they came home. They were of opinion therefore, that if they did chuse one Generall,One Generall▪ that that one should haue a more vniforme, and a more absolute command ouer the Army, both by night and by day, than if the command were in many hands. And if any thing were to be kept secret, it might be better concealed; if to be preuented, it should receiue the lesse hindrance. For there needed no conference, and the resolution of one might quickly be put in execution, whereas heretofore all things passed by pluralitie of voices of the Coro∣nels. Being in this conceit, they turned to Xenophon,The affection of the Army to Xenophon. and the Captaines comming to him, told what the affection of the Army was, and euery of them, out of their loue, perswaded him to take vpon him the command. Xenophon himselfe was desirous of the place, thinking that both his ho∣nour might hereby grow greater, and his name more esteemed both with his friends, and Citie; and it might fall out that he might be occasi∣on of some good to the Army. These thoughts lifted him vp to desire the Generall-ship. But when he weighed in his minde, that no man fore-knew the euent of things to come, and that hereby he might hazard his former reputation, he began to be in doubt; and being not able to re∣solue, it seemed best to counsell with the gods. He called therefore to him two Priests, and sacrificed to Iupiter, the King of gods,Iupiter. who by the Oracle of Delphos was appointed his Councellour in matters to come; and hee beleeued that the dreame, which he saw, when hee first was chosen Coronell of the Army, proceeded from Iupiter. And he remem∣bred, that when he went out of Ephesus to follow Cyrus,. Bird-gazers. an Eagle croa∣ked at his right hand sitting on the ground, which the sooth-sayer, that accompanied him at that time, said to be a great augury portending more, than the estate of a priuate man, and that it was illustrious, but yet notwithstanding laborious. For birds vse not to molest the Eagle by fal∣ling vpon her, saue onely when she sitteth on the ground. Further, that no great profit was signified by the token; because the Eagle taketh her prey rather, when she is on wing. The god therefore, when he sacrifi∣ced, foretold apparantly, that he was neither to seeke after the Generalls place, nor yet to accept of it, if it were offered him. This was the issue of that businesse. Now the Army being assembled, it was the opinion of all, that one Generall was to be chosen, and their choice inclined to Xe∣nophon; who when he saw, if they went to the election, their resolution would be to giue him the place, he stood vp, and spake thus:Iupiters answer. Xenophon refu∣seth to be Ge∣nerall. I (ô Soul∣diers) if I be a man, haue cause to be glad of this honour, which you offer vnto me, and to giue you thankes, and to pray to God, that any oc∣casion may be ministred, whereby I may be able to doe you seruice. But to chuse me your Generall, a Lacedemonian being present, seemeth nei∣ther for your, nor yet for mine owne auaile; in as much as, if hereafter you shall happen to stand in need of them, you will be disappointed of your hopes that way. Besides, I thinke it not safe for my selfe to enter into that course; for I doe see, that they neuer gaue ouer the warre
against my Countrey, vntill they made the whole Citie confesse, that the Lacedemonians were also their Commanders; after which confession, they laid downe their Armes, and proceeded no further in besieging the Citie. If then these things being so, I shall seeme, as much as in me lieth, to weaken their authoritie, I cannot be ignorant, how quick∣ly I shall be brought to acknowledge mine errour. And whereas you are of opinion, that lesse sedition and disobedience will grow out of the command of one, than of many, vnderstand from me, that whomsoeuer you choose you shall not finde me discontent or disobedi∣ent. For I hold it for a generall maxime in warre, that whosoeuer he be, which behaueth himselfe seditiously against his Commander, behaueth himselfe seditiously against his owne safetie. But in case you chuse me, I shall not maruell, if a discontent arise in some mindes both against you, and against my selfe. After Xenophon had ended his speech, many more arose, and said, that he ought not to refuse the Generals place; And A∣gasias the Stymphalian replied, that it was a thing ridiculous, that the La∣cedemonians should not as well be angry, if at a Feast another than a La∣cedemonian were by the Guests chosen for their Gouernour. For if things run in this course, quoth he, it shall be vnlawfull for vs to be Cap∣taines, because we are Arcadians. Here a murmur arose thorow the whole assembly approuing the speech of Agasias. Xenophon perceiuing, that more was to be said, added thus much: That you may (ô Souldiers) vnderstand the depth of this businesse, I sweare vnto you by all the gods and goddesses, that after I was informed of your minds and inclinati∣on, I by sacrifice enquired, whether it would be behouefull for you to bestow vpon me, and me to accept this command, or otherwise; and the gods so answered in the sacrifice, that it might easily appeare euen to a man of small skill, that I was not to take the place vpon me. So they chose Cherisophus. Cherisophus being chosen proceeded into the middest and spake thus: You know (ô Souldiers) that, albeit you had chosen another, you should haue found no opposition in me. But it falleth out well for Xenophon, that he is not chosen. For Dexippus accused him not long since to Anaxibius, all he could, my selfe being present and stopping his mouth. He said, he thought, that Xenophon had rather be ioined in command with Timasion, who was a Dardanian, and one of Clearchus his Souldiers, than with him, who was a Lacedemonian. But since you haue made choise of me, quoth he, I also will endeuour to doe you all the seruice I can. And you against the morning euerie man so order his affaires, that he may be readie to saile away, if the wind be faire. Our iourney shall be to Heraclea; and being there we will aduise, what is fur∣ther to be done. The next day they set saile with a faire wind, and ran along the Coast by the space of two daies following. In sailing they came by Iasons shore, where the Ship Argo is said to haue anchored, and by the mouthes of these Riuers;Peninsula that is ioined to the continent with a neck of Land only. First of Thermdon, then of Halys, last∣ly of Parthenius, by which after they had passed, they arriued at Heraclea a Grecian Citie, and a Colonie of the Megaraeans, situate in the territorie
of the Maryandes, and came to anchor neere the Acherousian Cherrone∣sus. There Hercules is reported to haue descended to the dog Cerberus, of which descent the markes are yet shewen, the depth of the place be∣ing more than two Furlongs.A Medimne is about one of our bushels. Amphora was a vessel that con∣tained thirtie gallons and a halfe. 200. Foot. Hither the Heracleans sent hospitall gifts to the Grecians, to wit, 3000. Medimnes of barley meale, 2000. Amphors of wine, 20 oxen, and an hundred sheepe. The riuer called Lycus, hauing two Plethers in bredth, conueieth his streame thorow this Territo∣ry. Here the Souldiers assembled together, consulting about the remain∣der of their iourney, and whether it were better to proceed out of Pon∣tus by land or by sea; and Lycon the Achaian stood vp and said: I won∣der (ô Souldiers) at the Coronels, that they go not about to make pro∣uision of victuall for the Army. For the hospitall gifts will not serue vs aboue three daies, neither is there any place, whither we may goe out, and furnish our selues. Therefore it seemeth good to me, that you de∣mand no lesse, then 3000. Cyzicens of the Heracleans. Another said, that a monthes pay (no lesse then 10000. Cyzicens) was to be demanded,A Cyzicen was in value about 18. s. and that while we sate in counsell to know their answer, Ambassadours were forthwith to be dispatched to the Citie, and thereupon further aduice to be taken. Hereupon they first propounded Cherisophus for an Ambassa∣dour, because he was their Generall; some also named Xenophon. They both opposed strongly, and were of opinion, that no extortion was to be vsed to force any thing from a Grecian Citie, being also their friend. Therefore when they seemed vnwilling, the Army sent Lycon the Achae∣an, Callimachus the Parrhasian, and Agasias the Stymphaliaen, who going to the Citie deliuered the decree of the Army; and Lycon is reported to haue vsed threatning words, if things were not performed according to the desire of the Army. The Heracleans hearing the propositions, answe∣red, they would consider; and presently they gathered their goods out of the fields, and appointed a market within the Citie, and the gates were shut, and armes seene vpon the walles. The authors of these trou∣bles accused the Coronels, as though they were cause of the ill successe. Their words were, that it was a shame, that one Athenian should haue command ouer the Peloponesians and Lacedemonians,Sedition of the Arcadians and Achaeans. especially such a one, as had brought no forces to the Army. That they had the paines, and other the profit; and euen till this present were the workers of the common safetie. For the Arcadians and Achaeans were those that bore the burthen,Their number was 4500. the rest of the Army was nothing (and in truth the Arcadi∣ans and Achaeans were more than halfe the Army:) If they were wise therefore, standing close to themselues, and chusing Commanders out of their owne people, they should goe forward in the iourney apart, and endeuour to inrich themselues by some meanes or other.The Army di∣uided. . Euery one had 450 vnder his command. This was de∣creed; and those Arcadians and Achaeans, that were vnder the command of Cherisophus, forsaking him and Xenophon, associated themselues to the rest, and they all chose ten Coronels out of their owne bodie, and de∣creed, that whatsoeuer the plurality of voices of these ten should resolue vpon, it should stand good and effectuall, and be put in execution. The
Generall-ship therefore of Cherisophus was dissolued within six or seuen daies, after he was chosen. Xenophon notwithstanding would haue pro∣ceeded in the iourney with them, thinking it more safe so to doe, than to trauell euery man by himselfe alone: But Neon vnderstanding by Cheri∣sophus, that Cleander, the Gouernour of Bizantium, was determined with his Gallies to make ouer to the Hauen of Calpe, perswaded him to keepe his owne forces by him, and to iourney apart; and further, counselled him to conceale it from the rest, to the end, that they and their Souldiers alone might be transported in the Gallies; and Cherisophus partly discontented with that, which had passed, and partly out of a hatred against the Army, gaue him liberty to doe, as he thought best. From that time forward Xenophon sought to saile away,Xenophons zeale without know∣ledge. and to depart from the Ar∣my. But sacrificing to Hercules the Guide, and asking of him counsell, whether it should be better for him to follow the warre with the rem∣nant of Souldiers vnder his command, or to depart, the god signified by the sacrifice, that he should continue his command, and not depart. So the Army was diuided into three parts. The Arcadians and Achaeans be∣ing more than 4500. all heauie armed; Cherisophus hauing 1300. armed, and 700. Peltasts, who were the Thracians, that followed Clearchus: Xe∣nophon 1700. armed, and 300. Peltasts, and he alone had horse amoun∣ting to the number of fortie. The Arcadians getting shipping of the He∣racleans, sailed away first, of purpose, that falling suddenly vpon the Bi∣thinians, they might preuent the rest, and make the greatest prey. They landed at the Hauen Calpe,The Hauen Calpe. which lieth in a manner in the middest of Thrace. Cherisophus marched on foot thorow the Countrey, beginning at Heraclea, and as soone as he entred into Thrace, he led along by the Sea-coast, for he was now sicke. Xenophon taking shipping, landed in the confines of Thrace, and of the Heraclean Countrey, and marched thorow the middest of the Land. Thus therefore haue we declared, in what manner the command of Cherisophus was wholy dissolued, & the army of the Grecians distracted into parcells.The seuerall marches of the army being se∣ueed. Of the Arcadi∣ans. The course, that euery one held was this. The Arcadians after they had landed by night at the Hauen of Calpe, aduanced forthwith to the next villages situate about fiftie Fur∣longs from the Sea: When day-light appeared, euery Coronell led his Diuision or Regiment to a village. If the village seemed any thing great, the Coronels allotted two Diuisions to it. They agreed also vpon a hill, to which they were all to retire, and because they fell vpon the Country suddenly, they tooke many prisoners, and brought in many sheepe. The Thracians, that escaped, assembled together, and many being taken pri∣soners shifted out of the Grecians hands, because they were Peltasts, the Grecians armed; and being now gathered together in good number, they first charged the Diuision of Smicretes,. one of the Arcadian Coro∣nels, as he was retiring to the place appointed, being heauie laden with prey. The Grecians both marched, and fought at the same time, till they came to a hollow bank't brooke, where in their passage they were put to flight by the Barbarians, Smicretes, and his whole band were slaine.
Another regiment of one of the ten Coronels, whose name was Hegesa∣der, had but 8. only left aliue by the Barbarians, which 8. were saued, with Hegesander himselfe. The rest of the Captains came to the hill, some with much ado, some easily. The Thracians encouraged with this good hand sell, made outcries one to another, & flocked together in multitudes by night, & as soone as it was day, they ordered many horse and Pelasts in a circle about the hill, where the Grecians encamped; and still more and more came running together, and without danger to themselues, charged the Grecian armed (for the Grecians had neither Archer, nor Darter,The Thraians besiege the A∣cadians. nor Horse) but the Thracians running forth, and spurring their horse close vp to the Grecians, cast darts at them, and being charged retired and easily saued themselues by flight, and some of them gaue on in one place, some in another, so that many of the Grecians were wounded, no one of the enemies hurt. Being thus not able to moue out of the place, where they stood, they were also at last debarred from water by the Thracians, and reduced to that extremitie, that they were faine to sue for composition. In the treatie all other things were easily agreed vpon, but the Thracians would giue no pledges, as the Grecians required, which was the stay of further proceeding. In this plight were the affaires of the Arcadians. Cherisophus marching forward along the Sea coast without danger,Of Cherisophus. was by this time come to the Hauen of Calpe.Of Xenophon. But Xenophon held on thorow the middest of the Countrey, and as he marched his Hors-men scouting before chanced vpon Embassadors going, it was not knowen whither; who being brought to Xenophon, he asked them, whether they could tell him tidings of any Grecian Armie els-where. They related vnto him all that had hapned, and that at this instant they were assaulted,Xnophon hath newes of the distesse of the Arcadians. and hardly laid vnto vpon the hill, and that all the Thracians of the countrey had en∣compassed them round. The Ambassadors were put in safe custodie, to the end to vse them for Guides, when need required. Afterward setting out 10 Scouts, he called the Souldiers together, and thus spake vnto them: The Arcadians (O Souldiers) are some of them slaine,His counsell for their re∣leefe. the rest being retired to a hill, besieged and assaulted. For my part, I am of opi∣nion, if they perish, we can finde no safety, the enemy being so many, and so much incouraged with the happinesse of this successe. It is there∣fore best to giue them aid with all speed, that if they be aliue, wee may ioyne with them in fight against the enemie, and not be left to runne the danger alone. And for the present, let vs march on till supper time, and then set downe with our Campe. And while we march let Timasion with the horse scout before, casting an eye toward vs alwaies, and giuing aduertisement of all occurrence, that we be ignorant of nothing that may concerne vs. He sent out likewise some of the best footmen of his light-armed toward the flanks of the Armie, and the tops of the hils, willing them to giue intelligence of what they saw. Hee commanded also to set fire vpon all, that was apt to take fire. For, quoth he, we can∣not escape any way, the distance backe againe to Heraclea being great, and the march forward to Chrysopolis great, and the enemie neere at
hand. The way is shortest to the Hauen of Calpe, whither we imagine that Cherisophus is come, at least if he be in safety. And yet are we not to hope for any shipping to carry vs from thence, and resting there wee shall not finde so much as a daies prouision. Now in case those, that are besieged were lost, it would be more dangerous for vs to hazard with Cherisophus his Souldiers alone. But if they be succoured, and freed from this danger, and all of vs assembled together, we shall in common dis∣pute our safety the better. You are therefore to march on with resolu∣tion, either now honourably to die, or else to performe a most noble act, and worthy of eternall memory, namely, to saue so great a number of Grecians, that are in ieopardy to be cast away. And it may be, that God hath so disposed of this businesse, to humble these high-minded men, wise in their owne conceits, and to honour vs, who in all our actions take our beginnings from the gods. You are then to follow your Lea∣ders, and to giue heed to that which is commanded you. Hauing said thus much he led on. The horsemen dispersing themselues as much as was conuenient,Furning the enemies coun∣trey to make shew of a great Armie. put all in a flame, as they went forward: and the Pel∣asts hauing gained the tops of the Hils, burnt all that would take fire, as did the Armie also, where they found any thing left vnburnt. So the whole countrey seemed to be on a light fire, and the Armie to be great. When it was time, they ascended vp to a hill, and quartered there. From thence they might discerne the enemies fires (for they were not distant aboue 40 furlongs) and themselues kindled as many fires as they could.Fiue mile. When they had supped, the word was giuen to quench and put out all the fires, and hauing placed their guards, they gaue themselues to sleepe. By breake of day they made their prayers to the gods, and ordering their troops for fight, marched forward with all speed. Timasion and the horse∣men hauing with them the Guides, and spurring on, were, before they were aware, vpon the hill, where the Grecians were besieged, but neither saw friends nor enemies forces (whereof they aduertised Xenophon and the Armie) only they found a few old women, and men, and some sheepe and oxen left behinde. And first, that which hapned, seemed a maruell: Afterward they vnderstood from them that were left, that the Thracians departed away in the euening, the Grecians as soone as it was day;The siege rai∣sed. but whither they were gone, no man knew. Xenophon vpon these tidings dined, and trussing vp his baggage marched away with intent in all haste possible to ioyne with those that were at the Hauen of Calpe. In their march they might perceiue the tract of footing of the Arcadias and Achaeans in the way which led to Calpe,Xenophon ouer∣taketh the Arcadians. and meeting together they gladly saw one another, and saluted as brethren. The Arcadians asked Xenophons souldiers, why they put out their fires. For we thought, said they, at the first, when we saw no fires, that you marched against the enemy by night, and the enemy, as we conceiued, fearing the same, arose with their Campe. For i was about that time, that they departed. But when you came not forward,They ioyne in marching. and the time was now past, we imagi∣ned, that hearing our distresse, you hasted all you could to the Sea side
for feare. We therefore thought it good not to leaue you, and thereupon came also hither. So this day they encaped vpon the Sea shore neere the Hauen. The place, which they call the Hauen of Calpe, lieth in that Thrace, which is in Asia.There are two Thraces, one in Europ, the o∣ther in Asia. In European Thrace standeth Constantinople, in the other was the Hauen of Calpe. The barbarous cruelty of the Thratans. A description of Calpe. Thrace it selfe beginneth from the mouth of Pontus, and stretcheth to Heraclea on the right hand as a man saileth to Pontus. The distance betwixt Byztium and Heraclea is as much, as a Galley can fetch vp with oares in a very long day. In the way there is no friend or Grecian City, but Thracins or Bithynians alone, who, if they lay hands vpon any Grecian either cas ashore by shipwracke, or com∣ming thither by other occasion, are reported to vse them with all de∣spight and villany. The Hauen of Calpe lieth in the mid-way to them that saile from Heraclea to Byzantium, or contrariwise from Byzantium to Herclea. The land beareth out into the Sea; and that part, which stret∣cheth into the Sea, is a craggy rocke, o the height (where it is least) of 20 fathoms. The necke of land, that ioyneth to the Continent,40 yards. is at least foure plethers in bredth,400 foot. and the space of land within the necke sufficient to giue habitation to 10000 men. The Hauen lieth vnder the rocke, hauing the shore trending to the West.The Hauen. Within it there is a plen∣tifull fountaine of sweet water running along the Sea, but so that the place may command it, and it bringeth forth both much other timber hard by the Sea, and besides much that is fit for the building of ships. As for the mountaine that ouershadoweth the Hauen, as it runneth 20 furlongs into the mid-land, it is pure earth without stones, but to∣ward the Sea, more than 20 furlongs,Two mile and a halfe. it is rough with many and all kinde of great trees. The rest of the Land is beautifull and large, and there are many Villages in it, and well inhabited. The countrey bringeth forth barley, and wheat, and pulse-corne of all sorts, and Bucke, and Se∣samum, and figs sufficiently, and many Vines pleasant in taste, and all other kinds of fruit, excepting only Oliues. This is the nature of the Soile. The Armie incamped by the Sea-side. In the Towne they would not quarter, being of opinion, they were fraudulently brought thither by some, that had an intention to plant a Colony there. For the most part of the Souldiers sailed out of Greece to follow this warre, not for want of meanes to liue by, but hearing of the bounty of Cyrus, some brought to his seruice men that had consumed their estates,The quality of the Grecians that followed this warre. some other runne away from their fathers and mothers, and some left behind them their children, as minding to inrich them at their returne. For they heard, that all that followed Cyrus gathered mountaines of wealth. Being peo∣ple of this condition, they desired to returne into Greece in safety. When the day of assembly of the Armie for this purpose was now come, Xe∣nophon sacrificed about the issuing of it out of the Campe, because they must needs be led out to make prouision. His purpose was also to bury their dead. The sacrifice being fauourable, the Arcadians also followed, and they buried the most part of the dead, euery man where he fell; for it was now the fift day since they were slaine, so that there was no possi∣bilitie to conueigh them from thence. And bringing some together
out of the high-waies, they buried them according to their meanes, as decently, as they could; and for those, they found not, they rai∣sed a great emptie monument, and kindled a Funerall fire, and laid vpon the monument Crownes of flowers. Hauing performed these Rites, they returned to the Campe, and after Supper gaue them∣selues to rest. The next day the Souldiers assembled. Captaine Agasias the Stymphalian, and Captaine Ieronymus the Elian, and other the eldest of the Arcadians were the cause of this assembly.A decree not to separate their Forces hereafter. They made a Decree, that if any man hereafter propounded to separate and diuide the Armie, he should be punished with death; and that the Armie should depart out of the Countrey in the manner it was wont, and that the former Coro∣nels should command.The death of Cherisophus. Cherisophus was alreadie dead by drinking a me∣dicine in his ague, and Neon the Asinite was substituted in his place. After this Xenophon stood vp and said: It seemeth (fellow Souldiers) that the rest of our iourney is to be performed by Land, in regard we haue no shipping; and hauing likewise no prouision, necessitie forceth vs to be readie to march. We therefore the Coronels will offer sacrifice; As for you, you are, if euer heretofore, to prepare your selues to fight, inasmuch as the enemie hath gathered courage. So the Coronels sacrifi∣ced taking to them Arexion the Arcadian Southsaier. For Silanus the Ambraciote had stollen away in a Ship of Heraclea, which he hired. They sacrificed about their departure, but the entrailes of the sacrifice were not faire. They stayed therefore that day. There were some, that durst giue out, that Xenophon intending to plant in that place, had perswaded the Southsaier to say, that the sacrifice allowed not of their departure. Hereupon Xenophon caused Proclamation to be made,A meanes to still suspicion. that the next mor∣ning euerie one that list might be present at the sacrifice, and if there were any Southsaier amongst them, he commanded him to come and view the entrailes, and so sacrificed in the presence of many. When they had now thrice sacrificed about their departure, the entrailes assen∣ted not. The Souldiers were ill apaid herewith. For their prouision which they brought with them, failed, and there was no Market to be had. Hereupon, when they againe assembled, Xenophon spake thus: The sacrifices, as your selues are eie-witnesses, are not fauourable to our de∣parture, and I see you are destitute of victuall, wherefore I hold it neces∣sarie to aske counsell by sacrifice about this matter alone. Then one of them arising, said: It is not without cause, that the sacrifice crosseth our departure. For, as I heard of one, that by chance came by Ship hither yesterday, Cleander the Gouernour of Byzantium, is about to crosse ouer to vs with Ships and Gallies. Hereupon it seemed good to all to remaine in the place. But yet they were forced by necessitie to fall out into the Countrey for victuall and prouision for the Campe, and sacrifice was of∣fered hereabout three times, which notwithstanding opposed their go∣ing out. They came then to the Tent of Xenophon and told him of their wants. I may not, quoth he, leade you out, vnlesse the sacrifice be fa∣uourable. The next day they sacrificed againe, and because they were
perplexed, and the businesse touched all, well-nigh the whole Armie encircled the sacrifice. And now there was no more sacrifice left. The Coronels therefore, albeit they led not out the Armie, yet did they call an assembly; and Xenophon said: It may be the enemie is gathered to∣gether, and we shall be driuen to fight by necessitie. If therefore leauing our baggage in this place of strength, we issue out prepared for fight, and then offer sacrifice, perhaps the sacrifice will giue better allowance. The Souldiers hearing this cried out, that there was no need of leading them out, but willed them to renew the sacrifice with all speed. There were now no Sheepe to be had, and they were faine to buy Oxen out of the Waine to offer in sacrifice. And Xenophon desired Cleanor the Arcadian to gather vp his spirits and be in a readinesse, if the sacrifice portended any good: but this sacrifice was also crosse. Neon was Coronell of that part of the Armie, which Cherisophus commanded. He, when he saw the Souldiers discontented with their wants, desirous to gratifie them, finding an Heraclean, who affirmed that he knew Villages at hand, from whence prouision might be had, made proclamation, that euerie one, that would, might goe abroad for prouision,Neons rashnesse. & proffered himselfe to be their Leader. There issued therefore out of the Campe to the number of two thousand, with Darts, Bladders, Bags, and other Vessels. After they came into the Villages, and were dispersed in rifling,And ill successe. the Hors-men of Pharnabazus fell vpon them (for they gaue aid to the Bithynians,Pharnabazus Lieutenant in Phrygia to the King of Persia. desi∣rous with the Bithynians to hinder the Grecians from entring into Phrygia, if they could) These Hors-men killed no lesse, than fiue hundred Gre∣cians, the rest fled vp into a Mountaine, and one of them, that fled, brought newes hereof to the Campe. Xenophon because the sacrifice was not agreeable that day, taking an Oxe out of the Waine (for there was no other to kill) offered it, and went to the rescous,A difference of age in Souldi∣ers. taking with him all the Souldiers vnder fiftie yeeres of age; and bringing those off, that were left aliue, returned to the Campe about Sun-set, and sat downe to Supper, being full of griefe and sorrow for that, which had happened. Vpon the suddaine some of the Bithynians,The enemy beats in the Grecian guards. thorow the thickets falling vpon the out-Guards, killed a few of the Grecians, and chaced the rest to the Campe, and a great cry being raised, the whole Armie ran to Armes. It seemed not safe to pursue the enemie, or to moue the Armie by night, the Countrey being full of thickets. They watched therefore that night in Armes, putting forth Guards sufficient to fight with the enemie, if need were. So was the night spent. In the morning the Coronels led into a stronger place, and the Souldiers followed with their Armes and baggage, and before it was Dinner time they cast a Trench all along the Face of the Campe, which led into the Countrey,Fortification of the Campe. and strengthened all the Rampier with Palizadoes, leauing only three Gates to passe in and out the Campe. In the meane time came a Ship from Heraclea fraughted with Barley-meale, and with beasts for sacrifice, & with Wine. Xenophon rising early in the morning, sacrificed about issuing out of the Campe, and the entrailes of the first beast offered were faire. The sacrifice being
ended, Arexion the Parrhasian southsaier espied an eagle of good fortune, and willed Xenophon to lead out the army; and the Coronels passng ouer the trench,. laid downe their Armes, and made Proclamation, that the Souldiers should first dine, and then issue out of the campe with their Armes, leauing the many, and the Captiues behinde. All the rest issued,The Grecians issue out of the Campe. except Neon. For it was thought best to leaue him Commander of those, that remained in the Campe. His Regiment being left behinde by the Coronels and Captaines, were ashamed to stay, seeing the rest marched out, and putting the guard of the Campe into the hands of the Souldiers, that were 45 yeeres of age, they followed after the Army. So these remaining behinde, the other marched forward. They had not gone 15 Furlongs, when they happened vpon the dead, lately slaine vn∣der the command of Neon,They bury the dead. . and staying the Reare of their Wing by the first dead, that they lighted vpō, they buried all, that lay next by the wing. When they had buried the first, they moued forward, and staying againe the Reare against the first, that were vnburied, they after the same sort buried as many, as the Army had lying by it. But after they came to the way,. that led from the villages, where they lay in heapes, they gathered them together, & so buried them. And being now past mid-day, they ad∣uanced and tooke what prouision euery man saw without the villages, and conueied it within the Phalange; when suddenly they might dis∣cerne the enemy, being many Horse and Foot vpon the moun∣taines ouer against the Army,. ordered in a Phalange. For Spithridates and Rathines were come thither with forces sent from Pharnabazus. When the enemy espied the Grecians,Two mile well∣neere. they made Alt about 15 Furlongs off: Hereupon Arexion the soothsayer of the Grecians sacrificed, and the entrailes were faire at the very first. Then said Xenophon: I thinke it best (ô Coronels) to chuse out certaine Companies, and to order them in the Reare of the Phalange for seconds,Seconds. that, if need be, there may be some to giue aid to the Phalange, and that the enemy being disordered, may fall vpon them standing in order, and readie for fight. All yeelded to this opinion. You then, quoth he, lead on against the enemy, that we make no stay after we see, and are seene of them. If you thinke good, I will go & take some of the Reare Companies, and separate them for this seruice.Ordering of the seconds. 100. Foot, that is, 20 paces Geometricall. Hereupon they marched on leasurely: But Xenophon taking three Companies of 200. apeece from the Reare, sent one to follow the Pha∣lange on the right hand, about a Plethers distance, Samolas the Ach was the leader thereof, another he separated to follow in the middest, the command whereof Pyrias the Arcadian had, the third on the left hand, vnder the command of Phrasias the Athenian. As they marched, they chanced vpon a great Forrest and hardly passable,A doubt to en∣ter a wood. where they made Alt, being ignorant, whether they might get thorow it or no; and the word was giuen for the Coronels and Captaines to come vp to the Front. Xenophon maruelling at the say of the march, and hearing the word, that was giuen, galloped vp to the Front with all speed. When they were come together, Sophoetus, the eldest of the Coronels said,
he thought not fit, that such a Forrest as that should be trauersed thorow. Xenophon quickly answering him, spake thus: My cōpanions, you know,Xenophons reso∣lution. as I thinke, that I neuer willingly brought you into any danger. For I see, that you need no glory, that may be purchased with valour, but rather stand in need of safetie alone. The case now standeth thus, that we can∣not depart hence without fight. For if we goe not against the enemy, he will follow and charge vs in our retreat. Consider then, which of the two is the better, to goe against them with armes in our hands, or facing about, to see them fall vpon our Reare. You cannot be ignorant, that to dismarch from an enemy, was euer held dishonourable by a man of va∣lour; as contrariwise, that to pursue, giueth courage euen to a coward. For my part, I had rather follow with halfe the number, we haue, than dismarch with twice so many. I know also, that there is none of you fea∣reth, they will stand our first charge, if we seeke them: Whereas no man is ignorant, that they dare and will be readie to follow vpon vs, if we re∣tire. If any man conceiue it a matter of danger, to haue the Forrest be∣hinde vs in our fight, I hold it rather an aduantage to be sought for. To the enemies I could wish, that all places might seeme easie to shift away, that they may haue occasion to turne their backes. For you, you ought to learne of the place it selfe, that there is no saetie, but in victory. But I should not a little maruell, if any of you could once imagine, that this Forrest is more fearefull for vs to trauerse, than other places, which wee haue alreadie passed. For how could we haue gone thorow the plaine countrey, if we had not ouercome the enemies Horse; or ouer the mountaines, if so many Peltasts had pressed vs? Admit now we come safe to the Sea, how geat a Forrest is the Sea? Where if we remaine, we shall finde neither shipping to transport vs, nor victuall to nourish vs. And we shall no sooner arriue there, but we must immediately issue out of our Campe to seeke prouision. Is it not therefore better to fight with the enemy now we haue dined, than to morrow fasting? The sacrifice is faire, and the presage of the euent fortunate, and the entrailes of the beasts portend good lucke. Let vs march against them, and since we are come into their sight, let vs not giue them leaue either to sup with con∣tent, or to sleepe, where themselues are disposed. Hereupon the Cap∣taines willed him to lead on, and no man gainsaid it. Leading on,Passing a Wood. hee gaue the word, that euery man should passe the Forrest in the very place, where he was. For he conceiued, that the Army should more easily passe singling themselues, as the way fell out, than if they clustrd and thronged at a Bridge, which might be in the Forrest. When all were thorow, hee rid along the Phalange, and said: Remember (ô Souldiers) what battels you haue, by the helpe of the gods, gained together against your enemies, and what they haue suffered, that fled from the enemy, and withall call to minde, that you are at the gates of Greece. Follow Hercu∣les your guide, and exhort one another by name. It will be a pleasure for him, that doth or speaketh any thing worthy of a braue minde, to leaue a memorie of his worth in any place, where hee will.
These words he spake riding in haste along the Front;The Grecians moue against the enemy. and withall led on the Phalang, and ordered the Peltasts on either wing thereof, and so went against the enemy. He also commanded them to carry their pikes on their right shoulders, till he gaue a signe with the trumpet; then char∣ging them to follow leisurely,. The demea∣ning of their pikes. Their Peltasts repulsed. and no man to giue chase running. Then was the word giuen, Iupiter the sauiour and Hercules the guide. The enemy kept his ground, trusting to the strength of the place. When they came neere one to another the Grecian Peltasts giuing a shout, ran forth against the enemy without command, and were encountred and put to flight by the Bithynian horse and foot. But when the Phalange of the armed marching speedily came vp, and the trumpet sounded, and they sang the Paean, and afterward gaue a shout, and char∣ged their pikes,. A charge. the enemy forsooke the place and fled; and Timasian with his horse, which were not many in number, killed as many as he could. So the left wing of the enemy, vpon which the Grecian horsmen followed, was quickly dispersed; but the right being not so muh pres∣sed in the chase, stood still vpon a hill. Whom when the Grecians saw remaining in the field,A second charge. they thought they might safely charge them, and without all danger. Singing therefore the Paean, they aduanced against them. But the enemy presently tooke themselues to their feet. The Peltasts gaue chase,Chace giuen by the Peltasts. till that wing was also scattered. Few of them were slaine, because of the multitude of the enemies horse, who put the Pel∣tasts in feare of following too farre. The horsemen of Pharabazi stood yet vnited together, to whom the Bithynian horsemen gathered, and from a hill beheld, what was done in the field. Which when the Grecians saw, albeit they were sore trauelled, notwithstanding they thought it conuenient to seeke them, as they could, lest haply taking heart, they might be againe emboldned. Therefore embattelling them∣selues, they led against them. The enemy seeing them comming cast themselues downe the steepe places no otherwise, than if horsemen had followed them in chase. A Forrest receiued them that fled, which the Grecians were not acquainted with. Wherefore night drawing on, they returned, and when they came to the place where the battels first ioyned, they erected a Trophey, and so about Sunne-set retired to the Sea; for the Campe was about 60 furlongs off. Henceforward the enemies began to looke to themselues,7 mile and a halfe. and remoued as farre from thence as they could, as well the inhabitants, as their goods and sub∣stance. The Grecians lay still expecting Cleander, and the Gallies, and Ships, which they thought would come. And going forth euery day without feare, hauing with them their cariage-beasts and slaues, they brought in wheat, barley, wine, pulse-corne, bucke, and figs. For the Territorie bare all fruit plentifully, Oliues only excepted. And as long as the Armie kept within the Campe, any man might goe forth to spoile, and deteine that he found for his priuate vse. But a decree was made, that when the whole Armie went abroad, whatsoeuer was ta∣ken by any man going apart, it should be to the vse of the generalitie.
Now was there plenty of all things. For prouision came from the re∣cian Cities on euery hand, and they that arriued there by ship, came willingly on shore, because they vnderstood a Citie was there planting, and that it was a good Hauen; and many of the enemies being neere borderers sent to Xenophon (for they heard that he was the planter) de∣manding vpon what conditions they might be receiued into his friend∣ship; whom Xenophon shewed to the Souldiers.Cleander Go∣uernour of Byzance, now Con∣stantinople. About this time Cleander came with two Gallies, but with neuer a ship. It fell out so, that at his ar∣riuall the Army was abroad, and some gone into the plaine countrey to prey, other to the mountaines, and had gotten together many sheepe; and fearing they would be taken away, they spake to Dexippus (who stole the ship of 50 ores from the Armie, when it lay at Trapezond) and praied him to keep them, and to retaine part for himselfe,Dexippus his fraud and wrong. and restore the rest to them. He presently beat away the Souldiers that stood there∣about, albeit they told him, that the prey pertained to the generality, and imedialy went to Cleander, and informed him that they sought to steale the sheepe. Cleander commanded, that whosoeuer he was that went about to take them away, should be brought vnto him. Dexippus laid hold vpon one, and began to leade him toward Cleander,He laieth hold vpon a Soul∣dier. Rescous of the Souldier. whom Agasias by chance comming that way, rescued, because he was one of his company. The rest of the Souldiers, that were present, cast stones at Dexippus, calling him Traitor. Many Mariners of the Gallies, be∣ing affrighted, ranne to the Sea; and Cleander himselfe shifted away.Cleanders feare and threat∣ning. Xenophon and the other Coronels pacified the Souldiers, and told Cle∣ander, it was no matter of danger, and that the decree of the Armie was cause of that, that hapned. Cleander incensed by Dexippus, and of himselfe discontented, because it might be perceiued, that he was in feare, said, he would saile away, and cause proclamation to be made, that no Grecian Citie should receiue them, as being common enemies to all; for at that time the Lacedemonians commanded all Greece. This seemed a hard and dangerous thing to the Grecians, and they de∣sired him not to doe so. He said, he would relent vpon no other con∣dition, than that the caster of the first stone, and the party that made the rescous, should be deliuered into his hands.Agasias. Agasias was the man he sought, who had beene a friend to Xenophon euen to the last; which was the cause that Dexippus accused him. The Commanders knowing not what to doe, called an assembly of the Armie. Many made small account of Cleander: Xenophon thought the businesse to be of no meane consequence, and arising spake thus: Fellow Souldiers,The Souldiers contemne Cle∣ander. Xenophons speeh to the contrary. if Cleander departing hence, carry that minde toward vs, which hee professeth, I take it to be a matter not to be contemned. For now the Grecian Cities are at hand, and the Lacedemonians are rulers of Greece; and euery Lace∣demonian of power sufficient to worke any City to what he list. If therefore he first shut vs out of Byzantium, and signifie to the rest of the Gouernours not to receiue vs into their Cities, as being disobedient to the Lacedemonians, and notto be gouerned, this rumor will come to the
eares of Anaxibius the Admirall, so that it will be hard for vs either to stay here, or to saile away. For at this time the Lacedemonians haue the Souereigntie of Greece, both by Sea and Land. It is not fit therefore, that for one or two mens sakes, we the rest be debarred from Greece, but we are rather to obey, whatsoeuer they command. For our Cities, from whence euery one of vs is, are vnder their subiection. I therefore (for I vnderstand that Dexippus informeth Cleander, that Agasias would not haue done this, vnlesse I had bid him) I, I say, cleare both you, and Agasias of this fault, if Agasias will say, that I am the cause thereof, and I condemne my selfe, and will willingly vndergoe all extremitie of pu∣nishment, if it may appeare that I were the beginner either of casting of stones, or of any other violence. I say further, if any man else be accu∣sed by Cleander, he ought, whosoeuer he be, to yeeld himselfe to Clean∣ders iudgement. So shall you be free from all fault. But as matters goe now, it will be hard, if thinking to receiue praise and honour in Greece, we in stead thereof shall not be in the case that other are, but be exclu∣ded out of all Grecian Cities. After this Agasias stood vp and said: I (ô Souldiers) sweare by the gods and goddesses, that neither Xenophon, nor any other willed mee to take away the man; but when I saw an ho∣nest and worthy Souldier of mine led away by Dexippus, whose trai∣terous dealing toward you, you well know, I thought it a matter not to be suffered. And albeit, I confesse, that I rescued him, yet would I not, that you should deliuer me vp. I my selfe, as Xenophon aduiseth, will yeeld my selfe into the hands of Cleander, to vse me at his discretion. Neither would I for this cause haue you make warre with the Lacedemo∣nians, nor haue any man impeached to saue himselfe, where he list. Only I desire you to make choice of some of your selues to send with me to Cleander, who in case I omit any thing, may speake and doe, what they thinke auaileable in my behalfe. The Army gaue him leaue to choose whom he thought good,The Souldier rescued, and the rescuer yeelded vp to Cleander. and he chose the Coronels. So Agasias and the Coronels, and the man that was rescued went together toward Cle∣ander; to whom the Coronels vsed this speech: The Army (O Clean∣der) hath sent vs vnto you, and desire you, if you thinke them all guilty, to vse your owne iudgement in punishing all: if one or two, they are wil∣ling to put them into your hands to be iudged by you. If therefore you lay the fault vpon any of vs, we here present our selues vnto you; if vpon any man else, we desire you to name him. For no man shall be with-held from you, that will acknowledge our command. Then Agasias stepped forth and said:Agasias in his owne defence. I am the man, Cleander, which tooke this Souldier from Dexippus, who was leading him away, and willed stones to be cast at Dexippus. For I knew this man to be a worthy Souldier, and that Dexip∣pus being by the Army chosen Captaine of a Galley of 50 oares, which wee craued from the Trapezuntians to gather other ships to saue our selues in, both runne away from vs, and also betrayed the Army, with which himselfe was saued.Exceptions against Dexip∣pus. And by his meanes we not only defrauded the Trapezuntians of their ship, but incurred the imputation of vniust
men, and as much as lay in him we all perished. For he heard as well as we, how impossible it was marching on foot to passe ouer the riuers that lay in our way, and to come in safety into Grece. He therefore being such a one, I tooke the Souldier from him. But if you, Cleander, or any about you, that was no run-away from vs, had apprehended him, you may well conceiue, I would haue forborne to doe, as I did. And I would haue you thinke, if you take away my life, you shall put an honest man to death for a cowards and a scundrels sake. Cleander hearing this said: I commend not Dexippus, if he behaued himselfe, as you haue related;Violence not to be vsed. notwithstanding admit Dexippus were neuer so vile, yet violence was not to be offred vnto him, but he was to be brought to iudgement, as you are at this time. Now therefore you the Coronels may depart, leauing this man behinde you, and when I giue you notice, returne to assist the Court in iudgement concerning these offences; and I haue neither cause to accuse the Army, nor any other man in priuate, in as much as himselfe confesseth, that it was he, that made the rescous. Then he that was rescued, spake thus: Lest you should thinke (Cleander) that I was apprehended as an offender, I neither strooke any man, nor threw stone; I said only that the sheepe appertained to the generalitie. For it was de∣creed, that when the Armie went abroad, all boot taken in priuate should be deliuered vp to the vse of the generalitie. This was all I spake, and for this Dexippus laid hands on me, and would haue caried me away, that all mens mouthes being stopped, he might haue had his part, and preserued the rest for those, that contrary to the decree went about to deceiue the Army. Hereunto Cleander answered: Seeing you are so acute and witty, stay you here also, that we may aduise what to doe with you. So went Cleander to dinner; but Xenophon assembling the Army, counselled them to send to Cleander, and to make intercession for the prisoners. Hereupon they decreed, that the Coronels, and Captaines, and Dracontius the Lacedemonian, and other that were fit,Intercession of the Armie for the prisoners. should goe to Cleander, and by all meanes intreat for their deliuerie. Xenophon there∣fore being come to Cleander spake thus: You haue (O Cleander) in safe keeping the men, you desired, and the Army hath referred vnto you, not only to dispose of the prisoners, as you please, but also of themselues in generall. Now they desire and intreat you, to bestow the men vpon them, and not to put them to death, because in former times they haue done good seruice to the Army. Obtaining this fauour at your hands, they promise in regard thereof, if it shall please you to accept the com∣mand ouer them, to make manifest, how modest they are, and how duti∣full to their Generall, and (the gods being propitious) how fearelesse of the enemy. Further they are humble suiters, that you would be pleased to come vnto them, and to make proofe of Dexippus, and of them, and of other, whether shall be most respectiue and dutifull to their Comman∣ders: Cleander hearing this, said he would streight-waies giue them an∣swer; and I release vnto you, quoth he, the men that are in durance,Cleander relea∣seth the priso∣ners. and will my selfe come vnto you, and conduct you into Greece, if the gods
permit. The reports which are spread abroad of you, are much differing from that, which I my selfe now heare, namely, that the Armie should be in minde to reuolt from the Lacedemonians. The Coronels much extol∣led him for his bounty,Accepteth the place of Gene∣rall. and departed, hauing the prisoners restored vnto them. Cleander offred sacrifice about the iourney, and vsed Xenophon with all kindnesse, and contracted hospitalitie with him, and when he saw the Armie orderly doe what was commanded, he much rather desi∣red to be their Generall.The sacrifice gaine say it. But when he had sacrificed three dayes, and the sacrifice assented not, he called the Coronels together, and said: The sa∣crifices allow not, that I should be your Generall. Yet be not you there∣fore out of comfort. For, as it seemeth, you are the men that are appoin∣ted to leade the Armie home. Goe forward. When you come where we haue to doe, we will entertaine you in the best manner we can. Here∣upon the Souldiers offered him the sheepe that pertained to the genera∣litie, which he receiued and gaue backe againe. So he sailed away. But the Souldiers diuiding amongst themselues the corne, and other things, which they had gathered together, marched on thorow the countrey of Bithynia. And when they found nothing in their right way (for they held on as if the countrey had beene friend) it seemed good to returne backe a day and nights iourney. Doing this they tooke many slaues and sheepe; and the eighth day came to Chrysopolis a Citie in the country of Chalcedon, and staied there seuen dayes selling their spoile. Finis Libri Sexti.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF XENOPHON, TOVCHING THE Ascent of CYRVS the younger, out of Asia the Lesse, into the Higher COVNTREYS. WHat the Grecians did in their Ascent with Cyrus vntill the battell, and what, after Cyrus was slaine, in their iourney till they came into Pontus, and what marching on Foot, and sailing out of Pontus, till they had passed the mouth of Pontus, and came to Chrysopolis in Asia, is described in the former discourse. After this Pharnabazus fearing that the Armie would inuade his gouernment sent to Anaxibius the Admirall (who then happened to be at Byzantium) and desired him to transport it out of Asia,Anaxibius the Lacedemonian Admirall. promising him in that respect to doe, whatsoeuer he required at his hands. Anaxibius sent for the Coronels and Captaines to Byzantium promising to giue them pay, if they would come ouer to him. The other Coronels said,Draweth the Armie ouer to Byzance. they would aduise, and returne him answer. But Xenophon answered, that he purposed to leaue the Armie, and saile away.Xenophons pur∣pose to leaue the Armie. Anaxibius com∣manded him first to come ouer with the Armie, and gaue him libertie to depart afterward at his pleasure; which Xenophon assented vnto. In the meane time Seuthes the Thracian sent Medosades,Seuthes King of Thrace sendeth to Xenophon. and desired Xenophon to be a meanes and furtherance to the transportation of the Armie, adding he should not repent himselfe in so doing. Xenophon answered, that the Armie without all question was to come ouer, and in regard thereof Seuthes need not giue any thing either to him, or to any man else. After the transportation, quoth he, I am to depart. Let him therefore addresse himselfe in such sort, as he thinketh best, to those, that remaine behinde, and shall be most for his purpose. So all the Armie came ouer to Byzan∣tium. Anaxibius gaue them not pay according to his promise,The Armie at Byzance. but made
proclamation,Anaxibius see∣keth to de∣ceiue the Ar∣mie. that taking their Armes and baggage, they should depart out of the Citie, as if he had a purpose to send them away, and to take muster of them. Hereupon the Souldiers we discoten, because they wanted money to make prouision for their iourney, and they made no great hae in trussing vp their baggage. Xeph being become now a Guest to Cleander the Gouernour, went to him and saluted him, hauing in minde o take shipping presently. You shall not doe so, oth he: If you doe, you will be blamed: For alreadie they lay the fault vpon you, that the Armie is so slow in departing the Citie. Yet am not I in fault, quoth Xenophon: For the Souldiers wanting victuall and money for their iourney, are in that regard loth to leaue the Citie. Yet would I counsell you, quoth he, to goe out, as though you meant to march with them, and when the Armie is out of the Gates, to depart, whither you list. Let vs goe then to Anaxibius▪ quoth Xenophon, and take order accor∣dingly. Comming to him they told, what they had resolued. He willed them so to doe, and that the Souldiers should presently issue with their baggage; and further to signifie, that whosoeuer appeared not at the musters, and view to be taken, should thanke himselfe, if any thing fell out contrarie to his expectation.The Army go∣eth out of By∣zance. Hereupon the Coronels first went out, and after them the rest; and now were all out but a few, and Ereos stood at the Gates readie to shut them and put in the barre, assoone as all were gone. Anaxibius calling then the Coronels and Captaines to him, said: For prouision, you may take it out of the Thracian Villages. There shall you finde plentie of Barley, and of Whea, and other victuall. Af∣ter you are furnished, march on to Cherronesus, where Cynisous shall giue you your pay. Some of the Souldiers ouer-heard these words, or else some of the Captaines reported them to the Armie. The Coronels as∣ked Seuthes,The Army fin∣deth the deceit of Anaxibius. whether the Countrey were enemie, or friend, and whether they were to march ouer the holy Mountaine, or in circle thorow the middest of Thrace. During this conference the Souldiers snatching vp their Armes ran with full speed to the Gates,. minding to enter within the Wals. Etonicus and those with him, when they saw the armed come running,Returneth to Byzance discon∣tented. shut the Gates, and made fast the barre. The Souldiers beat at the Gates crying, they were extremely wronged, thus to be thrust out to the enemie, and threatned to breake the Gates asunder, if they opened them not of their owne accord. Other some ran along by the Sea side, and climbed vp the wall by the great stones, that were laid betwixt the Sea and the wall, to breake the violence of the waues. There were of the Souldiers, that remained yet within the Citie, who when they saw the stirre about the Gates,Breake open a gate. cut asunder the barres with axes, and set the Gates wide open. Xenophon beholding what was done, fearing left the Armie should fall to spoile,The feare of the Citie. and worke inestimable damage to the Citie, to him, and to themselues, ran amongst the rest, and in the crowd was carried within the Gates. As soone as the Byzantians perceiued, that the Armie had entred the Citie by force, they fled out of the market-place, some toward the ships, some to their houses. They that were within the Citie
fled out, and some put the Gallies afloat, hoping to finde safetie in them. All accounted themselues lost, none otherwise, than if the City had beene taken by the enemie. Anaxibius fled to the Sea, taking a Fisher-boat, and recouered the Castle, from whence out of hand he sent for succour to Chalcedon, thinking the Garrison of the Castle insufficient to make the place good against the Armie. The Souldiers, when they saw Xenophon, said to him: Now (ô Xenophon) it is in your owne hands to make your selfe a man; you haue a Citie, you haue Gallies, you haue riches, you haue so many men; now, if you please, you may doe vs good, and we will make you great. You say well, quoth Xenophon,. and I will follow your counsell; onely if this be your desire, put your selues in order of battell without delay. Both himselfe gaue this command, and he wil∣led the other Coronels to giue direction to imbattell the Souldiers, thereby to still and appease the vproare.. They putting themselues in or∣der, the armed stood in short time fiftie deepe, and the Peltasts ran to both wings. The place was fit to embattell in, called Thracium, being void of houses, and an euen plot of ground. After they had laid downe their Armes, and were still, Xenophon called the army together, and made this speech vnto them: I maruell not (ô Souldiers) that you are angry, & thinke you haue cause of discontent in regard of the deceit, that is vsed towards you. But if we giue reines to our anger, and seeke reuenge vpon the Lacedemonians, that are present, and put the Citie, that is blamelesse, to sacke, cast in your mindes, what will be the issue. And what kinde of war this will be, they may iudge, that haue seene, and remember the euents of things lately passed. For we, the Athenians, entred into war against the Lacedemonians, and their Allie, being owners of no lesse, than foure hundred Gallies, which were in part abroad, in part in our Arsenall. And albeit that the Citie had much riches,Xenophon stil∣leth the com∣motion. and a yeerely re∣uenew arising from the Citizens, and from strangers, no lesse than 1000. talents, and besides was mistresse of all the Ilands, and possessed many Cities in Asia, many in Europe, and amongst the rest this Byzanti∣um it selfe, where we now are, yet were we ouercome, as you all know. Now then what can we expect to befall vs, the Lacedemonians and Achae∣ans being linked in societie, and the Athenians and all their confederates, that then were, being of the partie; Tissaphernes, and the other Barbari∣ans on the other side of the Sea our enemies, and the great King most of all other, whose kingdome we sought to bereaue him of, and to take his life, if we could. All these things being so, is any man so simple to con∣ceiue, that wee shll haue the vpper hand? For Gods sake let vs not be franticke, nor cast away our selues shamefully in becomming enemy to our fathers, friends, and kinsfolke. For they liue all in the Cities, which will make warre against vs. Which warre will not want a iust ground, considering we sought not to possesse any Barbarian Citie, albeit we won them by force, and now we put to spoile the first Grecian Citie, to which we are arriued. For my part, I wish my selfe 1000. Fathoms vnder the ground, before I see so shamefull an act committed by you; and I
would counsell you, being Grecians, to seeke things right and iust not by force, but by obedience to them, that are rulers of the Grecians: which if you cannot obtaine, yet is it not fit, that because we are wronged, we should therefore depriue our selues of Greece. And now I am of opinion, that we are to signifie to Anaxibius, that we come into the Citie, not to vse any violence, but, if it might be, to obtaine some friendship at his hands: If not, to shew vnto him, that we depart not being deceiued, but obeying his command. Messengers to . These things were decreed, and they sent away Hieronymus the Elaean, and Eurylochus the Arcadian, and Philesius the Achaean to deliuer the message. In the meane time, while they remained in the place, expecting their messengers returne, came Cyrotades a Theban, who was no banished man from Greece,otades ofe∣eh himselfe Generll. but went from place to place de∣sirous to haue the command of an army, offering himselfe to any Citie or Nation, that needed a Generall. He then comming to the army, told them, he would lead them to that part of Thrace, which was called Delta, where they should inrich themselues with the spoile of the Coun∣trey: and if they would accept him for their Generall, he would bounti∣fully bestow meat and drinke vpon them. The Souldiers at the same time heard his proposition, and the message of Anaxibius, who returned answer,The army go∣eth out of the Citie and fol∣loweth him. that they should neuer repent themselues of their obedience to him: for he said he would signifie it to the Magistrates of his Citie, and be readie to gratifie them to the vttermost of his power. Hereupon the Souldiers tooke Cyrotades for their Generall, and went out of the walles. Cyrotades appointed to be with the army, the next day bring∣ing with him sacrifice, a soothsayer, and meat, and drinke for the ar∣my. When they were departed the Citie, Anaxibius shut the gates, and made Proclamation, that whatsoeuer Souldier hee found in the Citie, hee would sell him as a slaue. The next day Cyrotades came with sacrifice, and a soothsayer; 20. men followed him laden with barley meale, other twenty with wine, three with oyle, one that bore as great a burden of Garlicke as he could, another of Onions. Laying these things downe, as it were to be diuided amongst the souldiers, he sacrifi∣ced. Xenophon in the meane sending to Cleander, desired him to get leaue for him to come within the walls, and to take shipping to saile from Bi∣zantium. Cleander came vnto him: With much adoe, quoth he, I haue obtained that which you desire. For Anaxibius said: it would not sute well, that Xenophon should be within the walls, and the Armie without so neere to the Citie;Xenophon de∣parteth from the Army. especially the Bizantians being at diuision amongst themselues, and ill-minded one against another. Notwithstanding he willed you to come in, if you minded to saile away with him. Xenophon saluting and bidding the Souldiers farewell, entred the Citie with Cle∣ander. Cyrotades found no good successe in his sacrifice the first day, nor did he distribute any thing to the Souldiers. The next day he brought the beast to the Altar, and stood crowned, as though he meant to sacri∣fice. Timasion the Dardanian, and Neon the Asinaean, and Cleanor the Or∣chomenian told Cyrotades, it would be in vaine to sacrifice in hope to be
Generall of the Armie, vnlesse he gaue prouision to maintaine them. He bid, that the prouision should be diuided amongst them;Cyrotades his prouision too scant. He renoun∣ceth his com∣mand. The Coronels of diuers mindes. when he could not furnish out so much as would serue euery Souldier for one dayes prouision, he tooke his sacrifice with him, and renounced the Generals place. Neon the Asinaean, and Phryniscus the Achaian, and Timasion the Dardanian remained with the Armie, and leading it to the Thracian vil∣lages about Byzantium encamped there. The Coronels were diuided amongst themselues, Cleanor and Phryniscus wishing to leade the Armie to Seuthes (for he had wonne them, giuing the one a horse, the other a woman) Neon to Cherronesus, imagining, if they were vnder the Lacede∣monians, he should be chiefe Commander. Timasion the Dardanian was desirous to passe it ouer againe into Asia, hoping thereby to be restored to his countrey, which the Souldiers likewise desired. Much time being spent herein, many of the Souldiers selling their armes in the countrey thereabout forsooke the Armie, other dispersed themselues into the neighbour Cities. Anaxibius was filled with ioy, hearing that the Ar∣mie went to wracke. For that comming to passe, he conceiued he should gratifie Pharnabazus. Anaxibius now sailing from Byzantium encoun∣tred at Cyzicus Aristarchus the successor of Cleander gouernour of By∣zantium. He told Anaxibius, that Polus, his successor in the Admirals place, was only not arriued at Hellespont. Anaxibius willed Aristarchus, if he found any of Cyrus his Souldiers at Byzantium, he should sell them for slaues. Clearchus sold none; nay rather those that were sicke,Cruelty of Anaxibius and Arstarchus against the Souldiers. The faithles∣nesse of Phar∣nabazus. he in pitie made much of, and compelled men to take them into their houses. But Aristarchus hasting to Byzantium, as soone as he came there, sold no lesse than 400 of them for slaues. Anaxibius sailed to Parium, and sent to Pharnabazus expecting an answer according to their composi∣tion. He, after he perceiued, that Aristarchus was come Gouernour to Byzantium, and that Anaxibius was no more Admirall, regarded Anaxi∣bius little, and practised the same with Aristarchus concerning Cyrus his Souldiers, that he had before concluded with Anaxibius. Hereupon Anaxibius calling Xenophon vnto him,Anaxibius sen∣deth Xenophon to the Army againe. willed him with all his cunning to saile to the Armie, and keepe them together, and to gather as many as he could, of those that were dispersed, and leading them to Perinthus to transport them into Asia with all speed. He gaue also a Galley, and a letter to Xenophon, and sent an expresse messenger to command the Pe∣rinthians to furnish Xenophon with horse, and send him with all speed vn∣to the Armie. So Xenophon sailing away came to the Armie. The Soul∣diers entertained him with ioy, and streightway followed him willing∣ly, being in hope to passe ouer out of Thrace into Asia. Seuthes hearing that Xenophon was come, sent Medosades by Sea vnto him, and intreated him to bring the Armie into Thrace, promising whatsoeuer he thought would tempt him to giue way vnto his request.Seuthes desireth to haue the seruice of the Army. Xenophon answered it was impossible to be done. Medosades, after this answer was giuen, rode away. When the Grecians were come to Perinthus, Neon separating his Regi∣ment from the rest of the Army, encamped apart, hauing about 800 men.
All the rest of the Armie set downe together hard by the walls of Perin∣thus.The Army at Perinthus a Ci∣tie in Thrace. Xenophon in the meane time practised all he could, to get shipping for the speedy transportation of the Armie into Asia. Whilest this was doing, Aristarchus the Gouernour, arriuing from Byzantium with two Gallies at the perswasion of Pharnabazus,Aristarchus hin∣dereth their passage into Asia. commanded the Saylers not to receiue so much as one Souldier aboord. And comming to the Ar∣mie, forbade them to passe ouer into Asia. Xenophon told him, that it was the commandement of Anaxibius, and he sent him purposely about this businesse. Aristarchus replied, that Anaxibius was not Admirall, and I, quoth he, am Gouernour here; if I take any of you vpon the Sea, I will sinke you. Hauing said thus much, he entred within the walls of the Ci∣tie. The next day he sent for the Coronels and Captaines of the Armie. They being now neere the walls, it was told Xenophon, that if hee went into the Citie,Xenophons dan∣ger. he should be apprehended, and either suffer there, I wot not what, or else be deliuered into the hands of Pharnabazus. He hea∣ring this sent in the rest; for himselfe, he said, he would aske counsell of the gods by sacrifice; and departing he sacrificed, demanding whether the gods would be pleased,His sacrifice. he should leade the Armie vnto Seuthes, or no. For he saw he could not safely passe ouer into Asia, especially since the man, that forbade the passage, had Gallies at command; and he liked not to be shut vp in Cherronesus, and to haue the Armie brought to ex∣treme want of all things. Besides, in the place where they were, they must obey the Gouernour, and yet be destitute of prouision. About this businesse was Xenophon. The Coronels and Captaines returning from Aristarchus, brought word, that he willed them now to depart, and come againe in the euening. Hereupon the fraud seemed more apparent. Xe∣nophon therefore, when he saw the sacrifice to be faire both for him and the Armie to goe to Seuthes without danger, taking Polycrates the Athe∣nian Captaine with him,He posteth in∣to Thrace. and a man from euery the Coronels (except Neon) such a one as euery one trusted most, rode that night to the Camp of Seuthes, which was 50 furlongs distant; and comming vp to the Campe,6 Mile and a quarter. they found fires, and no man neere them. And first they imagi∣ned, that Seuthes had remoued his Campe, but when they heard a noise, and Seuthes his Souldiers calling one to another, they conceiued, that Seuthes had caused the fires to be made before his night-guards, that in the darke the Sentinels might not be seene,Fires before the Guards. and yet those, that had ac∣cesse to the Campe, might not be hidden, but plainly discouered by the light of the fires. Which when he perceiued, he sent the Interpreter, which he brought with him, to signifie to Seuthes, that Xenophon was there desirous to speake with him. They asked, whether it were Xeno∣phon the Athenian, and whether he came from the Armie? and when he answered, he was the same, they returned dancing. A little while after came about 200 Peltasts, and taking Xenophon and his company with them, they led them to Seuthes. He was in a Castle carefully guarded, and the horse round about the Castle were bridled. For in the day time he fed his horse, by night he had them in a readinesse for feare. It is
reported that Tereus one of his auncestors hauing a great Armie in this countrey, lost many of his Souldiers, and was lighted of all his baggage by these men. They are the Thynes,The Thynes. who are said to be the most warlike of all the Nation, especially by night. When they came to the Castle, Seuthes willed Xenophon to come in with any two he should choose. Be∣ing within they first saluted, and then according to the Thracian manner drunke hornes of wine one to another.Xenophon with Seuthes. Medosades was then present with Seuthes, whose seruice he vsed in all Embssages. Xenophon began then to speake: You sent Medosades to me (O Sethes) first to Chalcedon, in∣treating me to be a meanes to transport the Armie out of Asia, and pro∣mising, if I brought it to passe, to require my seruice, as this Medosades signified vnto me. Speaking thus much, he asked Medosades, if it were not true. Medosades said, it was so. Then came Medosades to me the second time, after I came from Prion to the Armie, promising, if I brought the Armie to you, that you would otherwise vse me as a friend & brother, and also giue me the Townes you possesse by the Sea-side. He asked Medosades, whether he spake not this also. Yes, quoth he, I spake it. Goe to now; report what answer I made you at Chalcedon. First,His propositi∣ons to Seuthes. you answered, quoth he, that the Armie was to come ouer to Byzantium, and that in respect thereof there needed not any thing to be giuen to you or to any man else; and you said, you were to depart as soone as you came ouer; and it fell out as you said. But what answer made I at Selymbria? You said it was not possible to be done, because the Armie was to march to Perinthus, and there to be transported into Asia. Now am I here, said Xenophon, and this Phryniscu one of the Coronels, and this Polycra∣tes one of the Captaines, and without the Castle are the most trusty friends of all the other Coronels (except of Neon the Lacedmonian) To giue credit therefore vnto our negotiation, it will be good, that you call for them to be present here within. And you Polycrates ell them from me, that I would haue them leaue their armes without, and you likewise leaue your sword there, and so come in. Seuthes hearing this, said, he distrusted no Athenian: for he knew they were his kinsfolke, and he reck∣ned them in the number of his faithfull and well-affected friends. When they that should, were come in, Xenophon asked Seuthes, wherin he purpo∣sed to vse the seruice of the Armie. Seuthes spake thus: Mesades was my father, vnder whose gouernment were the Meladopans, the Thynes,Why Seuthes desired the army. and the Thranipsans. When the affaires of the Odryssians began to be trou∣bled, my father being driuen out of this countrey fell sicke, and died, and I was brought vp as an orphan by Medous, that now reigneth. Af∣ter I grew to a few yeares, I could not endure to sit, and looke vpon an∣other mans table. Wherefore being at his table, I humbly besought him to afford me such forces, as he could, that I might be reuenged vpon them, that had eiected vs out of our patrimony, and not alwaies liue like a dog waiting at his table. Hereupon he gaue me those men and horse, which you shall see as soone, as it is day. And now I spend the time with these spoiling and driuing preies out of my fathers countrey. But if you
ioyne with me, I hope (the gods being friends) easily to recouer my kingdome. And this is the cause, wherefore I craue your aid. What then, quoth Xenophon, can you giue the army, the Captaines and the Co∣ronels, if we come? Speake it, quoth he, before this company, that they may make report to the rest of the army. He promised to a common Souldier a Cyzicene,The offers of Seuthes to the army. two to a Captaine, foure to a Coronell, and as much land, as he desired, and yoakes of oxen, and a walled towne situae by the Sea. But if endeuouring this, we bring it not to passe, and some feare arise from the Lacedemonians, if any of vs come vnto you, will you receiue him into your countrey? He answered: yea I will hold them as my brothers, and place them in seats, and make them partakers of all I shall possesse. But to you, Xenophon, I will giue my daughter, and if you haue a daughter, I will buy her after the Thracian manner, and will giue her Bisanthe lying vpon the Sea-coast to dwell in, which is the goodliest countrey I haue. Hearing these things, and giuing and taking hands, they rode away, and before day, came to the Campe, and euery one re∣turned answer to them, from whom he was sent. When it was day, Ari∣starchus called againe the Coronells and Captaines, who thought it not good to come at Aristarchus,Aristarchus sen∣deth for the Coronels, who refuse to come. but to call an assembly of the army. All came together, except the Souldiers of Neon, who were about ten Fur∣longs from the rest. Being assembled, Xenophon arose, and spake thus: We cannot (ô Souldiers) saile ouer, whether we would, by reason that Aristarchus with his Gallies hindreth vs; so that it is not safe for vs to go aboord. He also commandeth vs to make way thorow the Holy Mount by force, and so to come to Cherronesus: which if we do, he faith he will no more sell vs for slaues, as he did in Bizantium, nor yet beguile vs, but will surely giue vs our pay; nor shall we need to looke about vs, as wee doe now, being destitute of necessary prouision. Seuthes promiseth, if you will come vnto him to vse you kindly. I would haue you therefore to consider, whether you will stay here, and debate of these things, or march away to a place, where you may refresh your selues with victualls. I am of opinion, seeing we neither haue money to goe to market, nor are suffered to take victuall without money, that we were best to returne to the villages which were allotted vs, and hauing there such things, as we want,The army go∣eth to Seuthes. to heare the propositions of such, as desire your seruice, and to chuse that, which shall be most expedient for your selues. You, that like hereof, hold vp your hands. All held vp their hands. Goe then, quoth he, and presently trusse vp your baggage, and when you are commanded, follow your leaders. After this Xenophon led, and the army followed. And albeit Neon, and other from Aristarchus endeuoured to perswade them to returne, yet they would giue no eare. When they had now mar∣ched about thirtie Furlongs,Seuthes meets the army. Seuthes met them. Whom when Xenophon saw, he desired him to draw neere, that in the hearing of the multitude they mought conferre about some things, which tended to the good of the army. Being come vp, Xenophon said: We are now marching thither, where we may finde food. There, after we haue heard, what you, and
this Lacedemonian will say, wee will resolue vpon that, which shall seeme best for vs. If therefore you will lead vs to a place, where we shall haue plentie, we shall be the more beholding vnto you, and thinke you make vs your guests. I know, quoth Seuthes, where many villages stand not farre asunder, which abound in store of prouision, and are no fur∣ther off, than we may well reach by dinner time. Lead then, quoth Xeno∣phon. They came to the villages in the afternoone, and the Souldiers assembling, Seuthes vsed this speech: I desire you ( Souldiers) to take entertainment of me. I promise euery one of you a Cyzicene for his monthly pay, and to a Captaine, and a Coronell as much,18 Shillings. Seuthes to the Armie. as is vsually giuen. Meat and drinke you shall haue of the ountrey, as you haue now. Whatsoeuer is taken from the enemy, I will challenge, as mine owne, that disposing of it, as I shall thinke best, I may make vp your pay. We of our selues shall be of force sufficient to giue chace to the enemy, that flyeth: with your helpe we shall easily ouercome those that resist. Xenophon then asked him, how farre from the Sea he desired the army should march. No further than seuen daies iourney, quoth he, and oftentimes selfe. After this it was permitted, that any man, that would, might speake. Many said, that Seuthes propounded things not to be con∣temned. For it was Winter, and no man, though he would neuer so faine, could get home by Sea, and wanting mony to buy things necessary,Reasons why the Armie should follow Seuthes. they were not able to remaine in a friends countrey, and in the enemies it was safer to stay and be nourished in the company of Seuthes, than be∣ing alone, especially so many commodities offering themselues. Besides, to haue pay was a thing found, ere it could be looked for. Xenophon ad∣ded, if any man be of a contrarie minde, let him speake; if not, let a de∣cree be made hereof. When all were silent, they gaue their consent,They agree to follow him. and a decree was made accordingly. Xenophon therefore presently informed Seuthes, that the Souldiers would take entertainment of him. After this the rest quartered, euery man, as the lot fell to his company,Hee inuiteth the Coronels and Captaines to supper. but Seuthes called the Coronels and Captaines to supper in a village hard by. Com∣ming to the doore, where they should sup, they found one Heraclides a Maronaea; he insinuated himselfe to each of them, who, he thought, was able, and had to giue Seuthes; and spake first to certaine Parians, that came to make a league with Medocus the King of Odryssians, bring∣ing with them gifts for him, and for the Queene. He told them,Gifts to the King. that Me∣docus liued in the countrey, that was twelue daies iourney from the Sea, and that Seuthes with the helpe of that army would be master of the Sea, and being their neighbour, would bee able both to pleasure, and hurt them. If you be wise therefore turne the gifts, which you bring, to Seu∣thes, and it will be better, than, if you presented them to Medocus, that dwelleth so farre off. Thus he perswaded them. Then he came to Ti∣masion the Dardanian (for he heard, he had cups and carpets taken from the Barbarians) and said: It was the manner, when Seuthes bid any to supper, that the guests inuited, offered presents vnto him. He, quoth Heraclydes, if he become great in this kingdome, will be able either to
restore you to your countrey, or else to make you rich here. Thus admo∣nished he euerie one, before they entred to supper. He came likewise to Xenophon and said: You are both of the greatest Citie, and of greatest name with Seuthes; and it may be, that Seuthes will thinke you worthy to possesse cities and land in this countrey, as many of your countrey∣men haue done heretofore. It is fit therefore for you to honour Seuthes with the richest presents. For I know, the royaller your presents be, the more gratuitie you shall obtaine at his hands. Xenophon hearing this was displeased in minde. For he brought no more out of Pari with him, than a boy, and money to defray his charges. When the greatest men of Thrace, tht were then present, and the Coronels and Captaines of the Grecians, and the Ambassadours sent from Cities, were entred into sup∣per, they set downe all in a ring. Then were three-footed kettles brought in for them all.The manner of sitting and ser∣uice at supper. They were about twentie in number, full of flesh cut in peeces, and of great loaues of leauened bread, pierced thorow and faste∣ned to the flesh. The tables, as the custome is, were set neerest to the strangers. Seuthes first of all taking the loaues next him, broke them into small peeces, and the flesh likewise, and threw the peeces to whom hee thought good, reseruing to himselfe no more tha a taste. The other, that had the tables standing by them, did the like. There was amongst the rest an Arcadian, Aristos by name, a notable eater. He not regarding that which was cast vnto him, taking a loafe of the bignesse well-nigh of a pecke in one hand, and a peece of flesh on his knees, fell a eating. Hornes of wine were carried about, and euery man tooke them. Ari∣stos, when hee that filled the wine came, and offered it to him, seeing Xe∣nophon forbeare eating, goe, giue it him, quoth he, for he is at leasure, and I not. Seuthes hearing the voice, asked the filler of wine, what he said, who when he told him (for he could speake Greeke) the whole compa∣ny fell a laughing. The cups now walked thicke about, and a Thracian vpon a white horse came in, and taking a full horne, said: Seuthes, I drinke to you, and giue you this horse, whose backe when you are vpon, you may easily take, whomsoeuer you chace, and retiring, need not feare any enemie. Another brought in a boy, and drink∣ing in the same sort, gaue him to the King. Another, garments for his wife. Timasion drunke to him, and gaue him a siluer cup and a carpet worth ten pound. Gesippus the Athenian standing vp, said, That it was an ancient and a verie good custome, that they that had, should for honours sake giue to the King; and the King to them, that had not. So should I, quoth hee, haue wherewith to present and honour the King. Xenophon doubted with himselfe what to doe. For he was honoured, sitting in the next seat to the King, and Hera∣clides willed the wine-filler to reach the Horne vnto him. He was now well tippled, & therefore stood vp boldly taking the Horne in his hand, and said: I (ô Seuthes) giue my selfe vnto you, and all these my Com∣panions, to be your faithfull friends: and I giue none of them against their wils, but all so minded, that euerie one will striue to doe you more
seruice, than my selfe. And now they are here wishing nothing more, than to beemploied, and to vndergoe perill for your sake; with the helpe of whom (if the gods will) you shall both recouer and also enioy your Fathers Kingdome; and not only it, but many Horse, many men and faire women, whom you shall not need to spoile, and take from them, what they haue, but of their owne ree will they will bring gifts vnto you. Seuthes standing vp pledged him in a full Horne, and drunke it out, and he cast here and there the flesh that was before him. After this the Cera∣suntines came in, who vse Flutes and Trumpets made of the raw Hides of Oxen playing in measure, as the vse is vpon the Instrument called Magade. Seuthes himselfe stood vp and casting forth a martiall cry,See Iul Poll. pag. 187. lin. 12. leaped forward nimbly, shunning, as it were, a dart, that seemed to be cast at him. Iesters also came in. When the Sun was now readie to set, the Grecians arose from their seats, signifying, it was time to dispose the watch, and to giue the word.The Watch. They desired Seuthes to take order that no Thracian entred the Grecian quarter by night; because, said they, there are some Thracians, that are enemies, some, that are friends, both to you, and vs. When they went out, Seuthes also stood vp nothing lesse than like a drunken man; and comming abroad, he called the Coronels to him, and said: The enemie yet knoweth not, that you are entertained by me.Surprising the enemie. If therefore we goe against them, before they feare to be caught, or prouide to defend themselues, we shall easily gaine both prisoners and plentie of riches. The Coronels commended his aduice, and willed him to leade on. He replied, that they should make themselues readie, and stay, where they were. When it is time, quoth he, I will come vnto you, and taking you and the Peltasts with me, by the helpe of the gods, I will be your guide. Xenophon said: Consider, I pray,The order of matching in the night. seeing we are to march by night, whether the Grecian manner be not best. In the day time the light-Armed, or Horse, according to the nature of the place, haue the Vant of the Armie; in the night the vse of the Grecians is to giue the leading to the slowest. For so the Armie is easiliest kept together, and it is soonest espied, if they breake. But being seuered, they often fall one vpon ano∣ther, and through ignorance doe, and suffer hostilitie. Seuthes answered, You say well, and I will follow your order, and giue you old men the most experienced in the Countrey for Guides, and my selfe bring vp the Reare with the Horse. For I can soone be first, if need be. They gaue for the Word Pallas, because of their kinred. After this was spoken,Pallas is in Greeke Athe∣naea. From hence did Athens take the name, and Seu∣thes was of the blood of the Athenians by Progue, whom Tercus King of Thrace, one of Seuthes his an∣cestors maried. they tooke their rest. About midnight Seuthes came vnto them with his Hors-men being Curaciers, and with the Peltasts in their Armes, and after he had giuen them Guides, the armed Foot marched first, the Peltasts followed, and the Hors-men came in the Reare. When it was day Seu∣thes galloped vp to the Front, & much commended the Grcian manner. For I my selfe, quoth he, marching in the night, albeit but with a few, haue oftentimes had my Horse distracted from my Foot. Now are we by breake of day all together in one place, as it ought to be. But it is best, you stay here, and rest your selues, I will scout abroad. Speaking thus
much, he galloped along the Hill, following a way, that lead forward. When he came to much Snow, he began to looke about, whether there were any foot-steps of men comming forward or backward. When he could discerne no tract, he straight returned and said: All will be well (ô Souldiers) if God will: For we shall fall vpon the enemie and take them at vnawares. But I will goe before with the Horse, to the end, that if I see any man, I may stay him, lest he scape from vs, and giue warning to the enemie. Follow you, and if you fll farr behinde, direct your selues by the tract of the Horse. After we are ouer these Mountaines, we shall come to Villages, that are many in number, and rich. Abou noone he was vpon the top of the Mountaines, and discouering the Vil∣lages, he came vpon the spur to the armed Foot, saying: I will send the Horse downe into Champeigne, and the Peltasts into the Villages: fol∣low you, as fast as you can, that, if any resistance be made, you may come in to succour. Xenophon hearing this, alighted from his Horse: When Seuthes asked him, why he alighted, when most haste was requisit; I know, quoth he, you shall not haue need of me alone, and these ar∣med will more willingly run, if I leade on foot. After this Timasion ioined with him hauing fortie Horse or thereabout.Choice of soul∣diers by the age  speed. Xenophon comman∣ded them, that were 30 yeere old, taking with them their armes alone, to come out of the body vnto him; with whom he posted on. Cleanor lead the rest of the Grecians. When they were come to the villages, Seuthes galloping vp, said: It is as you said, Xenophon, we haue caught the men. But my horse haue left me, & giuen chace one one way, another another, and I am afraid, lest the enemy gathering together, make head, and worke vs some mischiefe. Some of vs must stay in the Villages also. For they are full of men. But I, quoth Xenophon, will take the top of the mountaine with those I haue. Command you Cleanor to stretch out his Phalange along the champeigne by the villages. When this was done, they gathered together into the champeigne about 1000 slaues, 2000 oxen, and 10000 other cattell.The prey. There they quartered that night. The next day Seuthes burning all the Villages, and leauing not so much as a house, to the end to strike a terror into other of that Nation, and to signifie what they were to expect, if they yeelded not, departed thence. And he sent Heraclides to sell the prey at Perinthus, thereby to raise pay for the Souldiers. He and the Grecians encamped in the Plaines of the Thynes, who forsaking their houses fled to the mountaines. The Snow was great, and the cold such, that the water frose, which was carried for sup∣per,The cold of the Countrey. and the wine likewise in the vessels; and the nosthrils and eares of many of the Grecians were sidged with the rigour thereof. And the cause was then perceiued, why the Thracians wore fox-skins vpon their heads and eas, and (sitting on horsebacke) coats not only vpon their breasts, but also vpon their thighes, and put on gownes, that reach to their feet, and refuse the vse of cloakes. Seuthes sending some of the prisoners to the mountaines, gaue them to vnderstand, that vnlesse they descended to inhabit their houses, and acknowledged him for their
King, he would fire their Villages also, and their corne, and cause them die of hunger. Hereupon the women, and children, and old men came downe; the younger sort quartered in the Villages at the foot of the mountaines. Which when Seuthes had intelligence of, he commanded Xenophon to follow him with the youngest of the armed foot. And be∣ginning to march in the night, they came to the Villages by breake of day. The most part of the enemy escaped away, by reason that the mountaine was neere.Seuthes execu∣teth his rebels. As many as were taken Seuthes killed with darts. There was one Episthenes an Olythian, a louer of boyes, who seeing a faire boy now first come to mans estate, that had a Target, and was ready to be executed, ranne to Xenophon, and beseeched him to be a meanes to saue the faire boy. Xenophon stepped to Seuthes, intreating him not to kill the boy, and told him withall the fashion of Episthenes,Episthenes. and that he once raised a company with no other intent, than to see, if any were faire amongst them, that with them he might shew himselfe a braue man. Seuthes asked: Episthenes will you die for him? He hol∣ding out his necke, Strike, quoth he, if the boy bid, and I will hold it for a fauour. Seuthes asked the boy, whether Episthenes should be strucken in his stead. The boy would not suffer it, but humbly sued, that neither of them might be put to death. Then Episthenes taking the boy in his armes, Now, quoth he, Seuthes, you and I must haue a pull about this boy: For I will neuer let him goe. Seuthes smiling gaue him leaue to doe what he list. He thought it best to encampe in that place, lest they of the moun∣taines should be releeued with victuall out of the Villages; and himselfe descending into the Plaine, quartered there. Xenophon hauing with him his chosen Souldiers encamped in the vppermost Village neere the mountaines; and the rest of the Grecians not farre off, in that part, which the Thracians call the mountainous countrey. Many daies passed not, before the Thracians descending from the mountaines practised with Seuthes about pledges and agreement; and Xenophon came vnto Seu∣thes, and told him that the Campe was seated in dangerous places, and that the enemie was neere at hand. I had rather, quoth he, encampe else-where, than in these streights, where all are in perill to be lost. Seu∣thes willed him to be of good cheere, shewing him the pledges, which were brought vnto him. Some also descending from the mountaines, intreated Xenophon to be a meanes of peace. He was content, and bid them be of good comfort, and promised they should haue no harme, as long as they would be obedient to Seuthes. All that they did, was to no other end, than to spie and discouer, what was done in the Campes. So ended this dayes worke.Spies of the enemy. The night following the Thynes descending from the mountaines gaue a Camisado. The housholder of euery house was the leader.A Camisado by the Thynes. For otherwise it would haue beene hard to haue found the houses of the Villages in the darke, which were set round about with great Palizados because of the cattell. When they were come to the doores of euery house, some threw in darts, other some laid on with clubs, which they were said to carry to the end to breake off the heads
of the pikes, some fired the houses, and called Xenophon by name, wil∣ling him to come out, and die, vnlesse he had rather be burnt. The fire was now seene vpon the roofes of the houses, and Xenophons heauy ar∣med were yet within, ready notwithstanding with their Targets, Swords, and Head-peeces. And when Silanus the Macestian, who was 18 yeares of age, gaue a signe with the Trumpet, presently they also, that were lodged in other houses,The Thracians Peltasts. leaped forth with their drawne swords in their hands. The Thracians fled immediatly, casting, as their manner is, their Targets at their backs; but whilest they climbed ouer the Palizadoes, some hung by the Targets, and were taken, some slaine by mistaking the goings out. The Grecians followed the chace. Yet there were of the Thynes, which returning backe in the darke, wounded with darts such as ran by a house that was on fire, ayming out of the darke against the light; and they wounded Hieronymus, Enodias, and Theagenes, all Captaines, yet was no man slaine. There were some that had their baggage burnt. Seuthes hasted to rescous, with the first seuen horse he could recouer, ha∣uing a Thracian Trumpeter; & as soone as he perceiued what was in hand, he caused the trumpet to sound all the way he came, which also strucke a feare into the enemies mindes. When hee came to the Grecians, hee tooke them by the hands, and said, that he thought he should haue found many more slaine. Xenophon desired, that the Hostages might be deliuered vnto him; and that Seuthes would be pleased to goe with him against the mountaine, or else to giue him leaue to goe with his owne forces alone. The next day Seuthes deliuered the Hostages to Xenophon being old men, and the best, as it was said, of the Mountainers; and ioy∣ned his owne forces to Xenophons. Seuthes had now thrice as many folke, as he had before. For the Odrysans, hearing of his good successe, came in numbers to serue him. The Thynes, when they saw from the moun∣taines many armed, many Peltasts, and many horsemen, descended and humbly sued to compound, and promised to doe, whatsoeuer they were commanded, and to put in good assurance. Seuthes calling Xeno∣phon, told him what they said, and added, he would make no attonement, if Xenophon would be reuenged of their Camisado. Xenophon answered, he had sufficient reuenge, in that he saw them now slaues, which were before free. But he would counsell Seuthes hereafter, in taking Hostages, to take those that were able to doe him most harme,Fit Hostages. and to leaue the old men at home. So all the Thracians of the countrey came vnder Seuthes his subiection.Constantinople which lieth in the European Thrace. They marched from thence against the Thracians, that lie aboue Byzantium, and inhabit the Territorie called Delta. This coun∣trey was neuer subiect to Mesades, but it had beene vnder Tereus the Odrysian, that liued many yeeres agoe. Heraclides came hither hauing with him the price of the spoile, and Seuthes causing three paire of Mules (for there were no more, the rest being yokes of Oxen) to be brought forth, calling Xenophon, offered them vnto him, the rest hee parted amongst the Coronels and Captaines. Xenophon made answer, that he would be content with that, which he should bestow vpon him here∣after:
now, quoth he, giue to the Coronels and Captaines, that follow you with mee. So Tisi the Dardi had one paire, Cleaner the Orhmenian one, and Phryniscus the Achaya one. The yoes of Oxen he distributed amongst the Captaines. The moneth was now out, and yet the Souldiers had no more than twenty daies pay.Want of pay. For Heraclydes said, he could sell the prey at no greater price. Xeph therefore being discontent told Heraclides, that he seemed not to regard Seuthes so much, as he ought. For if you did, quoth he, you would haue come with full pay, although you had taken it vp at interest, and if not otherwise, euen by selling your owne clothes. Hereupon Heraclides grew angry, and fea∣red to be turned out of Seuthes his friendship, and from that day for∣ward sought to bring Xenoph in disgrace with Seuthes. The Souldiers also laid the fault vpon Xeph, that they wanted their pay; and Seuthes was displeased with him, because he was so earnest a suiter in the behalfe of the Souldiers. And whereas he wonted to say, that as soone as hee came to the Sea-side, he would deliuer to Xeph, Byzathe, and Gani, and new castle, hence forward he neuer spake word of any such thing. For Heraclides calumniated that also,Heraclides his calumniations. alledging it was not safe to deliuer such holds into the hands of one, that had an Armie. In the meane time Xenophon aduised with himselfe, what was best to be done in following Sethes in warre against the vpper countries. But Heraclides bringing in the other Coronels vnto Sethes, counselled them to say, that if need were, they could leade the Armie vpon seruice as well as Xepho, and promised he would take ship, & within few daies bring in two moneths pay; only he desired them to goe forward in Seuthes his seruice. Tima∣sion answered, if you would giue me fiue moneths pay, I will not serue without Xenophon. Phryniscus and Cleanor said the like. Whereupon Sethes gaue hard words to Heraclides,The credit of Xephon with the Coronels. for that he had not brought in Xnophon. So was Xenophon sent for alone. Xenophon perceiuing the sub∣tlety of Heraclides, and that it was to bring him into suspicion with the other Coronels, tooke vnto him all the other Coronels and Cap∣taines, and went to Sethes. When all were agreed to proceed in the seruice, they marched forward thorow the countrey of the Thracians, that are called Mliphgi, as far as Salmydesson, leauing Pontus on their right hand. Here many ships sailing into Pontus are shaken and cast on shore, the place being shallow and muddy. The Thracians inhabiting that part, setting vp marks and bounds along the Sea, take euery man within his precinct the wreck of that which is cast on shore. Before they had parcelled, and bounded out the ground, they are said to haue killed one another striuing about the prey. Many beds, many chests, many bookes are found there, and many such other things, as Saylors vse to conueigh in woodden vessels. After these places were brought vnder Seuthes his gouernment, the Armie returned. Now had Seuthes a grea∣ter Armie of his owne, than the Grecians were. For many more of the Odrysians were come downe vnto him, and alwaies as he subdued any countrey, the people of the countrey ioyned themsele to his seruice.
They encamped in the Plaine aboue Selybria,6 Mile and more. about 50 Furlongs from the Sea, and no pay was yet seene to come. So the Souldiers wereore offended with Xenophon,The Army dis∣pleased with Xnphon about pay. The Generall of the Lacide∣monians in Asia the lesse. The Army wa∣ged by the La∣cedemonians. 13. Shillings. and Seuthes much estranged from him, and so much indeed, that when he came to speake with him, Seuthes would make, as though he had much businesse. About this time, two moneths being scarcely spent, came Charminus the Lacedemonian, and Polinicus sent from Thymbro, and brought newes that the Lacedemonians were min∣ded to make warre vpon Tssaphernes▪ and that Thymbro had lready ta∣ken ship to prosecute that warre, and had need of this Armie, and added that euery Souldier should haue a Daricke the month, euery Captaine two, euery Coronell foure. As soone as the Lacedemonians were come, Heraclides hearing, that they addressed themselues to the army, straight∣waies told Seuthes, that it came well about for his affaires. For the Lace∣demonians, quoth he, stand in need of the armie, and you need it not. Seu∣thes hearing this, willed the messengers to be brought in. When they said, they came about the armie, he answered, he willingly yeelded it in∣to their hands, and desired to be friend and confederate with the Lacede∣monians; He then inuited them to be his guests, and feasted them royal∣ly. But hee neither inuited Xenophon, nor any other of the Coronels. When the Lacedemonians enquired, what Xenophon was for a man, he an∣swered, that in other things he was not ill, but he loued the Souldiers too much,Seuthes his opi∣nion of Xeno∣phon. and for that cause fared the worse. They replied: But is he not one, that can sway the Souldiers, which way he thinketh best? Hera∣clides answered, Yes▪ Will he not then oppose against vs, if we seeke to lead the Souldiers away? If making small account of him, you call them together, quoth Heraclides, and promise them pay, they will not stay here, but haste away with you. How shall we then assemble them, quoth they? Wee, quoth Heraclides, will bring you vnto them to morrow morning betimes; and I know, that as soone, as they see vs, they will gather toge∣ther willingly. This day so ended. The next day Seuthes and Heraclides brought the Lacedemonians to the armie, and the armie assembled toge∣ther. The Lacedemonians said: Our City is resolued to make warre vpon Tissaphernes, who hath wronged you. If therefore you will goe with vs, you shall both reuenge your selues vpon your enemy, and also haue eue∣ry one of you a Daricke the month for your pay, a Captaine twice, a Co∣ronell foure times as much.13. Shillings. The Souldiers gladly heard this newes; and by and by there stood vp an Arcadian accusing Xenophon. Seuthes remained there to heare what the issue would be, and hee stood within hearing, hauing an Interpreter with him, albeit he also of himselfe vnder∣stood the most part of that, which was spoken in Greeke. Then the Ar∣cadian said: We (ô Lacedemonians) had beene with you long agoe, if by Xenophons perswasion we had not beene brought hither,Xenophon accu∣sed for the pay due to the Souldiers. where lying in the field this sore Winter, we neither night, nor day, haue taken rest. He in the meane time hath the fruit of our labour. Sethes hath priuately made him rich and defrauded vs of our pay. So that if I, that speake first, If I, said he, might see him stoned to death, and punished, for leading vs
into this countrey, I should account my selfe satisfied of my pay, and not be grieued hereafter with any thing, that is past. After him stood vp another, and then another. Hereupon Xenophon spake thus:Xenophons de∣fence. What may not a man expect, when I am accused by you of that, wherein my con∣science witnesseth with me, that I haue beene most desirous to doe you good. I was now returning home, when hearing, that it was not well with you, nay rather, that you were brought to all extremitie, I returned to doe you seruice, and to assist you in any thing, I could. After my comming, Seuthes sending many messengers vnto me, and promising many things, in case I perswaded you to come vnto him, you know, I refused and led you thither, from whence, I thought, you might with most facilitie be transported into Asia. For I held it the best course, and knew you most desired it. But when Aristarchus with his Gallies in∣tercepted our passage, I thereupon called you together, as it was need∣full, to consult, what was to be done. You would not then heare Ari∣starchus, that commanded you to march into Cherronesus, but yeelded to Seuthes, that desired to entertaine you; and it was not one, but all of you, that desired to goe with Seuthes, and all of you made the decree. Say then, wherein I haue wronged you, hauing led you to the place, whither you all desired to goe? But when Seuthes began to defraud you of your pay, if I then commended him, or allowed of his dealing, you haue good cause to accuse & hate me. But if before that time I was most in his fauour, and now furthest out, is it right, that preferring you, before him, you should accuse me for that, which is the cause, that he and I are at difference? But you will say, now I haue gotten from Seuthes, that, which was yours, I may cast a faire colour before your eies. Is it not then manifest, that if Seuthes haue giuen me any thing, he hath so giuen it, that hee meant not to lose it, and yet pay you your due? I should thinke, that in bestowing on me the lesse, his purpose was to hold the greater from you. If your opinion be such, you may if you please, make the negotiation betwixt him and me void, by demanding your pay. For it is plaine, that if I haue beene bribed, he will demand the bribe againe, in case, I performe not the contract. But my conscience telleth me, that I am farre from intercepting any thing of yours. For I sweare vnto you by all the gods, and the goddesses, that Seuthes hath not performed to me, that he promised me for mine owne particular. Hee is present, and heares, and knowes whether I forsweare my selfe or no. And, that you may maruell the more, I haue not receiued so much as other Coronels, nor so much as some Captaines. And why haue I done this? Mine opi∣nion was, the more I suffered pouertie with him, the more he would be my friend, when his abilitie was greater. Now I both see him in prospe∣ritie, and know, what disposition he is of. Some will say: Shame you not to be so childishly deceiued? Truly I should be ashamed, if I were ouer∣reached by an enemie. But it is more shame for a friend to deceiue, than to be deceiued. And if there be any caution to be vsed toward a friend, I know you all haue carefully endeuoured, not to giue occasion of with∣holding
from you that, which he hath promised you. We haue neither wronged him in any thing, nor fore-slowed his affaires, nor for feare left any thing vndone, that he hath commanded. But you will say, assu∣rance, that he should not deceiue, though he would, was then to be ta∣ken. Heare, I pray you, that which I would neuer say against him, were not you too vniust and vnthankfull toward me. For you may remem∣ber, in what case you were, when I led you to Seuthes. If you were dis∣posed to goe into Perinthus, did not Aristarchus the Lacedemonian shut the gates against you, and keepe you out of the Citie? Encamped you not in the field? Was it not the middest of Winter? The market, you had, how was it furnished? What monie had you wherewith to buy? You must remaine in Thrace; for the Gallies lay at anchor forbidding your transport. Remaining there, you must be in the enemies countrie, where there were many Horse and Peltasts. You had armed Foot in∣deed, with which approching the village wee might haue seised vpon corne, though not much; but chace we could not giue, nor take slaues, nor cattle. For I was with you, and neither saw many Horse, nor Pel∣tasts. In this necessitie if I ioined Sethes vnto you, who had both Horse and Peltasts, when you wanted both, had I not deserued well, albeit I had procured you no pay? For after you were assisted with them, found you not more plentie of come in the villages, because the Thracians were driuen to a speedie flight? And you failed not of captiues and cattle; nor saw we an enemie, since we had Horse, whereas before he followed vs boldly with Horse and Peltasts, and suffered vs not to disperse in little troopes, or to take prouision in any quantitie. If therefore he, that wrought this securitie for you, had added no pay vnto it, this would haue beene the greatest wrong, you had suffered; and for this were he in your iudgement vnworthy to liue? But now how depart you? Spent you not the Winter in plentie of all things? And for ouer-plus, had you not that, which was giuen you by Seuthes? You haue all this while liued vpon the enemie, and neither seene any of the Armie slaine, nor miscar∣rying aliue. Besides, if you haue done any thing praise-worthy, against the Barbarians in Asia, you hold your reputation still, and haue added a new praise by ouercomming the Thracians, against whom you warred in Europe. Truly I affirme, you ought to giue thankes to the gods, as for a benefit, for that, for which you are now angrie with mee. And this is the case, you stand in. Consider further how it is with me. I when I first departed for my countrie, departed from you with your good liking and commendation, and as one, that for your sake, had reputation amongst the rest of the Grecians. Besides, I was in credit with the Lacede∣monians. For otherwise they would not haue sent me to you againe. But now I goe away accused by you to the Lacedemonians, and for you am in hatred with Seuthes, whom, hauing followed with you, I hoped to haue found a readie receiuer of me and my children, when need should haue beene. And yet you, for whom I am hated of them, that are much more mightie, than my selfe, for whom I cease not, no not euen now, to doe
all the good, I can, you I say, that are thus affected toward me, haue me neither running away, nor forsaking you. But if you doe that, which you threaten, know, that you shall put to death a man, that hath broken many a sleepe for you, that hath done many exploits, and beene in many perills with you, and both in part, and in the whole (by the helpe of the gods) hath erected with you many a Trophie against the Barbarians, and taken care, that no Grecians should hold you for enemies; so that now you may goe without controlment, whither you lift either by Sea or Land. Howbeit because you haue the world at will, and may faile whi∣ther you of late desired, and they, that are of most might, stand in need of you, and you are offered pay, and the Lacedemonians the men, that now are esteemed most powerfull, are come to be your leaders, you haue found a time to take away my life. This was not your minde, when you were in distresse; O you men, that are so kinde rememberers of your well deseruers. Then you called me father, and promised al∣waies to bee mindfull of mee, as of your Benefactor. But yet you must not imagine, that these men, which are come for you, are destitute of reason and vnderstanding. For, as I conceiue, they will not thinke the better of you, seeing in what manner you behaue your selues toward mee. After he had spoken thus much, hee kept silence. Then Charminus the Lacedemonian stood vp and said: I see no iust cause,Charminus ex∣cuseth Xno∣phon. you haue, to be angry with this man: my selfe can giue him this testimo∣nie, that when I, and Polynicu asked Seuthes, what Xenophon was for a man, he had nothing else to blame him in, but that he loued his Souldi∣ers too well, for which cause he was in lesse esteeme with the Lacedemoni∣ans, and with him. Then Eurylochus the Lusatian borne in Arcadia stan∣ding vp, said: I am of opinion (ô Lacedemonians) that you may doe vs much kindnesse, if you will be pleased to effect this first worke of a Ge∣nerall to procure our pay of Seuthes, will he, or nill he, & not to leade vs away before we haue it. Polycrates the Athenian stood vp, and spake for Xenophon: I see (ô Souldiers) Heraclides here present,Heraclides the with-holder of the pay. who taking the prey, which we got, and selling it, neither gaue the price to Seuthes, nor to vs; but stole it, and keepeth it himselfe. If we be wise therefore let vs call him to an account. For he is no Thracian, but a Grecian, and hath wronged Grecians. Heraclides hearing this was put in a feare, and com∣ming to Seuthes; If, quoth he, we loue our selues, let vs be gone out of their fingers, and getting on Hors-backe they spurred to their Campe. After this Seuthes sent his Interpreter Ebozelmius to Xenophon entreating him to stay behinde with 1000 Armed,Xenophon in danger from the Lacedmoni∣ans. . and promised to deliuer vnto him both the Sea Forts, and also the other things, which he offered vnto him, and willed the Interpreter to tell him in secret, that he heard of Poly∣nicus, that if the Lacedemonians once got him, he was sure to die by the hands of Thymbro. The same newes was sent to Xenophon by many of his Hosts, and that he was accused, and was to take heed. He hearing this tooke two sacrifices, and offered to Iupiter the King, demanding whether it should be better for him to remaine and rest vpon the conditi∣ons
propounded by Seuthes, or to depart with the army. It was answered, he should depart. Afterward Seuthes remoued his Campe further off. The Grecians quartered in Villages, wherein they might make their best prouision to goe to Sea, which Villages were giuen by Seuthes to Medo∣sades.Medosades an∣gry with the Grecians, com∣plaineth. When Medosades saw the goods of these Villages consumed by the Grecians, he grew displeased; and taking with him an Odrysian one of the chiefest of them, that came downe to Seuthes, and about fiftie Hors-men, he came and called Xenophon out of the Grecian Campe; who came forth accompanied with some of the Captaines, and with other, such as he thought good. Then, quoth Medosades, You offer wrong (Xenophon) in wasting our Villages. Therefore we forewarne you, I from Seuthes, and this man, from Medocus, the King of the vpper Countrey, to depart hence: otherwise you shall not carie it so. For if you harrie the Countrey so, we are resolued to defend our Countrey, as against enemies.Xenophons answer. Xenophon, hearing these things, said: I would hardly an∣swer your accusation, were it not for this young mans sake. We, before we were your friends, ranged this Countrey at our pleasure, wasting what we thought good, and burning what we thought good. And you, when you came Embassador to vs, rested in our Campe without feare of any enemie. Your selues were not in the Countrey, and when you came into it at any time, you remained in your quarters with your Horse bridled, as in a Countrey of enemies, that were too strong for you. Afterwards you became friends to vs, and by our meanes got the posses∣sion of the Countrey: and now you seeke to chace vs out of the Land, which by our furtherance you conquered by force (for as you know the enemie was not of strength sufficient to driue vs out) and not only giue vs no gifts for our well deseruing, but as much, as in you lieth, suffer vs not to quarter here at our departure. And speaking these things you neither reuerence the gods, nor this man, who seeth you now suddenly made rich, whereas, before the time you ioined with vs in friendship (as your selfe confessed to me) you led your life in robberie. But why speake you these things to me? For I haue no longer the command: You, men forsooth worthy to be admired, haue deliuered ouer the Armie to the Lacedemonians, not calling me to counsell, that as I offended them, in bringing it to you, so by rendring it vp to them againe, I might be recon∣ciled, & win their fauour. When the Odrysian heard these things, he said: The rehearsall of these passages (ô Medosades) strike me vnder the earth; and had I knowne before hand, what your propositions would haue bin, I would neuer haue followed you hither. For King Medocus will haue no good opinion of me, if I should ioine with you in chacing away your be∣nefactors. Then Medosades (for he was grieued to see the country spoiled) desired Xenophon to call the two Lacedemonians. He taking with him such as he thought meet, went to Charminus and Polynicus, and said, Medosades would faine speake with you: and desire you (as he did me) to depart the countrey. Now I conceiue, you may, if you please, be a meaneto recouer the Armies pay, by telling him, that the Armie besought you to
procure it from Seuthes either with or gainst his will; and said, that when they had receiued , they would willingly follow you,The two Lace∣demonians are meanes to re∣couer the Soul∣diers pay. and that they seemed to haue good ight to that they demanded, and hat you promised them not to depart before they recouered their right. The La∣cedemonians answered, that they would speake, both what they were in∣fomed, and any thing else, which they thought to the purpose, and pre∣sently they went forth, taking such with them as they liked of Charminus comming where Medosades was, said: Haue you any thing to say to vs, Medosades? If not, we haue to say to you. Medosades then very hum∣bly, I, quoth he, and Seuthes desire this, that being friends we suffer no hotilitie at your hands. For what harme soeuer you doe to these coun∣trey folks, you doe it to vs, whose subcts they are. The Lacedemoni∣ans answered, we are ready to depart, as soone as they, by whose meanes you enioy the land, are satisfied for their pay. If no, we come to assist them, and to punish such, as wrong them contrary to their oath. If you be the men, we will begin to doe right upon you. Then said Xenophon: Are you content, Medosades, to giue them in whose countrey you are, seeing you say they are your friends, authoritie to determine, whether you, or we, shall leaue the countrey. He would not heare of that, but desired the two Lacedemonians to goe to Seths about the pay, and thought that Seuthes would not denie it. If not,Xenophon sent to Seuthes a∣bout the pay. to send Xenophon with him, and promised to set to his helping hand. Besides he desired forbea∣rance of burning the Villages. Thereupon they dispatched Xenophon away, with such other men, as they thought conuenient. When he came to Seuthes, he vsed this speech:His words to Seuthes. I am come to you (ô Seuthes) not as a suiter for any thing, but only to shew, you haue no cause to be angry with me, for that I laboured to obtine the Souldiers pay, which you cheerefully promised at their first comming to you. For I thought it was no lesse profitable for you to giue it, than for them to take it; and I knew, that these men, next after the gods, were they that set you in so conspicuous a place, making you King of a large Territorie, and of much people, that whether you doe good or euill, it cannot be kept in secret. And I am of opinion, that it is a matter of great consequence in such a man, as you are, not to seem to send away your benefactors ingratefully, and without recompence, and of as great to be well spoken of by 6000 men; but the greatest is, not to derogate credit from your owne word. For I see the word of false men wandeth vp and downe vaine, and weake, and void of honour. But such as are knowne to speake truth, obtaine as much by request, as other men doe by force, and in correcti∣ons their threatnings are as powerfull, as other mens punishments, and in promises they are beleeued no lesse, than they that giue assurance. You should doe well also to call to minde, what you gaue vs, when you made vs your confederates. I know you gaue nothing;A Talent is va∣lued at 175 li. sterling, and 50 Talents are 875 li. ster∣ling. but being beleeued to say true, you animated so many men to follow you, and to purchase you such a kingdome, as is worth not 50 talents (as much as is thought to be due to these men) but manifd times more. First therefore sell not
for that little money, that is due to the Souldiers, your credit, where∣by you haue purchased this Kingdome. Then I would haue you consi∣der, how highly you esteemed the compassing of that, which you haue obtained. I make no doubt if it were vndone, you would wish it effe∣cted, rather than to possesse much more riches than is demanded. For my part I hold it a greater affront and shame, now not to continue the possession, than at first not to haue gained it, by how much it is harder for a rich man to endure pouertie, than not to haue beene rich, and to fall from a Kingdome to a priuate estate, than at first, not to haue reigned. Doe you not know, that they, who are now your subiects, obey you at this time not for friendship, but for necessitie? and that they would at∣tempt their freedome againe, were they not held in by feare. Whether then thinke you, they will more feare and respect you when they see these Souldiers ready to stay, if you desire them, or quickly returne, if you need them, and that other besides hearing their good report of you, will attend your seruice, when you shall please to vse them; or if they con∣ceiue, that other will refuse you, because they beleeue you not, and these now here beare a better opinion of them, than of you? Nay they were brought vnder your subiection, not because they were fewer in number than we, but for want of good Commanders. Therefore there is dan∣ger also in this, lest they chuse some of them Commanders, who thinke they are wronged by you, or else the Lacedemonians, who are of more power, to whom the Souldiers wil doubtlesse be more zealous in seruice, if they compell you to render to them the arrerages of pay, and the Lacedemonians will sooner consent, because they stand in need of the Armie. This also is not obscure, that the Thracians brought vnder your subiection will more cheerfully take Armes against you, than with you. For if you preuaile, they must become your slaues, as they must be free, if you be ouercome. And accounting the Countrey your owne, whether thinke you it will be better preserued from spoile if these Souldiers re∣ceiuing their claime depart in peaceable manner, or if they stay here, as it were in an enemies Territorie, and force you to leuie more, than they are, against them, which must also be fed vpon the Countrey? Now for Money, whether imagine you, will be the greater expence to pay them that you owe, or this debt still remaining due, to wage other Souldiers by aid of whom you may ouer-master these? But the debt seemeth a great summe to Heraclydes, as he told me himselfe. Whether then is it not much easier now to take it vp and pay it, than it was to take vp the tenth part of it before we came vnto your seruice? For it is not the quantitie, that maketh much or little, but the abilitie of him that giues, or receiues; and your yeerely reuenue is now more, than the worth of all, you possessed before. These things did I forecast in minde, as your friend, that both you might seeme worthy of that, which the gods haue bestowed vpon you, and I not leese my reputation with the Armie. For you know well, that at this present I can neither harme an enemie, nor succour you hereafter, though I would neuer so faine: Such is the
affection of the Armie toward me. And I take your selfe, and the gods, that know all things, to witnesse, that I haue neither receiued any thing of you in regard of them, nor demanded ought of theirs to my priuat vse, no nor any of those things, you promised me. And I sweare further vnto you, I would neuer haue taken gift of yours, vnlesse the Souldiers had receiued that, which is their owne. For it would be a shame for me, ha∣uing been so much honoured by them, to procure mine owne aduantage, and neglect theirs. But Heraclides esteemeth all things trifles, saue only money, howsoeuer it is gotten. I contrariwise (ô Seuthes) thinke, that a man (especially a Ruler) can haue no fairer possessions, than Vertue, Iu∣stice, & Generositie. The possessor of these is enriched with many friends for the present, and enriched with other that hereafter will seeke for his friendship; and in good fortune he hath them, that will reioice with him; in ill, that will be readie to assist and helpe him. But if by my deeds you perceiued not, that I was your friend from my heart, nor yet knew it by my words, remember notwithstanding the words of the Souldiers. For you were present and heard, what was spoken by them, that sought to bring me into hatred; who charged me to the Lacedemonians that I made more account of you, than of the Lacedemonians, and for themselues like∣wise, that I more regarded your well-fare, than theirs. They said I had receiued gifts of you. And when they accused me of these gifts, do you thinke, they saw in me an ill affection toward you, or rather a desire to do you seruice? I am of this minde, that whosoeuer receiueth gifts, he ought to loue and esteeme of him, that is the giuer. Before I came to your ser∣uice, you entertained me kindly in countenance, and in words, and hos∣pitall gifts, & made no end of promises: now you haue compassed your desire, and are as great, as I can make you, seeing the small estimation the Souldiers haue me in, you dare contemne me. But I firmely beleeue, time will teach you, that this money is to be paid, and that you will giue no cause of complaint to those, that haue so well deserued at your hands. Only this is my desire, that when you pay it, you would haue a care to restore me to the same place with the Souldiers, wherein you found me at the first. Seuthes hearing this, cursed him, that was the cause, why the Souldiers were not paid long before (euerie man imagined he meant He∣raclides) For I, quoth Seuthes, will pay the arrerages▪ and neuer had in minde to defraud the Souldiers of the least part of their due. Then spake Xenophon againe: Seeing it is your pleasure to make paiment, let me entreat you to doe it by my hands, and not to see me in worse case with the Souldiers for your cause, than I was, when I came to your seruice. Seuthes answered: You shall not by my meanes.Seuths assen∣teth to pay the Souldiers. But if you will stay with me and hold with you 1000 Armed, I will giue you the Townes, and other things I promised you. Xenophon told him, It could not be, as matters stood. But I pray, quoth he, send vs away. I know, quoth Seuthes, it will be safer for you to remaine here, than to depart. Xenophon againe replied: I thanke you for your care of me, but I cannot stay. Howbeit wheresoeuer I become, the more estimation I haue, it shall not be the
worse for you.The pledges of the Thracians that gaue the Camisado to Xenophon before. Then, quoth Seuthes, I haue no money, but a little, viz. one Talent, which I will deliuer vnto you, but you shll haue 600 Oxen, 4000 Sheepe, and 120 Captiues. Taking these, and the pledges of them, that wronged you, goe your waies. Then Xenophon smiling, said: If these suffice not to make vp the pay, whose Talent shall I say I haue? But seeing I cannot depart hence without danger, is it not better to stay here, and take heed of stones? For you heard their threatnings. So he remained there. The next day Seuthes deliuered that which he promised, and sent men to driue the cattell. The Souldiers in the meane time gaue out, that Xenophon was gone to remaine with Seuthes, and to receiue the things which were promised him. But when they saw him come,The Armie sa∣tisfied. they reioyced, and ran to meet him. Xenophon as soone as he saw Charminns and Polynicus, You, quoth he, are the men that haue pre∣serued these things for the Souldiers, and I deliuer them into your hands, dispose you of the sale, and deliuer the price to the Souldiers. They taking and appointing men to sell them, raised money for the Souldiers,Xenophon bani∣shed his coun∣trey for follow∣ing Cyrus, who was a friend to the Laedemoni∣ans. Lampsacus a Ci∣tie in Asia the lesse. but not without imputation of much corruption. Xenophon came not neere, but openly made ready to goe to his countrey. For it was not yet signified vnto him, that he was banished, but some especiall men of the Armie came vnto him, desiring him not to depart, till he had conducted the Armie, and deliuered it vnto Thymbro. From thence they sailed ouer to Lampsacus, where Euclydes the Phliasian Soothsayer, the sonne of Cleagoras, who painted the dreames in the Lycaum, met Xe∣nophon. He was glad to see Xenophon in health, and asked him, how much gold he had.Xenophon not greedy of riches. Who swore he had not enough to bring him home, vnlesse he sold his horse, and other things, which were about him. Eucly∣des beleeued him not: but when the Lampsacens sent hospitall gifts to Xenophon, and Xenophon offering sacrifice to Apollo, desired Euclydes to be at the sacrifice, Euclydes then looking vpon the Sacrifice, said; he belee∣ued now that Xenophon had no money: and I know, quoth he, if hereafter you happen to get any, you will haue an impediment, if no other, you will be an impediment to your selfe. Xenophon confessed this to be true. Euclydes proceeded:An Epithet gi∣uen to Iupiter, signifying fa∣uourable or gentle. Iupiter Milichius, quoth he, will hinder you. He further asked him, whether he had sacrificed, as I, quoth he, am wont for you at home, and burne the whole beast. Xenophon said, he had not offred to that god all the time of his trauell. Euclydes aduised him there∣fore to sacrifice vnto the god, & your affaires, said he, will prosper better. The next day Xenophon marching on to Ophrynium sacrificed,A Citie in the countrey Troas. and burnt whole Hogs, after his countrey manner. The same day came Bito and Euclydes to pay the Armie; and they were Xenophons guests, and tey re∣leased and restored to Xenophon (refusing to take the price of the redemp∣tion) the horse,Xenophons horse released, being pawned. 32 li. 10 s. which he had pawned at Lmpsacus for 50 Daricks, sus∣pecting he pawned him for need, because they heard that he delighted in him. Then marching thorow the Territorie of Troy, and passing ouer Ide, they came first to Antandrum, and then held on along the Sea side of Lydia to the Plaine of Thebe. From thence marching forward by Adra∣myttim
and Certnium (not farre from Atarna) to the Plaine of Caycus, they reached to Pergamus a Citie of Lydia. Here Hellas the wife of Gongy∣lus the Eretrian, mother of Gorgy and Gongylus entertained Xenophon for her guest. Shee told him, that Asidates a Persian was in the Plaine. If you goe by night, quoth shee, with 300 men, you may take him, his wife, and children, and much riches. Shee gaue him for Guides her co∣sin germane, and Daphagoras a speciall friend of hers. Xenophon there∣fore hauing these with him offered sacrifice. Agasias the Elaean sooth∣sayer being present, said, that the entrailes were faire,Xenophon vpon an exploit. and that Asidates might be taken prisoner. They went to supper, and after supper Xeno∣phon taking the Captaines to him, that were his best friends, and had al∣waies beene faithfull vnto him, and therefore desiring to doe them a kindnesse, proceeded on his iourney▪ There went also with him, whe∣ther he would or no, other about 600 Souldiers. But the Captaines posted away before to preuent them of partage, as though the money had beene ready to their hands. Comming to the place about midnight, they suffered the slaues, that lay neere the Castle, and many other things to slip away, their care being only to take Asidates and his companie. When they could not take the Castle by assault (for it was high and great, and had many bulwarks & defendants expert in fight) they went about to sap the foot thereof. The wall was of the thicknesse of eight bricks.Sapping of a Castle. By breake of day it was pierced thorow, and when it was light one of the defendants strooke him that stood next, thorow the thigh with an Oxe-goad, and further with their arrowes they made it dangerous for any man to approach to the Tower, or come in sight. When those in the Castle made an outcry, and put out fire for a signe, Itabelius with his owne forces, and with the Garrison of Coania, being armed foot,A signe for succour. and with about 80 Hircanian horsemen (which were in the Kings pay) and other Peltasts about 800 came to rescous. Othr also out of Parthenion, other out of Apollonia, and the neighbour Cities, being horsemen. Now was it time to thinke, how our Retreat should be made. Therefore ta∣king the Oxen and other cattell, and the captiues, and couching them within a hollow square, they hasted away,. Xenophons re∣treat. not so much thinking vpon the riches, as that (if they should depart, leauing that behinde them, which they had gotten) their Retreat might seeme a plaine running away; besides that, that the enemy would grow into heart, and the Soul∣diers be discouraged. Now they retreated fighting, as it were, for the prey. When Gongylus saw the Grecian so few, and the enemy, that pres∣sed them, so many in number, he by compulsion of his mother issued out with his owne forces to be partaker of the fray. And Procles out of Alisarna, and Teuthranias, who was descended from Demaratus, came likewise to rescous. Xenophons souldiers being ouerlaid with arrowes and Ilings, casting themselues into a Ring,A Ring. . to the end to oppose their armes against the arrowes, with much adoe passed ouer the riuer Caijcus, well∣nigh halfe of them being wounded. Amongst the number of whom was Agasias the Stymphalian, who continued the fight against the enemy
during the whole Retreat. Thus they came safe home, hauing 200 cap∣tiues, and cattell sufficient for sacrifice. Xenophon sacrificing the next day, led out his Armie by night, that he might goe as far as he could into Lydia, and giue no cause of feare to the enemie by being so neere, but make him negligent vpon his guard. Asidates hearing that Xenophon had the second time sacrificed about him, and that he was marching with all is Armie, went out of his Castle, and lodged in the Villages not farre from the Citie Parthenium. There Xenophons souldiers lighted vpon him,Assidates taken prisoner. and tooke him prisoner, and his wife, and his children, and his horse, and all that he had. So that the former sacrifice tooke effect now. After∣ward they returned backe againe to Pergamus; and thenceforth Xeno∣phon had no cause to complaine of that god. For the Lacedemonians al∣so, and Captaines, and Souldiers consented to giue him an extraordinary share,Xenophon re∣waded with a large portion. of horse, and oxen, and other things; so that he was thereby able to gratifie a friend. Not long after came Thymbro, and tooke the Ar∣mie, and ioyning it to the rest of the Grecian forces made warre against Tissaphernes. These were the Gouernours of the Kings Prouinces, that we iournied thorow: Artymas of Lydia, Artacamas of Phrygia, Mithridates of Lycao∣nia and Cappadocia; of Cilicia, Synesis; of Phoenicia and Arabia, Dernes; of Syria and Assyria, Belesis; of Babylonia, Roparas; of Media, Arbacas; of the Phasians and Hesperites, Tribazus: The Carduchans, Chalybes, Chaldaas, Macrons, Choicans, Mosynaecans, Coitans, and Tibarens, are people vnder no mans subiection. Paphlagonia is ruled by Corylas, the Bithynians by Phar∣nabazus, the Europaean Thracians by Seuthes. The totall number of the Ascent and Descent is 215 Encampings, 1150 Parasangs, 34255 Furlongs.4281 mile, and more. The time of the Ascent and Descent one yeere and three moneths. FINIS.
A COMPARISON OF THE ROMANE MANNER OF WARRE, WITH THIS OF OVR TIME; OVT OF THE END OF THE FIFTH Booke of IVSTVS LIPSIVS, De Militia Romana. WE haue considered 5. things in the Roman war∣fare: their Musters, their Armes, their degrees & distribution of Bands, their Embattelling, and their Discipline. To make a true com∣parison betwixt our manner of warre and theirs, we must weigh the one with the other in equall ballance of all these generalities, and obserue by the consequents and aduan∣tages, which of them is to be preferred be∣fore other. Therfore to speake first of Musters,Musters. it is no doubt but that they vsed an excellent course in making choice of the best & most honest men. Which notwithstanding will hardlie at this daie be imitated by vs, as our fashi∣ons and gouernment are; vnlesse happilie it be in some Free-estate. But they amongst vs are few, or else but weake. And the Venetian alone, which is of meanes and abilitie sufficient, for certaine priuate regards debarreth her people for the most part from seruice: I except the ser∣uice of the Sea. Kings and Princes will not be tied to this Romane forme, and haue their causes. It would be hard to rate their Souldiers after such a Subsidie or Assessment; and scarce safe to allow them the like libertie of Armes. But of things of this nature we haue discoursed in our Politikes. Now I hold thus much, that euerie Prince may to his great commoditie, deuise another course than is in vse now adaies in Musters. It is not vn∣knowne what the Turke doth in his Ianizars. I would haue many or few Legions (according to abilitie or reuenues of State) be leuied of fit men, and bound and framed to seruice from their youth, till a prefixed
time. There is an Art of handling of Armes, and the profession of the name, or the countenance or apparell changed, make not by and by a Souldier. But I referre you againe to my Politikes, and the notes, which I purpose to set forth. The next thing is the degrees and diuision of Bands, after they are le∣uied.Ordo. O how good was this amongst the Romans in all respects? The distribution of the parts apt: the greater bodie of the Legions, the principall members the Cohorts, the Lymmes, the Maniples themselues. Looke into the placing of Leaders, and Captaines, Ensignes, Lieute∣nants, there is nothing too much, nothing wanting, all for vse, nothing or pompe or burthen. Let that, which I haue spoken, be considered of. Much may be borrowed from thence for the good of seruice in Gene∣rall, much also for the good of the Treasurie. Arma.Armes come in the third place. Here they say, We goe by the worst. They make sport when we enter into speech of these matters; they tread downe and spurne with their feet, Slings, Darts, Arrowes, only in regard of these our Guns: and boldly giue out that no Romane army had euer beene able to endure these thunderbolts and crackes, especially if they had beene beaten with the greater and more violent kinde of Ordinance. These, and more than these are their vaunts, which a man skilfull of Antiquities would not be to seeke to answer and refute. First, where they so lightly esteeme of all these flying weapons, I scarcely beleeue they well know their might. How much doe Slings differ in effect and force (for their forme is verie different) from our smal shot? this at the first hearing seemeth a thing worthy of laughter; but examine it with me. Both the bullets be of Lead: neither is there much diuersitie betwixt their greatnesse or shape; nor yet do the Slings much giue place in power or violence. I must beleeue those, which haue seene it, and which were in the ancient warres euen then, when these Engines were managed with Art and vse. They therefore write, that which may equall, if not preferre them before Guns. Concerning violence, it is so forceable in a Sling vnladen with skill, that the verie bullet hath beene often molten with fire conceiued in fly∣ing. This appeareth by the testimonie of Lueretius, Ouid, Lucan, and Statius. Doe you not happily credit Poets? Let the Philosopher come. Seneca affirmeth, that Motion doth extenuate the aire, and extenuation in∣flame it: So doth a bullet throwne out of a Sling melt, and distilleth by the at∣trition of the aire, as by fire. The like is found written in Aristotle: And yet it loseth not his force, but being so on fire pierceth the bodie. Virgill. With molten Lead his Temples twaine disparted stand, His lims extended lie vpon the yellow sand. It killeth with one blow. And I maruell not that Dauid, being both young and a Slinger, did ouerthrow the monstrous Goliah with this wea∣pon. And that you may at once, and fully know the vertue thereof, heare what Diodorus Siculus saith of the inhabitants of the Iles Baleares. They
throw stones (for you know that these also, not only Lead are deliuered out of Slings) much greater than other Slingers, and with such stiffenesse and strength, that the blow seemeth to come from some Engine. You see he compareth it with an Engine. And he addeth further, that it pier∣ceth Targets and Caskes, and all defence of Armour. I denie that there can be greater force in small shot, and perhaps there is not so great, ex∣cept in Muskets onely. Now the Slings are much better in one respect, that they reach and hurt a great way further. Which of our small Pee∣ces carrieth his force point blanke, aboue 200. or 300. foot? It fainteth or straieth from the marke, if you aime further off. But the bullet of a Sling hath carried his full strength 600. foot, as you may finde it cleerely expressed in Vegetius. The archers & slingers set vp for a marke Besomes, that is, bundles of twigs, or grasse, so that being 600. foot distant from the marke, they hit it with arrowes and with tones throwne out of a Sling. He ioyneth it here with arrowes, and giueth the distance, I spake of, to either of them. But there are other, that preferre it before arrowes, and hold that the sling-bullet outflith them. You shall reade in Strabo: That a Sling carrieth further than a Bow: In Dio; The Slingers ouer-reaching the Archers did hurt all, yea the armed men. This he reporteth in the expedition of Marcus Antonius against the Parthians; who not∣withstanding, as all agree, were well armed, and speciall good Archers: and yet Slingers were too good for them. Which Xenophon also writeth plainly in the acts of his countrey-men the Grecians. For the Rhodian Slingers, saith he, reached further than the Persian, and than many of the Archers. Therefore they reached farre. But went they neere the marke? All testifie they did, especially the Islanders of the Baleares; and that they learned this certainty in throwing euen from their Cradle. Also you may reade in the Bible, that seuen hundred or thereabouts, of the Inhabitants of Gabaa were so good marke-men with a Sling that they could hit you a haire. Enough of Slings. Some say that Gunnes doe more terrifie by reason of their sound. I grant it. But whom doe they terrifie? Birds? For I cannot thinke that true Souldiers will be moued with their sound or firie sight; vnlesse per∣haps at the first. And truly I am of opinion, that if the Romans had ioi∣ned battell with vs, they would at the first haue feared the shew and re∣ports of our Peeces: But at the first only. After they had discerned the truth they would haue been the same, they were wont; especially so ar∣med, they would by couering themselues with their Targets haue weake∣ned or made vaine the stroke of the Bullet. And for great Ordinance I see no reason to repute it so terrible, in as much as those, that haue had the experience, cleerely confesse, that they neuer saw battell broken by this kinde of Artillerie. A plaine Hillocke, or Rampier, or top of a Trench in the way breaketh the force of this so terrible Engine. These things are knowne to Souldiers; and excepting at the siege of Townes, this Engine serueth rather for a shew, than to
worke great masteries in the warres. I omit the disaduantages which follow it, and forbeare to oppose and bend against it the Roman Engines. This matter requireth a larger discourse, and is to be reserued for some other place. I come to Darts, which they likewise sport at. Yet haue they this com∣moditie, that they are fit for readie & speedie seruice, and at all times and places. It is not so in Guns, which haue a time both to be charged and also discharged, and hinderance from raine and other casualties. And doe not Darts outreach them? I obserue that they are matched with Arrowes by Homer, in whom Vlysses glorieth thus of himselfe: I cast a Dart as farre, as other doe an Arrow shoot. Although this attributed to Vlysses is not commonly true, and the Ar∣row flieth further of both. But how much? The proportion is expressed in Statius: As far as Arrowes fly at thrice, and foure times with a Dart you throw. He measureth out a Theater for Plaies and describeth it: And it was so much ground, saith he, as you can reach with casting a Dart foure times, and shooting an Arrow thrice. Therfore an Arrow reached further than a Dart by a fourth part of distance. And if that flew six hundred foot, then this foure hundred and aboue. So that I haue good cause to smile at the asseueration of an Italian Writer, one yet skilfull in these things, who constantly denieth that any Arme is of force sufficient to throw a Stone or other weapon fortie Paces. Peace man, and beleeue a thing so com∣mon in all antiquitie. And had these Darts any force? You haue seene in the kinde of Dart called Pilum: whereof I haue entreated in my third Booke. Will you heare of another kinde? Tragula.The Spaniards, Gaules and sometimes the Romans, vsed a Dart called Tragula. Of it doth, I know not what Writer report in Suidas: Cotta fought with a weapon, that is tearmed Tragula, which he threw so vio∣lently, that thorow Curace, and sides, he fastened to the earth, as with a naile, whomsoeuer he hit. A Gods name what Armes were these? how growne in strength either by Nature, or by Skill gotten through exer∣cise?Arrowes. I will say nothing of Arrowes. Both they were in estimation with∣in the memorie of man, and peraduenture they are now altogether gi∣uen ouer not vpon the best aduice. I finde in Plutarks Crassus, that the Parthian Arrows forced all kinde of Armor: In Agathias the Historian, that Arrowes shot by the hand of one Aligernus a Gothe, passed thorow a mans body, Target, Curace, and all. And that you will maruell at, if they fell vpon a stone, or other hard thing not easie to be broken, they shiuered it to fitters with the violence of the blow. Looke your selfe, if you please, in Procopius, what he writeth euerie where of the Archers of his age. I only take this out of him: That an Arrow was put off with that force, that neither Curace, nor Target, could make resistance. This may suffice for light-weapons, which notwithstanding are the principall in our warres. They try the whole encounter, and straight either gaine or lose the Field. True and lasting fights are only now to be read of. I
speake not all this because I hold the ancient weapons better, than those we now vse, but only to shew that they are not to be contemned, and that some of them are to be taken vp at this day, and to be mingled with ours. This would be a gallant and profitable manner of seruice, if it were handled by men ripe in exercise, otherwise these weapons are not worth a pinne. Now for the fashion of arming the Romans, what can be alleaged, why it should not be the best of all other?Armour. A man was armed from head to foot, his legges not vncouered, and had a large Target, a principall defence both for Horse and Foot.The Target. I af∣firme that there is no Armor of more vse, than the Target. But our sloth, or rashnesse, hath cast it cleane out of doores. Some neighbours yet re∣taine it, as the Polish Hors-men, and Turks. We, as I said, haue slothfully laid it downe, or else carelesly; as though we were safe by contempt of things seruing for our defence. Yet I vrge it not, because I see such as haue written of warre, acknowledge this fault, and exhort to amend∣ment. Surely the most of our men are vnarmed, and what else, but to be compared to velitarie bands? open to hurts, and therefore fearefull, be∣cause nature, carefull of her selfe, compelleth to feare. I speake not of Pike-men,Pikes. whom we arme according to the laudable custome of the Macedonians. And yet we haue few of them, I meane we Netherlanders, or French. The Spaniards haue, I confesse, who also by a prouerbe doe tearme the Pike Queene of weapons. The Swisses most of all, who in times past were famous in this kinde of fight, and the true Phalangites. But now they begin to vse them more sparingly, and to mingle other kindes of light weapons with them. And what is mine opinion? I deliuer it not, because Polybius hath spo∣ken sufficiently for me, where he compareth the Roman and Macedonian Armes of purpose. What can I bring more wise, or more sound, than is by him alleaged? Notwithstanding this is my iudgement: That the Ro∣mans good and pliable to imitate all good things vsed few Pikes, and in Marius and Caesars time they gaue ouer those, that the Triarij did beare. The cause was, for that it is no conuenient weapon for a battell mar∣shalled and distinguished into Maniples. It ought to be a large and co∣herent body, where Pikes are of force; being diuided they are vnprofi∣table. Further, but few Pikes serue to much purpose in a great body, see∣ing the first Rankes only can charge them, and the rest giue no further helpe, than by thrusting on with their bodies. Moreouer, such a battell vnmoueable for the most part, & vniforme, is strong only in Front: it can hardly turne vpon the suddaine and not breake. Lastly, he that carieth that weapon, hath almost no vse of any other (yet the Macedonians had also a Hurling-staffe) and specially he cannot fitly beare or wield a great Target. The Romans considered these things, and perhaps more than these. And albeit they often endangered Phalanges, and sometimes with their owne danger (as Paulus Aemilius is said to haue quaked at the sight of a thicke Phalange comming on with their Pikes charged) yet did they
more esteeme their owne weapons, and iudge them better for all kinde of seruice. For they themselues were able to fight in all kindes, in Front, in Flanke, and behinde, and also were able all to serue, as occasion serued. As in a body it is best, when all parts are actiue and euerie one fit for his office; so is it in a battell: for, as Liuy saith, The Phalange is vnmouea∣ble and of one kinde, the Roman battell consisting of many parts, easie to be diuided, easie to be ioined and knit together, if vse require. Adde that the Romans could range and vnite themselues in rough and vneuen grounds, the Phalange, which consisteth of thicknesse and depth, could not to any purpose. And therefore if a ditch, hill, hedge, or other thing came in the way, it was presently disioyned, and the manipular Battalion insinuated it selfe into the void spaces, and so ouerthrew the Phalange. And yet I denie not, that Pikes are of good vse in our customes & fights, especially against horsemen, whose charge they notably sustaine and re∣pulse. But what need is of them in the Roman manner of arming? when the Velites for the most part gaue the first charge in the Front, and made the horses stand off; if they could not, the Legionarie souldier with his Darts did easily stay, or put them to flight. This weapon was heauy and powerfull, whereof euery Souldier carried a couple; so that they might very well put the horse to retreat with defence of their great Targets, or else with threatning the point (as I conceiue) of the other Dart, especi∣ally being knit together shoulder to shoulder and close. This I am sure of, that the Roman battell was seldome broken by the impression of the horsemen only, which is commonly seene at this day. What? will you say not by the Parthians? Yes. But marke that I spake of impression. The Parthians did for the most prt ouerwhelme the Romans with their arrowes afarre off, and neuer came to the shock. Therefore they ouer∣threw them not, but by little and little wounded and wasted them by comming on and retiring after their manner. The same would befall our Pikemen through the enemies shot, were they not answered with like weapons, and with horsemen. Wherefore I thus resolue concerning Pikes, that they were not necessarie for the Romans, and yet are pro∣fitable for vs, and so would be, although we should take vp the Ro∣man armour in part. I haue seene some that would haue them ming∣led, and would haue maniples armed partly with Swords and Targets, partly with Pikes. Let Commanders and men of experience consider thereof. The fourth thing is Embattailing, which if I should account perfect and sound at all hands in the Roman manner of raunging,Acies. Reason would be on my side. In the Front were the Hastati, the weakest; next after them the Principes, more strong; then the Triarij, strongest of all, that the enemy might be weakned and spent by degrees. The horsemen were placed on the Flanks, to saue the Battell from enuironing and encom∣passing: and if the enemies horse charged the Romans front, then were the Roman horse to giue on their flanke. I need not repeat many things, I haue discoursed before. But this is of greatest marke, and a prin∣cipall
matter for victorie, that the Battalions haue their spaces and intervals, and the Velites in them or before them. So that the Sta∣tarie Souldier serueth the Velites for retreat, that they may without danger entertaine, or forsake the skirmish at their pleasure. Goe to, say the whole Band of the Velites is defeated and of no vse, what inconuenience is it? The Ranks stand entire, and the Velites being wisely kept vnmixt and diuided from them, the Statarie Souldier thinketh not that hee hath lost any thing by the ouerthrow of the Velites. Therefore they enter the fight fresh and whole, and no∣thing impaired in body or minde, and to be short, with assurednesse and certainty of retreat into the intervals. Consider you Comman∣ders, this is a great secret, that your Souldier be bold and confi∣dent, fight with hope of victorie, being compelled retreats with∣out feare of ignominie or danger. So was it amongst the Romans by reason of their triple battell of their Hastati, Principes and Tria∣rij, which last vndertooke the maine danger with assurance of their owne strength. There were the Commanders, there the Standard, there the old Souldier, and in summe there was Victory because Valour was there. Packe away you Turks with your Ianizars, which vsurpe a manner of resemblance, but a false resemblance of the ancient discipline. If it were a true one, we had not now beene. For I rest out of doubt of this, if the ancient were ioyned to these our new-found Armes, and withall the true marshalling of Bands and kinde of embattailing vsed, the old and new World would shortly be subiect to one man. O secret truly heauenly, which men rather ghesse at than vnderstand, and which gouernest this world with a wonderfull temper, bridlest, or aduancest the wicked, and liftest vp or throwest downe the good, euen as they depart from or come to thee. I display not my wings neerer to this Sunne, lest I melt, or be consumed; but I cry with a fee voice, Hee that will attaine to Glory or Empire, let him turne to the ancient Disci∣pline. For surely if our light Souldiers (so I call shot) were mixt betweene the Maniples and before the Maniples of the armed with in∣tervals and distances for retreat, and that against the horse and ar∣med foot; what battell durst assaile, nay what battell could resist vs? For in regard hereof our men should be alwaies fit to charge, fit to retire for a second charge. All which notwithstanding is to be done with long vse and exercise, lest they trouble vs in the do∣ing. I call you to witnesse, you Commanders, that I speake truth. Imitate it then in good faith, but against them that oppugne the Faith. There are many things in particular concerning ordering of Bat∣tels, whereof we might giue a taste, but precepts wee cannot now giue; and these depend vpon a wit truly martiall, that is, fiery and high. He that can, let him conceiue; he that cannot, let him yeeld and be beaten. Thus much I admonish, that herein may be found
out a large field of Stratagems, and that no other meanes hath gai∣ned more victories or trophees. Whatsoeuer is vnlooked for trou∣bleth the enemy, prouided that it disorder not thy owne. Let that be a certaine and infallible rule. For euery small inuention is not by and by to be embraced or of efficacie, but only such a one, as is squared out by circumspection and heed. He ought to be an Ar∣gus, that is a Commander, and to haue eyes in his backe, forhead, head, and feet. And yet all things are easie to be ordered, where this common good order hath his being. Giue mee Cohorts, giue mee Maniples so placed one to second another, so ordered, so won∣ted to ioyne, or disioyne, I will alwayes vndertake to haue the body of a battaile in readinesse, such as your selfe or occasion require. Discipline.Discipline is the last. Alas of what should I make comparison? Would I could finde any colour or shew to begin. But howsoeuer the ancient Discipline be esteemed, at this day there is none at all; and so those that haue beene Souldiers will confesse. O shame, ô dishonour. The Barbarians and Scithians goe beyond vs herein, and haue some ordinances, we none. What should I then compare? Should I praise, or exhort men to the Roman discipline? It is not only good, but the best of all, that haue beene, that shall be, giuen from heauen for an example. Let wise men meet, and sit in councell, they cannot in conceit, in writing, comprehend a fuller, a better. Exhort I then to the vse thereof? As our men and manners are I dare not. It is enough, if in generall I induce any forme of Discipline; without which there can be not only no perfection or successe, but scarcely any name of seruice. Other are robberies, which men exercise without law, right, or measure. I would be loth to call ours by that name (nei∣ther indeed ought I, the cause being good) but in good sooth wee touch not the line of the other. I haue made three parts of Disci∣pline; Duties, Exercise, and Lawes. They are seuerally to bee considered, and whether there be any good in them to serue our purposes. Duties extend to Guards, Ministeries, Workes, and to those things whereof I haue intreated at large.Duties. For Guards, wee haue some shew, and that not ill digested.Guards. Yet doe I beleeue, that in time past there haue beene better or safer: as the Stations before the gates of the campe, the Guard-tallies, the continuall Round, the relieuing of Guards, the dif∣ferences and diusion of houres, and such like, which an industrious Ge∣nerall may marke and put in practise. Ministeries.Ministeries are either out of date amongst vs, or else volunta∣rie and without law. Yet who can deny, but that such like may with comelinesse be vsed towards the Coronels and Commanders without vexation of the Souldiers, being parted amongst them by turnes?
But Workes are the chiefe and most profitable,Workes. yea the most ne∣cessarie part, not only for victorie, but also for safetie. And yet why is entrenching of the Campe altogether cast off? Wee set downe open and without any certaine order, and when we will seeme more circum∣spect, we inclose our selues with our carriage, both an inuention and terme Barbarous. But see me the Roman Campe, so formed, so quar∣tered out; how beautifull is it in sight, apt for vse, strong against all in∣cursion and force of the enemy? How many of our owne and stran∣ger-armies haue beene cut in peeces, or put to flight by carelesnesse herein? And euen of late those gallant Christian forces at the Donaw, whom the most cruell enemy surprised on the sudden. Say I beseech you if the Roman Campe and Guards had beene there, would this haue happened? But they like not, or rather are ashamed to be Labourers. Should a Souldier put his hand to the Spade? It is an ignominy. Away, hire them that list to fall to such drudgerie. These be their words. But whose? You would thinke them of the blood Royall at the least, or else men of great riches. Yet looke vpon them, you shall perceiue them most abiect of all other, whom Need and Despaire haue compelled to seruice. My fellow, art thou ashamed to doe that, which many excel∣lent men, yea Senators haue done? This pettie conceit, wherewith they couer their sloth, will packe away with one onely warning or Proclamation of a Prince. No man will hold that reproachfull, which shall be done in common, which shall be done by the better sort, and sometimes by commanders themelues, for example sake: Polybius com∣meth to my minde; who writeth, that a man is counted Most wise of all liuing creatures, but hee esteemeth him most foolish: Because other things if they once offend, take heed. The Fox will hardly bee brought againe to the snare, nor the Woolfe to the pi-fall, nor the Dog to the staffe. Onely man from age to age doth faile almost in the same things. Let mee apply this to vs and our affaires. What profit is more appa∣rant, than of these Workes? What more common in Writings and Bookes? Yet wee neglect them, and had rather cast away our selues, than our opinions. And concerning Workes, how profitable are they without the Campe, being the only meanes and remedie, neuer deceiuing against great Ordinance, and to make your approches without perill to any Citie. Workes are of wonderfull effect to blocke vp Townes, to de∣fend your selfe in them against the enemy; and with Workes you may performe that, which otherwise is not to bee done with great Bands of men. They haue likewise their place in the battell, either to fortifie your selfe suddenly on any side against the enemy, or to traine and draw him on, or else to make an orderly retreat. You shall reade that trenches were cast by Sylla, against the sudden circumuention of Mithri∣dates huge Armie and infinite multitude of Horse. And that the like was done by Caesar vpon another reason and occasion. What need
words? The effect will proue the saying of Domitius Corbulo true, that An enemy is to be ouercome with the spade, that is, with Workes. Would God we had mindes to trie, and to lead the Souldier hither by lit∣tle and little, and that one would not be faultie herein by the example of another. Exercise.The second thing in Discipline is Exercise. That also is neglected of vs. Where are our Field-teachers? Where is our daily meditation of Armes? And when no man professeth an Art, which he hath not lear∣ned, men thinke they perfect in warre alone, as soone as they come to it. The Drum is strucke, they runne together, their names are entred in the muster-booke, they disguise themselues in apparell, they looke grim vp∣on the matter, they play the Ruffians, and bouse it out in drinke, streight way they are become Souldiers. Are these things to be laughed at, or pitied? Goe, goe, you that be wise to our forefathers, and by their exam∣ple fashion your Souldiers in all manner and kinds of Armes. For neither the length of age (as Vegetius saith) nor number of yeeres doe teach the Art of Warre, but continuall meditation of exercise. An vnexercised Soul∣dier is alwaies raw, though he haue serued neuer so long. Lawes.The Lawes are last. Come hither my Commanders, shew me your Lawes, that I may match them with the Roman Lawes. Why are you so silent? Haue you none, or few? Those that you haue are they voide, and without effect? Truly this is our life: Lust ruleth in stead of Law, and the Sword challengeth the place of Right. Who at this day punisheth Theft? Who Rapes? Nay who Murther? For Whoredome and Adulterie are now counted braue exploites, and worthy to be rewarded with a Crowne. If I speake of abstinence and frugalitie in Diet, I shall be scorned with the tongue out; of swearing or periurie, I shall be thrust out of dores by the head and shoulders. Shamefastnesse and honour, whither are you gone? How are you bani∣shed from the most part of our Europe-seruice. I protest againe, my complaint and accusation is not against the good. I write against you, you spots and wems of noble Mars, which make the warres a refuge and sanctuarie for your villanies. I haue sufficiently declared, that the Romans held another course. There Iustice, Chastitie, and Innocencie, dwelt in Campe, and their Souldiers were in no place fierce and violent, but against the enemie. I rip not vp those things, which I a while agoe spake of. But truly they are such, as albeit many will debase in speech, yet can they not but extoll them in minde. And yet who is so haire-braind that dares controll them? They doe not so, but say that those times are gone; that this age requires other manners. O good and sweet conceites. As though men were other now, then they were wont, or another reason gouerned, and that which is iust not iust in all ages, and so that which is vniust. The matter is, they are hardly laid vnto being enioined to abstinence from outrage and vices, to turne their hands against Enemies, not Citizens, to reserue their strength for Mars, not for Venus; in summe not to consume their entertainment or pay in dicing,
lewdnesse, and gluttonie. Concerning which pay, it comes fitly to my minde to admonish, that the ancient warriers would be sure to take heed not to commit all to the Souldiers hands; but, as Vegesius saith; It was diuinely ordained, that halfe should be sequestred to be laid vp with the En∣signe, and reserued there for the Souldiers, lest it might be consumed by their Cabin-mates in lauishnesse and idle expences. O excellent, and as he tear∣meth it, Diuine Ordinance, carying with it a double profit, and that most euident; namely, to make the Souldier more continent, and sparing, lesse giuen to wantonnesse, banquetting, and companie, and to make him fight with greater courage in defence of the Ensigne, According to mans nature (as the same Authour noteth) which euer hath more care of that wherein he seeth his Wealth lie. Which thing I also obserue to haue beene practised by a Grecian Generall, named Iphycrates. Polyenus writeth of him, that in paying his Souldiers, he with-held euerie month A fourth part, and retained it for a pledge, lest they should easily forsake the Armie. And so he had both his Companies full, a his Souldiers rich. Who seeth not that this may or rather ought to be practised in our loose manners, seeing that otherwise our Souldiers being, as it were, gloriously prodigall, continue, though seruing neuer so long, alwaies poore and needie, and would be alwaies readie to sterue, if they had not libertie to spoile. These things, and the like, might easily be imitated by vs, if we had a little higher mindes, and as the Poet saith, our hearts seasoned with Noble honestie. Now it is knowne how Rewards and Punishment excite and bridle, which whole kinde is omitted by vs through carelesnesse and indul∣gence.Rewards. Punishment If the rewards of Promotion were againe brought to their right course, it would doe much good, and that without any expence of the Treasurie. I speake of this kinde, as when a Souldier for his vertue as∣cendeth by degrees, and a difference is betwixt the Captaines them∣selues. If some little aduantage were adioined to their places, how would it inflame the lower sort of Souldiers? Lastly Crownes, and Chaines, and those other things particulari∣zed by me, together with publike commendation and praise would transport ingenuous mindes not only to danger, but to death it selfe. Notwithstanding I would not haue punishment omitted. Vertue cannot rise, where Vice accompanieth it with equall pace. And Souldiers are to be held-in with a sharpe and seuere kinde of chastisement. From whence are so many Rebellions and Mutinies, Threatnings and Weapons bent against their owne Commanders? From want of punishment, and from too much libertie. And albeit other cau∣ses be pretended, these are the true and inward causes. Let them be repressed with punishment, and a Souldier learne more to feare his Generall, than his Enemie. I haue enough weighed these things in the true Ballance of Com∣parison, especially being so vnequall. I exhort againe that they be put in practise.
But whom doe I exhort? I wish he, that hath interest, and whom I marke out with these eyes of my minde, were present, and had the hearing of all, that hath beene discoursed. But that re∣steth in the Diuine Prouidence: heare he, or heare he not, right and reason will heare, and ap∣proue the practise, reuenge the slighting and contempt of them. FINIS.
