26104 99838017 2374
A pleasant new Northerne Song. called the two York—shire Lovers. To a pleasant new Court tune, Or, the tune of Willy. WHen Willv once he stayed, To fetch home a lamb that straied, vnder a hill side, a bonny Lasse he spide, Of whom he was well apaied. Her chéekes like Cherries growing. Her lips like Rose-buds blowing, her eyes blacke and cleare, as the Sloe vpon the bréere, Or the worme in the hedge lies glowing Her waste so small and slender, Her skin so soft and tender, he sigh'd and he said, that she was a faire Maid, And his loue to her he'd render. The wind did seeme to play, With her tresses as she lay, betwixt hope and feare, He was in despairs, To giue her the time of the day. Yet resolu'd to court this Minion, There stept in a new opinion: this timorous Clowne, thought Phaebe had come downe, To speake with her loued Endimion. His errand quite forgotten, He lean'd to a tree was rotten, he swore by the Masse, there was neuer such a Lasse, His heart with a shaft was shotten. Then boldly he stept vnto her, His eyes shot affection through her, he cast away feaes, and pricking vp his eares, Thus Willy began to wooe her. Good day (quoth he) my honny, Thou dearer to me than money, Ile lose my little Lambe, And gladly giue the Damme, To lig with a Lasse so bonny. Now list to what Ile tell thée, There's none in shape doth excell thée, so thou wilt wed me, none happier than thée; Nor better day ere befell me. Of Nuts Ile giue thee plenty, And red side Apples twenty, my butter Ile leese, to make thee summer Cheese, And Creame to make Egge pies dainty. My Lambs new gowns shal beare thée, No daglockes shall ere come neere thee, the Poultry of the Towne shall cackle without Downe, Ere Ile want a soft bed to cheere thee. My Bagpipes mirth shall make thee, Each morne with a Song Ile wake thée at night Ile not faile, to tell a merry tale, And make thy sad thoughts forsake thee.
The second part. To the same tune. WHite Lillies shall paue the Closes, Each brier shall blush with Roses, the grasse greene and sweet, shall kisse thy tender feet. And the Medows shall yéeld thee posies. With shady bowers set ore thee, With thousand contents Ile store thee, while by some cleere brooke, with my little Dog and hooke, Ile bring my fine Ewes before thee. While thus he was close set at her, (Quoth she) I suspect the matter, for an houres sport, like the false alluring Court, The Country has learned to flatter. Therefore leaue off thy wooing, I loue not such short doing, and come vnto the matter, I loue not for to flatter, True affection hates long suing. But if your loue will proue steddy, Till Hymen had made him ready, then surfet all night, in a captiue Maids delight, Which yet but ayre hath fed ye. Quoth he I loue none aboue thee, For chastity I proue thee, as constant Ile proue, as the Mate vnto the Doue, Nay, thogh thou wert dead, Ile loue thee And all contents Ile giue thee, So that thou wilt liue with me▪ my life and all Ile loose, ere I my Loue abuse, And all my rich kith vnto me. As Willy thus was talking, The Shepherds eyes were walking▪ each legge and each limbe, so tricked so trim, She thought it no time of balking▪ Her heart with loue was taken, God Cupi did her awaken, and cast a cheerefull eye, vpon him by and by, To shew he was not forsaken. His lips to hers he laid, She neuer a word gaine-said: thus ioyning their hands, they tyed the Nuptiall bands, Which neuer till death decai'd. Such happy ioy God send me, When I to wed intend me, and to each faithfull Louer: where they be one or other, I heartily commend thee. FINIS. London printed for Iohn Wright.
