3073.5 S120424 99855622 21123
AN ANSWER TO THE DEMANDS of a great Prelate. Touching the Hierarchy of the Church. And the just defence of Priviledged, and Religious men. Permissu Superiorum. Printed at ROAN. M DC XXVI.
coat of arms(?) with lion rampant EMMANUEL ndijs.  Patris. Will. Sanc A.C. Cll Emman. Cantat
AN ANSVVERE To the demaunds of a great Prelate, touching the Hierachy of the Church, and the just defence of Priviledged, and Religious men. MY LORD: I Am not able to expresse the ob∣ligation which I haue to you, by reason of the Commandement which you vouchsafed to lay vppon me; which yet notwithstanding is both sweet and sharpe. Sweete, in regard that it comes from you, whom I doe so highly honour, as well in regard of the eminent quality which
you hold in the Church of God, as by reason of your rare vertues, and besides for that you are pleased to loue me cordially, and more then I shall euer be able to deserue. But yet sharpe withall, because it bring∣eth a complaynt with it, and shew∣eth a most bitter roote, which hath sprowted forth, and produced in the heart of many some little aversion from Priviledged persons, and Reli∣gious men; and which hath filled the mindes of many with a kinde of sharpnesse, and euen of contempt, and hate against them. Yea the matter is past on so farre, that many of them haue armed themselues, with a certayne fervour and zeale, and haue put themselues into com∣bate, against those other, as against the enemies of their persons, or at least, as against the enemies of their authoritie, their power, and their greatnesse. And yet certainly it
seemes, it would haue beene more honourable, euen to fight for them, as for their Children, to protect them as their Orphanes, and Pu∣pills, to haue set vppon the Wolfe who threatned them, being their sheepe, rather then to haue beaten them themselues; for hauing per∣haps a little strayed from the rest of the flocke, if yet indeede they haue strayed at all. Alas, it will not be vnfitly done to feare, that the sameSerm. 157. which the great Chrysologus sayth of St. Paul, may also be sayd of many others: Per zelum legis, legem im∣pugnabat, & in Deum, Dej amore pec∣cabat. I pray God of his great good∣nesse, to defend vs from this great misery, for it is one of the most permitious and irremediable mi∣chiefes of all others, if a man per∣swading himselfe that he seeketh no∣thing but God, doe yet indeede vn∣der that beleefe, seeke himselfe, and
suffer himselfe to be transported by some passion, for such a one is a kind of incorrigible man, and whilst hee thinketh to merit much, he looseth all: Qui errat, quo magis progreditur,Sene. eó magis errat, profectus ejus, defe∣ctus est. But now since it hath pleased you to tell me, that many of our Lords the Prelates of France, haue this firme beleefe, that Priviledged and Religious men, haue as it were, con∣spired against their authority; and desire to abase and weaken their po∣wer, to rayse vp and strengthen their owne Priviledges, vpon the dimi∣nution and ruyne of Episcopall po∣wers; I will not speake to you, as to you; but I will doe it to you as to them; or rather (if it please you) I will doe it by you to them; but yet with so great respect, and by way of discourse so full of honour, of can∣dour, and of truth, that God willing,
no man shall haue just cause of com∣plaint by it. And to the end that this good fortune may happen to me, and that God may inspire me with his grace, I doe in mine owne heart, desire your holy and paternall Benediction. I demaund not of you (for the parti∣cular which I haue in hand) any grace or fauour, nor the sweete effects of your friendship; nor any thing in∣deede, but meere justice, yea and e∣uen rigour, if you will (sauing that you being so good, can hardly be rigorous to any) and that you may make no account of my reasons, but according to the true value of them; and by the just weight of a minde which is not pre-occupated, or possessed by any contrary opini∣on: nor wrapped vp in certaine jea∣lousies, and vntrue reports; nor in∣flamed with the false fire of passion, which may be ouer-cast with zeale;
nor yet pricked on by any discontent∣ments, but of a minde intirely free, from all these things; and which weigheth reason by the bal∣lance of the Sanctuary; and judge∣eth of the whole businesse, as in the presence of God; and as being to render an account to the Divine Majesty, of all his actions; for the true way of treating well the affaires of God, is to treate them so, as be∣longeth to such affaires; and to ba∣nish from thence all kinde of hu∣mane interest, and all that which may sauour any way of earth. But now, before I will plunge my selfe more deepely into this sea, which is tossed by so many windes, and into the handling of this truth, which is opposed by so many men, it commeth into my thought, that I must here doe that, which was an∣ciently remarked by Tertullian, to haue beene done, by those Primitiue
Christians, when they were persecu∣ted much; for their enemies caused the God of the Christians to be pain∣ted, after a very strange and barba∣rous manner: for it was in the figure of a man, appareled with a large loose garment, full of Majestie, vp∣on the toppe whereof, as vpon the shoulders, the head of an Asse was put, with a booke in his hand. The feete which did appeare vnder the fringe of his Robe, had vppon them these Wordes, which were written in letters of gold, DeusCadeaux. Christianorum Ononychites. Now vp∣pon this ground the Pagans build strong discourses, in prejudice of God and of truth; and made the Church so ridiculous, and did so disadvantage the faith of Christ, that it was not possible to do it more: Vidimus in foro (sayth Tertullian) & risimus, & formam, & nomen. Quod colimus nos, Deus vnus est. But yet
me thinkes (saith he) it is but reason, that it should first bee vnderstood, whether indeede we doe adore that fantasticall thing, or no; and men should first be agreed vpon the mat∣ter in fact, before they should put their wits into such a full carriere, and giue themselues law and liberty to say that which is sayd; and indeede all that to which they haue a minde, tearing in peeces that white and in∣nocent Robe of Truth. It is great∣ly to be feared, least the passion of some particuler men, may haue chalked out, and framed some very deformed face, for the representing of this particular, which we haue in hand; and for the shewing it forth in ill posture, and with an aspect of great disadvantage, and setting it al∣so in a false light. They say, that these Priviledged persons haue a minde to oppresse the authority of our Lords the Prelates, that they
destroy the Hierarchy of the Church, that they invest the authority which was established by the Apostles, that they are tyed too close vpon the Pope (and of this for-sooth, they make a mortall sinne) that they exalt them∣selues aboue Bishops; that they for∣sake the care of Parishes, and draw all to themselues; that they abuse their Priviledges, and become in∣solent, and too independant vppon their Ordinaries; that they despise Ecclesiasticall Parsons and Curats, whom they vndermine; that they follow not the Maximes of the Country, and the Priviledges of the Gallian Church, that they fill the best Chayres of the Kingdome, and in fine, that they make them∣selues petty Kings. Having thus made up this Picture, and given such a colouring to it (as is used by the great Bassaw, who ordinarily makes all his, full of night, and
deepe shadowes and darkenesse) ha∣ving I say framed the face of this bu∣sinesse, after this manner, they put men then, into an Alarum, they cry out and Preach, yea and excommu∣nicate in many places; they print Bookes, and they doe wonders. What, say they, is it fit that men band themselues thus against Bi∣shops? is it fit to put the Church in Scisme? that poore Religious men should be so full of obstinacy and ambition? that without punishment they should bring confusion unto that order, which hath beene esta∣blished by our Predecessours, and a World of such discourses as these, which are received and beleeved as Oracles, and indubitable truths. I wil therfore say with Tertullian, to such as shall haue figured or rather dis-figu∣red us in this fashion, before the eyes of my Lords the Prelates, that first they should in earnest striue to know,
whether that be true or no, whether or no we adore this Orient Sun, and this interest of our owne, and whe∣ther our designes and pretences aime at that. For otherwaies it is to frame an ougly thing at pleasure, and it is like setting up a Quintaine or some man of wood, so to learne to make thrusts of the Launce, and of lan∣guage at it, when yet in the meane time all this is done with disadvan∣tage, to the service and glory of God? Wee men should first seeke to know whether indeede it bee the Arke of truth, or else the Chest or Coffer of our owne interest, which wee adore, and then afterward they might cry out at ease, and without danger of errour. My Lords, in such a businesse as this, a man may eyther seeke the sole Glorie of GOD, and the good of soules which are bathed in the blood of Iesus
Christ, who is the true Bishop and Pastor of our soules, or else hee may follow a passion, being over-cast and gilt with a shewe of zeale, and set foorth with the apparant ornaments of vertue; or else in fine, hee may giue himselfe way to bee perswaded to certayne things, which hee takes indeede to be very true, though yet in very truth they be not so. Of you my Lords I beleeue that it is the first con∣sideration, which puts you on; or at the most, that it is the first, and the third; you having perhaps, given beleefe to so many discourses; where with men may haue desired to flatter you; and perhaps to worke and make deepe impressions upon your minds. But yet withall. I beseech you suffer me to tell you that, which generally is in the beleefe of men; namely, that many who are not Bishops, haue suffered themselues to be transported into the second errour, and haue
taken passion, interest, and jealou∣sie, for direct inspirations: but veri∣ly I am in feare, least God should say, Non mittebam Prophetas, &Ier. 22. ipsi currebant; non loquebar ad eos, & ipsi prophetabant. Now therefore to discerne who is inspired by God, and who is put on by an Episcopall and Apostolicall spirit, and who on the other side is posessed by passion, I know not how it may be done more Divinely, then by the mouth of God, and by the mouth of three of the greatest perso∣nages, who haue ever beene in this World; and who all three were Pa∣stors, according to the verie heart, and gust of God. The first is Moses, that father of the people of God (and as it were their Bishop) under whom Iosua was placed. It hapned therefore, that one Eldad and Medad, who being a part from the multitude of the Iewes,
(and some will say perhaps that this is a figure of Religious men) be∣ganne to prophecy amongst the people, that is to say, to instruct, and Preach to them. This newes was quickely carried by a young man to Iosua, who being inflamed with a zeale, which was not altogether so very pure; ranne with speede to Mo∣ses: and being desirous to use double diligence in giuing proofe of his fi∣delity; said somewhat which pleased not Moses in any sort, who was a man all full of the Spirit of God. But let us heare his Wordes. Statim Iosue fi∣lius Nun, minister Mosi, & electus è pluribus; Domine mi Moses, prohibe illos. At ille, quid inquit aemularis pro me? quis tribuat mihi vt omnis populusNum. 11. 29 Prophetet, & det eis dominus Spiritum suum? What is that which this holy man means to say, this Idea of the Pa∣stors of the people of God? I had ra∣ther make it be spoken by the mouth
of a Pope, which was more worth then gold. But first you may obserue in passing by, that insteed of Prohibe illos, the Caldean version sayth; Mitte eos in carcerem; for this decla∣reth yet better, the boyling heart of Ioshua, and the excesse of his too hote zeale. But now let us heare what the Pope saith. Pia Pastorum mensLib. 22 mor. cap. 24. (saith St. Gregory) quia non propriam gloriam, sed authoris quaerit; ab omni∣bus vult adjuuari, quod agit, fidelis namque Predicator optat, si fieri vale∣at, vt veritatem, quam solus loqui non sufficit, ora cunctorum sonent. Vnde cum Iosue, duobus in castris remanenti∣bus, atque prophetantibus, vellet ob∣sistere, recté per Mòsen dicitur. Quid aemularis pro me, &c. Prophetare quip∣pe omnes voluit, qui bonum quod ha∣buit, alijs non inuidit. Will you therefore see this ill zeale, and how Moses speaketh of this emulation? Here it is. Domine mi,
prohibe illos. And will you see the true Spirit of God, and the pure zeale of his service, and of the good of soules? Behold also here it is, Qui mihi tribuat ut omnes, &c. The se∣cond instance is more eminent, and it is Iesus Christ who is speaking, and we must adore his Words. Thus stood the case. As he was going to Caperna∣um,Markc 9. the Apostles busied themselues about debating, who was to be the greatest man amongst them. Deere Lord, what a kinde of discourse was this, for the Apostles to make? But being ariued at their lodging, Christ our Lord demaunded of them, what discourse they had held uppon the way? to which they all helde their peace, and were infallibly ashamed of their having so impertinently de∣bated about the poynt of precedence. And our deare Lord instructed them sweetly, and taught them, that true greatnesse is to be onely found in
the bosome of Humility. Now St. hn interrupted him, saying thus: aister, wee haue seene a certaine an, who hath bin so bold as to im∣loy thy name, in dispossessing peo∣le of Diuells; but perceiving that he did not follow us, and that he was none of our Companie, we did ex∣presly prohibite, that hee should worke no more of these miracles. Ie∣sus autem ait; Nolite prohibere eum, emo est qui faciat virtutem in nomi∣e meo, & possit citó malé loqui de me. Qui. n. non est aduersum vos, pro obis est. Will you see the true zeale of the honour of God, Nolite rohibere &c. Qui. n. &c. And will you see on the other side, a zeale which hath in it a little heate, and oyling up of passion, Non sequi∣tur nos, & prohibuimus eum. In the name of God let me make you heare this great Oracle of Greece, and o∣ther great personages. For Saint
Chrisostome interpreting those wordsGloss. in Mark. c. 9. afore-said, saith thus, Veruntamen non erat tantae perfectionis, quod vel∣let sequi Christum & discipulos ejus &c. Et talis etiam non est prohibendus quia beneficia diuina non solum dantur per maiores sed etiam aliquando per mi∣nores & imperfectos, vt in hoc etiam de∣claretur virtus nominis Christi. Adde here that which is said by another. Pu∣tauit eum excludendum a beneficio, qui non vtitur officio; sed docetur, nemi∣nem a bono quod ex parte habet arcen∣dum, sed ad hoc potius quod non ha∣bet prouocandum. In fine, the glosse proceedeth thereuppon and saith; Per istum qui non erat de societate A∣postolorum, significatur laicus bonus, qui non habet predicandi officium; ta∣mem bonis verbis & exemplis agit ad expulsionem daemonis de cordibus proximorum, quamuis non sequatur Christum per statum Religionis, & clericatum. It is therefore much more
strong, when hee is a religious man. In fine, Titus Bostrensis addeth thus,In. c. 9. Luc. Qui vobis, qui mediligitis, non ad∣uersantur, pro vobis faciunt. Si qui. n. sunt quiquae ad gloriam meam spe∣ctant, implere satagunt, illi non ex se, sed gratia mea preueniente ea prae∣stant. And indeede it is their vocati∣on, and for this reason it is, that God sendeth many Religious orders into the World; giving them this expresse and precise vocation, which obligeth them to imploy themselues towards the salvation of their neigh∣bours, and to doe seruice to them who haue most particular obligation of the care of soules; but now you will say, why is it that God doth send this extraordinary succour, since the ordinarie may well performe it, without the other. To this I will not answere a word, but I will beg ofRom. 9. St Paul that he will answer it. Tu quis es, qui respondeas Deo, nunquid dicit
figmentum ei qui se finxit, quid me fe∣cisti sic? The third instance is of that ma∣ster of Bishops, the great St. Paule,1 Phil. but wee must heare himselfe. Qui∣dam (saith hee) propter inuidiam & contentionem, quidam autem, & prop∣ter bonam voluntatem, Christum pre∣dicant; quidam ex charitate, scientes quoniam in defensionem Euangelij po∣situs sum. Quidam autem ex conten∣tione Christum annunciant; non sincere existimantes pressuram se suscitare vinculis meis. Quid. n. dum omni mo∣do siuè per occasionem siuè per verita∣tem Christus annuncietur, & in hoc gaudeo; sed & gaudebo. Scio. n. quia hoc mihi proueniet ad salutem. Doe you not admire the greatnesse of this heart, more capable then the cir∣cumference of the whole World? Doe you not admire the purity of this soule, which cares not a whit, by whom, nor in what particuler
manner Iesus Christ be praysed and serued, so that it bee done indeede, although it should bee to the disad∣vantage of his owne honour, and of his life, yea and of his reputation, which is more deare then life. The in∣tention of those ill Preachers was such, as that those great personages, whilst they are explicating this pas∣sage: Pereat Paulus, pereat praedicatio,St Chriso. St Anselm. Theof. Corn. Ecclesia, fides, mundus, no sip si simul dummodó ad breue tempus in honore si∣mus, say, that Saint Paul takes no care of all that, but saith, that vp∣pon condition my master may bee well serued, and that soules may be assisted and comforted, all the rest concernes mee not, for I haue no in∣terest, but that of my master, and I am affraid least by seeking mine owne honour, and mine owne advuntages, with too much curiositie and care, I may hinder the service and glory of my Lord God. I like him well who
saith, that a man may perceiue the truth of their zeale of the service of God, who haue charge ouer soules,Iohn 12. when they doe as Martha did, who said to Iesus Christ, in so good a fa∣shion; Magister non est tibi curae quod soror mea reliquit me solam ministra∣re, dic ergo illi, vt me adiuuet. In effect you will finde that Saint Mary Magdalen did not faile, to put her hands to worke, shee sent for per∣fumes, and did embalme therewith the sacred head, and the blessed feete of Iesus Christ, and forgot not to helpe her sister; after shee had for sometime giuen eare to the heauen∣ly wordes of her deare Master, who was the onely diuine loue of her heart: for as for him who was scan∣dalized at this action, hee deserues not so much as to be named; and so hee receyued that answere which hee . St Ignatius entreth e∣ against those wret∣ches
who banded so against Saint aul: and sayth; Fugite istos, sunt. n.Epist. ad Trall. aniloqui, seductores, non Christia∣i; sed Christempori, Christilucriones, uique ex Christi nomine quaestum fa∣ciunt, &c. But this holy Martyre be∣leeued that those Preachers were He∣retiques, and so also did Saint Chri∣sostome, though indeede Saint An∣selme doth hold more probably, that they were Catholiques, but yet Ca∣tholiques, who euen consumed themselues with enuy, to see that St. Paul, appeared in the world with such a deale of lustre, and eclipsed a part of their glorie, leauing them in ob∣scuritie. This was the thing (as St. Anselme saith) which transported their heart, and bred in them a desite to destroy Saint Paul, whatsoeuer it might cost them. I haue no minde to make the application, but it suf∣ficeth me to shewe the heart of Mo∣ses, of Saint Paule, of Christ our
Lord, and of God; and the puritie of minde of these men, who are made according to the heart of God. For so that soules may be saued, such may be saued, such men neither care for their particular honour, nor for their interest, nor indeede for any thing of this World; nor by whom the businesse be performed, nor by what meanes, so it may be by that, which the Diuine Prouidence hath judged, and chosen for the best. For as Gerson sayth, to beleeue that no∣thing is well done, but that which thou doest, or that which thou cau∣sest to be done; alas, this is a poynt of great hazard. If this be to seeke God, there are indeede very many who are much deceiued, for men are wont to call this a seeking of ones selfe, and not a seeking of God; or if it be a seeking of God; it is for the finding of himselfe in that search, and to build (as a man may say) at the
cost of God, a Temple, or Trophy or a mans owne glory, and reputati∣on. Si adhuc hominibus placerem, Christi seruus non essem, sayd that man of Heauen, that instructer of Bishops. But now wee must consider the reasons that men alleadge against vs, in this argument, and what those windes are which make such a tem∣pest, in the sea of the Church, as that a man would say all were lost. So full haue men their mindes of zeale, and so inflamed vpon this businesse, and so much noyse doe they make. As for me, I aske for such mindes of men, as may be coole, and quiet, and wise, and by no meanes troubled, and boyling vp. And I demaund no grace, nor fauour, but onely a so∣ber and setled judgement, without any other interest, then of Gods ser∣uice, and which may not be pre-oc∣cupated by certaine inueterate opini∣ons,
which haue no soliditie in them. In fine, my Lords, I desire no other kinde of mindes in men, but such as are made like yours, that is to say, such as are solid, firme, dis-interessed, and which desire but to meet with th true meanes of saving the soules of your Diocesses; and to comfort the sheepe of your Flockes, and I am well inclined to beleeue, that of you which Saint Paul sayd of himselfe, inRom. 9. relation to others. Optabam. n. ego ipse (Paulus) anathema esse a Christo, pro fratribus meis. Let vs therefore see the reasons which some alleadge to prooue that there is no necessity of Religious men, but rather that they are of prejudice to the Hierarchy of the Church.
THE FIRST REASON. t Charles did not serue himselfe of eligious men, for the establishment of the Hierarchy of his Diocesse, which yet was the honour of Dio∣cesses. THe first, the most specious, and peraduenture the most strong reason is this, which heere wee finde alleadged; namely, that the great and incomparable Saint Charles, did not serue himselfe of Religious men, for the establishment of his Diocesse, which is neuer∣thelesse the most flourishing, or at least one of the most flourishing in Italy, and perhaps euen in the whole World. Can any man doe better then Saint Charles? Can a man fayle by imitating Saint Charles? Can it be disliked if a man doe that, which
was done by S. Charles? who is Cano∣nized, both in Heauen and in earth? My Lords, I cannot counsell you to make Saint Charles the judge of this question, for if you doe, you will infallibly loose your cause: I say you will infallibly loose it. Before I prooue this truth, I will tell you by way of surplussage, that supposing Saint Charles had procee∣ded so as hath beene sayd (which yet is not so) it cannot be inferred there∣upon, that all the World, eyther must do, or hath done the like. There may bee reasons which are good at Milan, which are not gusted else∣where, and some things are good in some season, which are not so in others. If hee were now liuing, and in France, hee must be faine to hold another stile, and to goe in another ayre then this. But yet they say still, that Saint Charles was of that opini∣on. Let it bee so. But Saint Bona∣uenture
was of an opinion directly ontrary to this, who was a Cardi∣nall as Saint Charles, a Pastor like him; at least as learned as hee, and a Saint as hee was; and yet neuerthe∣lesse; hee taught and practised the direct contrary, and found himselfe very well therewith. But let us heare him speake by his owne mouth, or ra∣ther take the paines to reade a Trea∣tise which hee made altogether vpon this subject, vnder this faire Title. Quarè fratres minores praedicent, & confessiones audiant. And you shall see whether Saint Bonauenture, be of the opinion of Saint Charles, or at least, whether hee be of that which is imputed to him. See but his A∣pologie for those poore Religious men, and my turne is serued. You will tell me perhaps, that it is so in∣deede, but then you will say, that Saint Bonauenture must goe for a sus∣pected man. It is certainly as easie
for me to say, that Saint Charles ma also bee suspected, though ineede h ought not to be so. But then yo say, that Saint Bonauenture was  Religious man; and Saint Charles was hee not so too? And if not; the I demaund justice of you my Lords for why will you haue Religious me beleeue St. Charles in this busines, an yet you will no that such as are no Religious, should beleeue St. Bon∣uenture. Either beleeue them both, o relinquish them both; or else you will ordaine men to bee both judges and parties, which is contrarie to all forme of justice in France. Saint Thomas also was of a con∣trary opinion to St. Charles. But you will say, that hee was no Arch∣bishop, any more then Saint Ber∣nard, who was also none, but yet of the same opinion with him. Hee was not indeede, but it was long of no bodie but St. Bernard, that hee
was not Arch-bishop of Millan, as well as St. Charles; nor of any but Saint Thomas that he was not Arch∣bishop of Naples: Now whom my Lords, doe you esteeme more in the sight of God, eyther him who refu∣seth to be an Arch-bishop, being prest to bee so, by the Pope, and by the whole World: or him who presseth that he may be so, as they say Saint Charles did, whilst yet he was yong, and before his conuersion. Or do you thinke perhaps that St. Bernard, or St. Thomas would say any thing against their conscience in a matter of such moment. But let vs yet say more, let vs leaue the Character a part, doe you not beleeue that the testimonies of these two Seraphins, bee as weightie and as important in the way of conscience, as that of the great St. Charles, who esteemed these two great Doctors and great seruants of
God, so much, that hee esteemed no∣thing of himselfe, in comparison of them. You say, this was the opinion of St. Charles; and I will shew you by good account, nine and forty Popes of a contrary opinion, I wll shew you 500. Cardinalls, Arch-bishops, Bishops, most illustrious, most reuerend, most holy, most wise. And (which im∣porteth) most dis-interested, both in France, and elsewhere, who were of a contrary opinion. I will shew you Emperours, Kings, Monarchs, and euen Oracles amongst men, who are also of a contrarie opinion. I doe highly esteeme Saint Charles, and God forbid but I should. But yet if I should beleeue him alone, against a sacred torrent of so many others, hee would giue mee little thankes for it, and truely I haue no minde to offend him. Would hee disagree from St. Bonauenture, hee, who in effect, did
nothing but by the aduice of Pani∣garola, a man of the same Order, and farre inferiour to Saint Bona∣uenture. Pardon mee my Lords, if I tell you, that the Historie of St. Charles his life, doth carry other manner of reasons with it, then that which you alleadge, how hee came to make his Diocesse so flourishing: for that story tels us, that the thing which made him victorious, ouer so many impediments, and inabled him to doe what hee listed, was this which followeth. 1. That hee led a holy and irre∣prehensible life.L. 1. c. 8. 2. Hee did ordinarily fast, andL. 8. c. 21. that oftentimes, with bread and wa∣ter; yea and euen when hee was pre∣sent at Feasts, and he fasted for deuo∣tion and not for thrift. 3. Hee gaue ouer in one mor∣ning,L. 2. c. 2. the reuenew of threescore
thousand Crownes by the yeare; and who would not beleeue a man, who should at once alleadge threescore thousand reasons, which weigh at the least, a Crowne a peece. 4. Hee alwayes euerie day recitedL. c. 2. 8. his Breuiarie, with his knees bent, and his head bare, and he euen blotted it all out with teares, which his deuoti∣on shed in so great aboundance. 5. Hee did neuer in effect, goe outL. 2. c. 2. of his Diocesse. 6. Hee gaue almes, euen almostL. 4. c. 3. & l. 8. c. 28. beyond the meanes he had. 7. He serued with his owne handsL. 4. c. 3. such persons as had plague soares vp∣pon them. 8. He made the visitation of his Diocesse on foote, and hee perfor∣med his Pilgrimages, after the same manner. 9. He daily celebrated masse, with anL. 8. c. 2. incredible deuotion, and with a Ma∣jesty, which was more then humane.
10. Hee was peraduenture theL. 8. c. 16. most humble man of all his Diocesse, and did in his very soule, beleeue more meanely of himselfe, then of a∣ny seruant hee had. 11. He was indefatigable, in theL. 8. c. 31. execution of his Office. 12. Vnder his Scarlet hee wore aL. 8. c. 31. hard and rough haire-cloath. 13. Hee tooke his rest, eyther vp∣ponL. 8. c. 3. the bare ground, or else vppon straw which was as hard. 14. He would read the holy Bi∣ble vppon his knees, and with his head bare, and the while, hee would shed aboundance of teares. 15. Hee carried a tender loue to∣wards the seraunts of God. 16. Euery yeare he made the spiri∣tuallL. 8. c. 5. exercises twice, sometimes in the Nouiciate, at Nouellara (which my Lady his sister had founded) vnder fa∣ther Anthonio Valentino, a Iesuite (of whom I haue vnderstood thus much)
and sometimes at Arona, in the No∣uilitate, which hee had founded him∣selfe, and then hee did euer make his generall Confession. 17. He would neuer do any thingL. 1. c. 4. without taking verie wise counsell, and hee did exceedingly distrust his owne iudgement. 18. Hee was euer the first at good workes, at the Office of the Church, at Sermons, at the visiting of Hospi∣tals, and seruing the sicke. 19. Hee was greatly exact andL. 8. c. 3. carefull, not to giue holy Orders, nor Benifices, but to persons very capa∣ble, and of good life. 20. He would doe nothing of im∣portanceL. 8. c. 3. without communicating it first, to the Pope, and his Councell, whom hee honoured as the Oracle of Heauen. This in effect, is that my Lords, which gaue him so great power to make a reformation through his
whole Diocesse, and not eyther se∣culers, or Regulers, or such other aydes as those; in fine, in the midst of all impediments, and when the whole seculer power would oppose it selfe to his designes, the Gouer∣nours of Millan sent worde to King Phillip the second, that they were not able to resist him; and the King would ordinarily make this answere, Puesel Arcobispo es vn sancto. Let this Arch-bishop alone, for hee is a uery Saint. The Arch-bishop Vis∣conte his successour, a most wise man, and whom I haue heard Preach, would sometimes bee making the same offers; but the same King an∣swered concerning him; Luego este no es saincto. No, sayth he, the case is not the same. For this man is not yet a Saint, when hee shalbe so, wee will speake with him againe. So that the beleefe which was had of the sanctity of Saint Charles, was that which
made him so omnipotent; doe but giue me some Saint Charles like him, and there shalbe no Barbarisme which shall not be tamed, and euen made holy in a short time: but without that there will be much to do, whosoeuer he be that goes about it, and Charles Baromeus, would not haue wrought those wonders, if hee had not beene St. Charles. All this say you, goes well, but in fine Saint Charles did not serue him∣selfe of Religious men, in making that Reformation. Though that were so, yet the Pope his Vncle, serued himselfe of them; and so did the greatest Cardinalls of his time, who found that they had no cause to re∣pent it. Farnesse at Rome, Paleotta at Bolonia, Valerio at Verona, Priuli at Venice, Medici at Florence, and Este at Ferara, that I may say nothing of my Lords, the Cardinals of France; whose memory is both in benedicti∣on
and admiration; hee of Bourbon, of Vendosme, of Lorayne, of Tornon, and so many others. And these two last, being men of very great judge∣ment, and reputation, resolued when they dyed, to breath out their soules in the hands of Religious men, and to leaue their heartes de∣positated amongst them, in testimo∣ny of an euerlasting loue. And I will also forbeare to say any thing of such as liue, and of an innumerable num∣ber of most eminent Prelates of France; yea and of Europe, who haue found themselues well at case, by not hauing beene of that opinion, which heere is attributed to Saint Charles. I could here say much of those great Cardinalls of Ioyuse, of Condy, of Retz, of Peron, of Ciury; and of so many others: but I will forbeare, and passe no further vpon this poynt. But we will yet say better to you, and I am content that Saint Charles
be made the Iudge of al this questions for either the story of his life deceiues vs, or certainely my Lords, you will loose your cause. So true it is, that Saint Charles did the just contrary, of all that which some men would make the World beleeue. See how he did it, and what his life relates. When hee was conuerted in good earnest to God, and to that eminent mannerL. 1. c. 5. of life which he grew to lead, he took for his guide, Father Iohn BaptistaL. 1. c. 5. Ribera a Iesuite. When hee resolued to make his entry into Millan, and to dispose of that people; hee chose Fa∣ther Palmio and some others of the same Order, which prooued so to the glory of God as all the World vn∣derstands. He setled Colledges and Religious-Houses, and serued him∣selfeL. 2. c. 7. of them for his Seminaries, and for the affaires of his Diocesse. At Millan he found the Barnabists, who are very good Religious men, and
who gaue him great succor towards the gouernment of his Church. Be∣sides, hee brought in the Theatins, e∣steeming them to bee very worthyL. 2. c. 19. labourers in the Vine-yard of God. And yet the good Cardinall did not conceiue, that he had halfe the men whereof hee had neede, for so great an office. Hee neuer ceased, till hee had brought the Capuchins into those Dominions of the Swissers, whichL. 6. c. 8. were vnder his Arch-bishopricke, be∣leeuing that the sanctity of the life, the good example; and the Preach∣ing of those Fathers, would worke that effect, which since indeed they haue wrought. Hee also placed two Colledges of Iesuites at Lucerna, andIbid. Fribourg; and besides at Millan, and at Arona; and hee serued himselfe of all those good Fathers, towards the perfecting of that work, about which hee went. In these most solemne and most renowned visitations, which hee
made amongst the Grisons, in the Voltolina, and other Countries which were blasted with Heresie: hee had ordinarily Panigarola with him,L. 7. c. 4. who was then but a meere Corde∣lier, though afterward he was made Bishop of Aste, and Father Achilles Gagliardo a Iesuite; besides others who were not of so much note as these two. Yea, there were three men, of whom he thought he could neuer haue enough, Panigarola, Emanuel Sà, and Father Adorno. The first of them for Preaching; the second for cases of conscience; and the third, for the conduct of his soule, for in all his life, and euen in the houre of his death, hee would euer be so con∣ducted by this Father Adorno; that in effect, hee did nothing but by o∣bedience to him, at least in those things which concerned the interi∣our man, and the guiding of his con∣science, which was most tender and
nice. And his life speakes of things great, and so extraordinary in this de, as that I dare not touch them ere. When hee was able to scape away, and goe to Nouellarie, thereL. 7. c. 11. & 12. to conferre with Father Anthonio Valentino (who was Father of the Nouices of the Iesuites) hee thought himselfe to be in a kinde of Paradise; and when afterward, hee came to finde himselfe assaulted by Death, he ent for Father Adorno, and made his generall Confession to him, and would needes dye in the Armes of him, vppon whom hee had entirely relyed for the direction of his soule, during his life. That I may say no∣thing of the Iacobins and Cordeliers, and other Religious men, who liued on Almes, by whom hee was often assisted, with very great fruite. And now I most humbly beseech you most illustrious, and most reue∣rend Lords, is it true which they
haue sayd of Saint Charles; that  did not serue himselfe of Religio men, hee who euer had them at  feete, hee who dyed in their Arme and who in effect, did neuer a thing of much importance, whe in hee was not assisted by their Cou∣sells: he who serued himselfe of the labours in his visitations, and wh receiued comfort by their conuers∣tion, making himselfe the founder o some, the protector of others, and generally a Father to them all. He tooke great contentment to reuolue that passage of Saint Gregory vp and downe in his minde. Cuncti qui prae∣sunt, non in se potestatem Ordinis de∣bent sed aequalitatem pensare conditio∣nis; nec praeesse se hominibus gaude∣ant, sed prodesse. Those two words of praeesse and prodesse, were euer∣lastingly before his eyes, and yet more, this other passage of the same Pope: Qui episcopatum desiderat, bo∣num
opus desiderat. Notandum vero,  illo tempore hoc dicebatur, quoPart. 1. c. 8. qssquis plebibus praeerat, primus ad rtirij tormenta ducebatur, tunc er∣audabile fuit episcopatum quaerere, ndo per hunc non erat dubium ad plicia grauiora quemlibet peruenire. Whilst hee was repassing this saying in his minde, it is not easily to bee beleeued, with how great ardour of zeale, hee would thinke of culti∣ting his Diocesse; seruing himselfe of all men, but not of any who would imploy themselues but by halfes. Hee was the first at labour, and the last, and lowest of all in the esteemation of himselfe. And it see∣med, as if hee had beene made Car∣dinall but to kill himselfe with taking paynes, and to dye himselfe purple in his owne blood: and to bath in the sweat of his owne labours, and so to be exalted to a thousand, and a thou∣sand Crownes of merit.
Notwithstanding all this, I  auow that in the latter yeares of  life, hee did not serue himselfe,  much of Regulers, as of other This cannot be well denied, and  must frankly auow the truth; F otherwise a man should contradi the History of his life, written Cap. 18. Possiuinus a seculer Priest, and  Domesticke of the holy Cardina and the witnesse, who saw wh hee wrote. Heere is then the ca the Religious men finding them∣selues to bee surcharged, and n beeing able to attend to all tha which the holy Cardinall expecte at their hands, desired that he would bee pleased to free them from some part of that great imploy∣ment. From hence, some good Priests tooke occasion to offer themselues to be vsed by Saint Charles, in what∣soeuer hee should commaund. This
small beginning inlarged it selfe; d these first seruants of God, did arme themselues by little and little, d set themselues forward apace. nd the better to aduance this py∣us designe, and to become more ac∣ptable, and necessary, they alleadg∣ed to the holy Arch-bishop, as fol∣loweth. 1. That Religious men, were not absolutely at his disposition. That they had Generalls and Pro∣uincials; who disposed of them at their pleasure. That sometimes when they were in the middest of some great good businesse, they left it all, to follow the call of Obe∣dience. That when Saint Charles be∣ganne to haue particuler gust in any one, it was then, that they would be taking him out of his hand. That he was not the Master of any of them. That euery one had particuler rules, which obliged him to diuers things,
and that therefore he could not ser himselfe freely of them. 2. That they had too great Pri∣uiledges and power from Popes, and that they were too independent vpo their Ordinaries. 3. That they were not of the or∣dinary body, and of the Hierarchy of the Church. 4. That they might not bee Par∣sons or Curats, Arch-deacons, Ca∣nons, Theologals, Vicars gene∣rall, nor serue the cures of Villa∣ges. 5. That secular Priests were rather to be reformed by secular Priests, then by Regulers, who haue had no education that way. 6. That by little and little, some Priests might bee substituted to the place of others; and so the Clergy of Millan would infallibly grow to be reformed, both in Country and City: by the substitution, I say, of
of good Priests, who might lead holy liues, and that all the younger Priests, moulding themselues by those others, might thus put them∣selues vpon the way of Ecclesiasticall perfection, obtayned by secular Priests, who shortly would people Lombardie, with excellent men for the Church. That Religious men not being come in, but to succour the Church when it was in decay, and seemed to hang towards ruine, there would now bee not great neede of them, but for singing their Office in the Quier, and to make mentall Prayer. 8. That good secular Priests were the men, who would vphold the dignity of Bishops, and who liue not but by them, nor take any thing to heart but their Commaund∣ments, and who would euer be at their feete, and euer neere at hand; to bee imployed by them, in all
kinde of labour without contr∣diction. 9. That for the greater assuranc and stability hereof, they would take an Oath, nay they would ma a particuler vowe, betweene th hands of the sayd Lord Cardinall, whereby they would irreuocably ob∣lige themselues to him, and would make themselues as his Creatures. This is that in grosse, which I haue learned both in Millan, as also out of the life of the Saint afore-said, touching that which they alleadged to him. And now he who imbraced all sorts of people, for the seruice o God, was much pleased by the lu∣stre of these faire and winning propo∣sitions. And as for the men, hee re∣ceiued them after a paternall man∣ner, and gaue them the Church of the holy Sepulcher; and obtained the yearly reuenew of a thousand crownes for them of Pope Gregorie the thir∣teenth;
and by occasion of of∣fering themselues to him, hee gaue them the name of Oblati, which continueth with them till this day, and in truth they haue done God good seruice in the Diocesse of the holy Cardinall. Now as for saying, whether afterward they grew vp to frame a bodie, or whether they haue chosen a Generall, or no, or what Hierarchy they haue, I must clearely auow mine owne ignorance. For in truth, I know not how the case stands, and I am so little curious, that I haue not taken care to informe my selfe. It is true, that I haue bin told many times, but I put not this eyther into my booke of receites, or of expences, as a thing which con∣cernes me not. But I beseech God to conserue and enrich them, with all the benedictions both of heauen and earth, for the seruice of the Church, and the good of soules.
9. This was then the occasion of that change which arriued at Millan; wherein my Lords, you may be plea∣sed to obserue, that it grew vpon the desire of the Religious men, and at their instant  that Saint Charles discharged them, of that too great imployment: for these are the ex∣presse words of the Historie. Besides that the holy Cardinall did neuer giue ouer, euen till the end of his life, to serue himselfe of Religious men, and to imploy them vppon the conduct of his soule; and you may well beleeue of so great a Cardinall, that since hee trusted his conscience, and his heart in the hands of Religi∣ous men, hee might also well trust the rest, his flocke, and whatsoeuer was in his Diocesse, which was the honour of Diocesses. 10. To tell you now which of the two is better, eyther to haue serued Saint Charles in the establishment of
his Arch-bishopricke, and to breake through difficulties, or to haue hel∣ped to conserue that, which was e∣stablished alreadie, would be but o∣dious, and without fruite. In like manner to debate, whether this bee not sitter at one time then in another, would proue to make a discourse apt to breed iealousie, and to discouer a high way couered with thornes. To know moreouer whether the Oblati doe better seruice to Bishops, then Religious men, yea or no; for the loue of God, do not ingage me vp∣pon this taske. When you goe to Millan, you ma take the paynes, to informe and instruct your selues here∣in. As for mee, I know in a manner what might be said, but I also know withall, that I will not say it. That which I wilbe bold to say is this, that I doe infinitely commend the large heart of Saint Charles, and his affe∣ctions of a father. He euer loued both
the one and the other, euer imploied both the one & the other, and as his life doth witnesse, he better loued to be a Father to all, then partiall to any. And seeing that hee had all in his po∣wer, he would not commit himselfe wholy to any; nor put himselfe into parallel with other folkes; and to the end, that all might be good children to him, hee was a louing Father to all. His life doth further relate, that he had often in his mouth, that word of the wiseman. Discurre, festina, susci∣taCap. 7. animam tuam, ne dederis somnum occulis tuis, nec dormicent palpebrae suae. In fine, he awaked all the world, he imployed all the seruants of God, and hee neuer thought himselfe to haue men enough to cultiuate his Diocesse, whereof he so much procu∣red the aduancement. 11. True, but yet he wished for some things to be in regular persons, and there were many little things which
pleas'd him not. Alas, is there any kind of people, wherof a mā is not weary at ngth, since a man groweth weary e∣en of himselfe, and many times he ares not for that after noone, which he passionatly desireth before. In fine, the minde of man is so made. But now my Lords, tel me if it please you, doe you beleeue that there hath been nothing done, by those others, which might haue beene wished otherwise, and which displeased Saint Charles, and his successors. Are they perhaps impeccable, or are they men drop∣ped downe from Heauen, and confir∣med in grace? If a man will not serue himselfe, but onely of such as make no faults, infallibly hee must serue himselfe of none; but hee must, as Saint Paule sayth, goe out of the World, and seeke them beyond these parts of the earth which are inhabi∣ted by men. Euery man is a man, and extreamely a man, and subject
to many tokens of humanity, and  inhumanity too. Hee is the most ex∣cellent amongst them, who commit∣teth the fewest faults A good old Religious man of the Mendicants, sayd thus at Millan. When those o∣ther good men shall haue serued St. Charles as long as wee, and shall haue sweate blood and water so many yeares: the world wil then be able to judge, who shall haue done better ser∣uice. And is it therefore fit, that for some little fault, all former seruices should be forgotten. Some one man, will haue committed some light in∣discretion; and a hundred others of the same Order, wil haue performed a thousand good seruices, and must the mis-fortune be so great, as to impute the fault of that one to the whole body, and that no account should be made of all that good, which a hun∣dred seruants of God haue wrought, and must all this be buried, in the pit
of obliuion? The great wisedome nd wise charitie of Saint Charles did rue it selfe of all: hee managed the ood seruices of some, hee excused e faults of others, if any were made, and he gayned the heart of the whole World. THE SECOND REASON. That Priuiledged persons trouble the Hierarchy of the Church. MY Lord Bishop of Geneua, who was the Saint Charles of France, and whose memo∣ry is in benediction, was a Prelate, whom you my Lords did honour so greatly, that more cannot be imagi∣ned. One day when I had the hoor to discourse with him at Paris, with that liberty which by his comman∣dement, and through his goodnesse I had acquied, and there had passed more then fiue and thirty years, since I had formerly touched this string: in
familiar speech hee sayd to me afte this manner, but with that ayr which he ordinarily vsed, and wit that Angelicall serenity of his.  know not whither these men will g to frame this Hierarchie, and whe they finde, and fancy these distincti∣ons. When soeuer it shall plea them, I will make them see, that Re∣ligious men, are one of the most im∣portant peeces, or parts of the tru Hierarchy of the Church. And som there are, who make a shew, as if th would onely abase Religious men who yet in very deede would faine a∣base Bishops too, and euen th Pope himselfe. Alas, sayth hee, le vs liue, and serue our selues of them whom the good God sendeth to v for although wee were ten times a many as we are, infallibly we shoul not be halfe so many, as were fit: s true it is, that, Totus mundus est  maligno positus.
2. Saint Bonauenture, a CardinallIn Apol. peuperum art. 2. 4. Proposi∣tionis.  Bishop, disputing with a cer∣taine Doctor Gultelmus de Sancto a∣ore, who sayd at that time, all that which now is sayd vppon this argu∣ment (for all that which is expressed n in this yeare 1625. is but the repe∣tition, and eccho, of that which was deliuered in the yeare 1257. this St. I say, doth obserue a choyse passage in the Gospell, from whence hee draweth a most excellent conse∣quence, and extreamely to the pur∣poseLuke 10. of our question. He obserueth, I say, that when that poore Trauailer was wounded, by those murdering Theeues, the Priest passed by, and that was all he did. A Leuite shortly after passed also by, but hee did not so much as once touch the poore wounded man, and so that these two, who were in greatest obligation to helpe him, left him wholy with∣out succour. By chance there passed
also a poore Samaritan, and,  (though he were in less Oblig did yet alight to the ground, he p∣red oyle and wine into his bleed wounds, hee raysed and set him vpon his beast, he caused him to ∣drest, hee payd the charges, hee  stored him in fine to himselfe, a was afterward greatly praysed  Christ our Lord. It doth many tim happen, that they who stile the∣selues, to be onely of the Hierarch haue so many businesses to doe, th they leaue many without succou and God sendeth others, who su∣ply that omission, in such sort, th what some doe not, others do, an that with a good will. And Go who is the common Father of al sendeth helpe, both by meanes  the one, and of the other. And after∣wards he saith, Messis multa, operar pauci; rogate ergo dominum messis, v millat operarios in vrneam suam. Nam
onorum Potisicum est, non tam pati∣ter ferre, quam desiderantèr appete∣ co-operatores Euangelistas ad multi∣dines diuinarum messium colligen∣. A good mother will neuer be ie, when she sees a man, who ough hee be none of her ordinarie omesticke seruants, doth yet ne∣erthelesse (finding a sonne of hers allen downe in the streete) raise him p with a readie hand, and wrap im gently in his armes, and carrie im backe in to her bosome. Nay, she will not know how to entertayne hat honest man kindly enough, nor e able to tell what thakes to giue im. In fine, he addeth this; Pensatis mnibus nul debet vtaeri iniuriosum,  supersum, si caelesti Hierarchiae lacuit, aliquos ad hoc opus, etsi non ne∣cessitate constilos, sed charitate in∣ductos eligere, quos & sub-caelestis Hi∣erarchia voluit & debuit approbare. I conjure you to weigh these words wel.
3. And when it should bee that Religious men, were not o Hierarchy of the Church, but o a kinde of extraordinarie succo will any man inferre thereupon,  they are not of the bodie of Church? Saint Paule came in  the Colledge of twelue Apo was alreadie furnished, and was ¦traordinarily called; but yet wa not, I beseech you an Apostle, an the bodie of the Apostles, and  great Apostle, and through his ¦cellencie, called the Apostle? I now there being but twelue se for the Apostles, where shall thes of Saint Paule be? Saint August will tell you this better then I, or ¦ther, you know it alreadie with any speech of mine. St. Marti one of the Apostles of France, ca in afterwards, and what shall  he be of this bodie, and of the num of the rest, because hee was call
afterwards, and to their succour? The enemies of the Church, doe sometimes feare one of these extra∣ordinary men, more then a hundred nd fifty of those others. Tolle Tho∣mam, & Ecclesiam dissipabo, said that miserable Rucerus, long agoe. Take Fryer Thomas away, shut but vp his mouth, let that dead man speake no more, and I will feare no bodie, but will ruine and renuerse the whole Church of Rome. 4. The Popes and Councels say expresly, that Bishops and Pastors succeed the Apostles, and the Disci∣ples of Iesus Christ. This is most true; but so it is also true, that Popes and Councels haue imployed Religi∣ous men, and grafted them, as it were, into this Hierarchy, as Kings are wont to do, who (besides their or∣dinarie Militia, which serues for pay) haue their white banners, vnder which voluntaries are assembled, who are
the men many times, that goe first  the knockes; and supposing that th acquit themselues well, and continu vnder the authority of the King, the are praysed, beloued, and admired b all the World. Besides them, who  meere right are obliged to procur the saluation of those soules, whic are vnder their charge, God an his Vicar on earth, hath certayn choyce troopes, which are sent t succour those others, and that the may acquit themselues the better, i doing their duty, they giue them Priuiledges and armes, wherewith to fight against Hell, and against sin and all those miseries which destroy soules. This is not therefore to trou∣ble the Hierarchy, but to magnifie it, to succour it, and to liue and dye for the seruice of it. Your Mr. Renatus Benedictus, who  is now dead, said one day to Father  Maldonatus, that in very truth, the
Church had formerly beene in such ermes, that shee had had necessitie hat Religious men should come in∣to the World to helpe her to re-esta∣blish Ecclesiasticall discipline; but now, said hee, when all goes so well, we have no more neede there∣of, and therefore let them suffer vs, euery one to follow his occupation. I would to God hee had said true, and that the World were in so pre∣sent state, as that Religious men had no more to doe, but to say their prayers. Alas, and what could we desire more then this? But in con∣science, my Lords, are wee now growne to be in such case as this, and is France so well sanctified both in City and Country? 6. The wish of a certaine worthy Prelate of this Kingdome, is much more worth the making, hee useth these very words, and for all kindes of reason, his testimony is worthy
to bee received both with affection, and with honour, hee beeing such as hee is, leading such a life, as all the World doth know, and admire. Lord how happy a thing it is when the Ecclesiasticall men, who are of the Clergy, and when the men of Religious Orders be in good accord, and maintaine good intelligence for the seruice of those soules, which haue cost the Sonne of God so much blood. When these Hurs and Iosuahs hold up the arme of these Moses; that is to say, of the ordinary Pastors, to whom the government of soules committed to their charge doth be∣long: How great benedictions grow from this holy vnaminity and corres∣pondnce: But on the other side, what confusion springeth forth, when they, who both by their Character of Priest hood, and by a Reguler life ought to be in Order, doe encoun∣ter and oppose one another: For if
the salt be unsavory; with what shall any thing be seasoned? If Order be disordred, by what meanes shall the extreame corruptions of disorder be remoued? If the rule be not streight, with what shall one be able to mea∣sure the dimensions of any building? O how truly doth the poore Church indure by these debates, other man∣ner of torments, then Rebecca suffe∣red by the combate of her Children. I confesse, it carrieth difficulty with it, for two men to runne in a Tilt∣yard at the same time, and in the same way against one another, with∣out justling, but that againe grows very easie, when there is a partition, which cutteth the length of the car∣rier in the middle; and in the same manner is it easie for divers to labour in the same Vine-yard without con∣testation, where the businesse is so great, and the labourers so few, eue∣ry one seeking not his owne interests
there, but the interest of Iesus Christ: provided alwaies, that they passe not the limits, which the Sonne of God hath prescribed, &c. And a little after, hee sayth thus. The Church, which is the seamlesse Coat, not of Ioseph, but of Iesus Christ, is torne by these Schismes, nothing indeede beeing so contrary to it, as internall divisions, which doe af∣flict it more then externall here∣resie, &c. 7. That the first honours be ren∣dred to my Lords the Bishops, and the second to the Pastors, and Par∣sons or Curats of Churches, is out of all dispute: Let them be great in dig∣nitie, and eminency, let them com∣maund, let them governe, let them triumph. They shall never be either so great, or so holy, but that all good Religious men will wish, that they may be so more and more, and that they may see them also many St.
Charleses. That which Religious men desire, is neither greatnesse, nor honour, nor revenew, nor prece∣dence, nor any thing which carrieth lustre, and noyse with it. That which they desire, is but to sweat blood and water, to labour day and night, to serue and comfort the whole World; to Preach, to take Confessions, to visite Hospitals, and Prisons, and must this be for troubling the Hierar∣chy? The Orientall Church is so far off from euer having had this be∣leefe, that even in these dayes, they scarce make any Patriarke, Arch-bi∣shop, or Bishop, but such as are Religious of the Order of Saint Ba∣sil. And still this Hierarchy of the Church must needs haue a head, who may gouerne and range it as is fit. Since therefore fiftie Popes without interruption one after an other, haue sent these Regulars in ayde and succor
of the Hierarchy, who will presume to say, that so many Popes, and af∣ter them, so many Cardinalls, and great Prelates, haue troubled the Order of the Church, together with so many Kings, who haue desi∣red them, sent for them, honoured them, and who would needes ap∣point by their expresse commande∣ments, that they should haue im∣ployment in their Dominions, and in fine, who haue served themselues of them in their owne soules. 8. A very learned Doctor in Paris, hath obserued (in the relation which hee makes of those Hierarchies of Heauen; to those on earth) that the Prelates or Gouernors of Religious men, are as the Principalities of Hea∣ven, in the Hierarchy of the Church on earth. Is this to trouble the Or∣der of the Church, and to bring in coniusion? The Cardinals (sayth hee) answer
to the Seraphins, the Bishops to the Cherubins, the Parsons and Curates to the Arch-angels, the Abbots and Superiours of Regular men, to the Principalities, &c. If now wee should examine this businesse by the fruite, which both the one and the other doe produce in the Church, there would bee much to be sayd, but this would bee odi∣ous. It is better that you be pleased to imploy your memories upon that which hath beene sayd already, and to retaine that in your minds, which was delivered by two Holy Prelates, speaking in these wordes. Petri Successor pia prouidet salutiS. Co. l. c. animarum, & in nullo praejudicat au∣thoritati Pontificum, tanquam ornans, non deornans Ecclesiasum Hierar∣chiam, dum mittit Religiosos. Vnde Sanctus Gregorious, ecce mundus Sacer∣dotibusS. Greg. in Past. plenus est, & tamen in Dei messe, rarus operarius inuentiur. This
great Pope, and this great Cardi∣nall, when they speake these wordes do they thinke, they trouble the Hie∣rarchy of the Church? 9. If these Regulars did intrud themselues, and as Tertullian sayth Si quis missus est a seipso: If they made hauocke where they goe, and di∣sturbed the Order of the Church, i would indeede; be inexcuseable, and punishable. But beeing inspired by Almighty God, authorised by Coun∣cells, sent by Popes, approoved by the Bishops of all times, and of all Countries in the World; hauing bi in possession of so many ages, and succeeding their predecessours, who haue lost their liues in cultiuating the Vine-yard of Iesus Christ: Alas, shall this be called a trouble to the Hierar∣chy of the Church? Hierarchicha o∣pera non peragunt authoritate sua, sed Ordinariorum, & potissimê summi pon∣tificis:. l. c. Saith this great Cardinall,
cujus dispositionis authoritas positiua urae transcendit: For these are his ve∣ry words. 10. It is to bee feared that the Church will finde her selfe like the poore Rebecca, who felt two bro∣thers contend so furiously in her wombe, and that shee may say, as the Spouse doth, by the relation of Saint Bernard. Filij matris meae pug∣nauerunt contra , quia pugnauerunt contra se. Si sic futurum erat, quid quid necesse erat me concipere? I must needes make you heare the voyce of this worthy Prelate. That the rankesM. de Bel∣ley. Serm. 10. de S. Ignat. of this Militant Church, haue been addressed according to the Orders of the Triumphant, there is no doubt at all. The Hierarchy of the one, ha∣uing beene formed according to the modell of that Mountaine of Hea∣uen, amongst the inhabitants of the eternall Syon. Besides, in this Hie∣rarchy, which contained the Order
of Pastors in the Church of God there bee added certaine troupes o succours, which enter into the Orde with them, as Michael did into tha of the Angell of Israel; and thes troupes compose a kinde of Hierar∣chy, by reason of their particular government, and of a speciall kind of Oeconomy, which they obseru under the name of Orders, and o Regularity. And although these con∣gregations of men haue many diffe∣rences, yet are they without any di∣uision amongst themselues; and espe∣cially without separation from the body of the Church in generall. And they beautifie this Spouse of the Lambe by those delightfull varieties: for which the Holy Scripture decla∣reth her to be so gratefull. And they compose the pretious Carguanet which adorneth the necke of this chast Doue with so great lustre. I say therefore that the Orders of Regulars
compose a particular Hierarchy: yet nexed neuerthelesse to the generall Hierarchy of the Church. Not at Religious men make any new Religion in point of beleefe, or that they maintaine any difference there∣in, from the rest of the faithfull, but on the other side, for as much as their life is more exemplar, and more perfect, and in regard that they are the most illustrious portion of the flocke of Iesus Christ; their piety doth make their faith much more delicate and more docile. Their soules not finding difficulty to beleeue any thing, so that it make for the aduan∣tage of his glory, who drew them out of the darkenesse of this World, to the admirable light of the practise of those counsells of his, which put them into the state of acquiring per∣fection. But I was saying that they seemed to compose a kinde of Hierarchy by
reason of their exemptions, whic substract them from the jurisdictio of the ordinary Prelates, and Pastor because their life is sequested fro the wayes of worldly men, and be∣cause the correspondencies of their Oeconomy, which finally pitcheth vpon the holy seate of Rome, by th degrees of their locall Superiours their Prouincialls, and their Gene∣ralls, is a coppy drawne out of the Originall of Parish Priests Diocessa∣ries, hnd Metropolitans, according to that order which the Sonne of God hath established in his Church, the whole rendring it selfe into the vnity of the Apostolicall Seate of St. Peter, as into the center upon which, as upon an immoueable Rocke our Lord hath established his Holy Church. 11. And now since they will mould the Hierarchy of the earth, uppon that of Heaven, it commeth fitly to
our purpose: for besides the Angells uardians, who are they which go∣erne the World in the ordinary ay? Such as are good Diuines ow, that there is not in a manner ny Quier of Angells, whereof God doth not sometimes send one, or o∣ther to performe some great charities to mankind. Sometimes a Cheru∣bin, sometimes a Seraphin, some∣times an Arch-angell; and (as Saint Paul sayd to the Hebrewes,) Omnes sunt administratorij spiritus, in Mini∣sterium missi propter cos qui heredita∣tem capient salutis. And now doe you beleeue, that the ordinary Angels take it ill, when the extraordinaries come to succour, and helpe to saue soules; and thinke you that this is a troubling of the Hierarchies. But you will say, haue not perhaps the ordinary Angels suf∣ficient power to doe what is fit. To which I make you this answere. Shall
wee give Law to God, and prescri to him what he shall doe? and sha we offer to change the unspeakeab designes of his holy Prouidence, an of his Charity? when the Apostle were so loaden, that they could no draw their net, being then so full fish, they saw another boate whicLuke 5. passed. Et annuerunt socijs qui era in alia naui, vt venirent, & adjuvare eos. So farre off are they from mis-l∣king, that others should put thei hands to their worke, that they in∣treate them to doe it with great in∣stance, and without that succo they might perhaps haue lost bot their paines, and their fish; and thi passage is applied to this argumen by some great personages, for th Apostles represent the Prelates and Pastors; and that little boate the Re∣gulars, who are called to succor and assist in the sauing of soules.
12. If men say, that the Hierar∣y is no other thing, then my Lords e Prelates, and the Parsons and urates, if that be so, it is certaine, at Religious men are not of it. If en say, that none are of the Hie∣rchy, but they who haue charge of soules, in that case, neither the Cardinalls nor Canons, nor Religi∣ous, nor Abbots, nor Chapters, nor a world of Ecclesiasticall persons, shalbe of it. But wee must consider whether in very deed, the nature of a Hierarchy consist in that: For St. Dennis, of whom all the World hath taken and learned, what be∣ongeth to a Hierarchy; and Saint homas after him, saith first, that Hierarchia est saier Principatus, &P. p. q. 108. 1. 1. multitudo ordinata sub vno principe. 2. Vna est Hierarchia hominum, & Angelorum sub vno principe Deo. 3 In diuinis personis est Ordo, sed non est Hierarchia; quia non est ibi
purgare, illuminare, & perficere,  quo consistit Hierarchia. 4. Non ess multitudo ordinata, sed confusa; si multitudine diuersi ordines non essen Vt ergó sit Hierarchia, debent e diuersi Ordines sub vnius Princip gubernatione. In this sence, all th which is in the Church beeing auow∣ed and addressed by the Pope, wh is the chiefe of this Ecclesiastica Hierarchy, and put in that pla which hath beene destined for it,  purge illuminate, and giue perfecti∣on, is so farre of, from being out o the Hierarchy, that it is a very profit∣able part thereof, and which, in a times, hath done admirable thing for the seruice of God, of the Church of Prelates, of Pastors, and for th good of soules. But if the word o Hierarchy be taken in the most rigo∣rous sence, and if it comprehend no∣thing else, but Prelates, and Pastor and them whom they imploy, (them∣selues
not being able in their owne ersons, to do al that which is fit) in his case, the Regulars will fall out in ood earnest, to bee of the Hierar∣hy, for they are imployed therein y Councells, by Popes, by a world f Prelates, yea, and by the greatest art of Pastors themselues; excep∣ing onely some few, who of late aue made noyse enough. The Kings of France themselues haue commaunded this to bee obser∣ued in their Dominions, in such sort, as that Saint Lewis layd a per∣petuall sentence of banishment out of his Kingdome, vpon that Doctor Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, who al∣readie had been condemned at Rome, in full Consistory, and whose booke was mis-liked, and torne, and yet worse vsed; that booke which he had composed against the Cordeliers, and the Iacobins, and wherein he serued himselfe of the same Arguments in
effect, in the strength whereof men make such a hoo-bub in thes dayes. 13. But you will say perhaps, tha Pope Anicetus and others, and th Councells also, and the Canons do take that for the Hierarchy, whic Christ our Lord did first send, name∣ly his Apostles, and then his Disci∣ples, by two and two, whom th Prelates and Pastors doe succeed But it is one thing, when they say that these latter succeede those for∣mer, and another thing it is to af∣firme, that none but they are in the Hierarchy of the Church: For what will you say, if other great Saint make it good, that you must rather take the Hierarchy by the Parable o the Vine-yard, which is the Church There indeede the first are my Lords the most reuerend Bishops; and they who follow after are the venerable Pa∣stors, and Parsons and Curates, but
that they who are sent at the ninth d eleuenth houres, are those Re∣lars who are designed to Preach, d receiue confessions, &c. as being me but towards the euening, but ho yet neuerthelesse shall at the end  the day bee passed for true labou∣rs, and shall also be well payd, and ith the same coyne of those others. hose eminent men, to whom God ue his spirit for the assistance of oses and Aaron, in their gouerne∣ent of the people of Israel, did ey trouble the Hierarchy? CongregaNum. 11. ihi septuaginta viros de senibus Isra∣, &c. Et auferam de spiritu tuo, tra∣m{que} eis, vt sustentent tecum onus po∣li. 14. Let us yet come closer, and y, that since it belongeth to the icar of Christ our Lord, to go∣erne this Hierarchy, and that hee  the head thereof (as that learned octor of the Sorbonne doth excel∣lentlyDe Monar∣chia.
prooue) let vs see the motiu which they aleadge, when they sen the Regulars to know, whether the haue troubled the Hierarchy, or els on the other side, whether they hau done it good, and most faithfull se∣uice. I might cite a hundred Bull but I will only choose three or fou but yet such as shalbe cleere, strong and which shall presse home; and wi haue great power vppon all the mindes, vpon whom truth and re∣son will haue power, as they are sure my Lords to haue vpon yours. Pope Gregory the ninth in the Bul Cum messis, whereby hee giueth di∣uerse Priuiledges to the Minorite F∣ers, and namely, in the administra of Sacraments, hath three motiue The first, Cum messis multa sit, oper rij verò pauci, &c. The second, Quo Ministerium vestrum diligentèr i∣plentes, vos operarios inconfusibile exhibetis. The third, Vt qui spirit
uitis, spiritu & ambuletis, de doctri∣ vestra & conuersatione, flores & uctus proueniant gratiores. Paul the third, in the Bull, Cum ter, whereby hee granterh many riuiledges to the society of Iesus, oth mention two motiues of that rant: The first, Ne gregi Dominico imarum cura de sit, & illum anti∣us serpens indefensum & inpraepara∣m inuadat. The second, attendentes d fructus vberes quos in domo Domi∣i hactenus produxistis, & producere on de sinitis vestrae Religione, integri∣ate, scientia, doctrina, moribus & ex∣erientia, &c. Pius Quintus, in the Bull, Et si Men∣icantium, whereby hee confirmes all riuiledges of the Mendicant Fryers ayth, Attendentes plerosque exve∣erabilibus fratribus nostris Archiepis∣opis, & Episcopis, qui Ordines Men∣icantium praecipuê, tanquam fructise∣os in agro domini palmites; & colere,
& adjuvare deberent, non solum exequi negligere, vecumetiam Con Tridentini decretis in pravum sens retoris, vos, & eorum quemlibit,  rijs afficere incommodis, & pertur¦tionibus, eorumque Privilegijs  modicum afferre gravamen conant (whereof hee recounteth diue proptereá volentes praemissis, ac similibus excessibus & gravamini ex nostri Pastoralis Officij debito pro¦dere. Attendentes etiam illos qui o¦diei, & aestus, tam in praedicatio¦bus, quam in caeteris spiritualib muneribus quotidiè sustinent, nis¦tiam aliquantum piè subleventur, fac¦fore, ut oprressi à suis officijs omni desistant, ne in posterum is aliquo inferatur gravamen, &c. omni & s¦gula Privilegia, &c. quomodo-lib concessa, &c. authoritate Apostolu tenore praesentium, perpetuò approb¦mus & confirmamus. Alexander the fourth, a long tim
before this, had the same motiue for he Cordeliers, in the Bull of Nimis, hereby hee protected them against he persecution of certaine Clarkes, nd sayth thus, Nimis iniqua vicis∣itudine largitori bonorum omnium re∣spondetur, dum ij qui de patrimonio Christi impinguati, luxuriant damna∣iliter, in eodem Christum patenter nfamulis suis non verentur, acsi fa∣tus sit impotens Dominum vltionum, &c. Cumquè non desint plerique tam Ecclesiarum Prelati, quam alij, qui aeca cupiditate traducti, propriae avi∣itati subtrahi reputantes, quicquid vobis fidelium pietas elargitur, quie∣em vestram multipliciter inquietant, contra vos molestiarum varias occasi∣ones exquirentes. Volunt namque &c. (where he recounteth al those wrongs which the sayd Cordeliers had recei∣ved of the sayd Clarkes.) Nè hujus modi gravamina vobis ab eisdem Pre∣latis, vel eorum subditis vlterius
inferantur, authoritate praesenti districtius inhibemus, &c. Gregorie the 14th. in his Bul, Ecclesi Catholicae, had also the same motiu for many Priviledges, which he gav or confirmed, to the Society of Iesu 15. If men desire to see generall Councells, for making an end of this proofe, they may be easily brought but you know them better then I, and therefore it would bee a superflu∣ous discourse; for you know (as I say) what the Councels of Viena, of La∣teran, and of Trent affirme. If therefore to haue shed so muc blood, for the maintayning of th Christian Faith, and of the Churc over the whole World, if to hau sweate blood and water. If  haue fought against Heresie and Errors, and Schisme if to hau couragiously defended the Catho∣lique Church, even to the last breath of life; if to haue Preached, writte so many bookes, laboured night and
day, both in Cities and Countries, hrough whole ages: to haue served he whole World, to haue obliged en millions of soules to haue sacrifi∣ed their life to the glory of God, nder the authority, and by the ommandement of so many Popes, and holy Prelates, even of this King∣dome of France: If this, I say, be to trouble the Hierarchy, if this bee a mortall sinne, if this be a Schisme, wee cannot indeede deny, but that by the space of so many Ages, the Regulars haue committed these dis∣orders; and that so many holy and wise Prelates, at whose feete they dyed, in labour under them, and for them, throughout their Dioceses, that these great Prelates, I say, haue committed a very grieuous fault. But so also on the other-side, if these proceedings doe merit any returne of friendship, if any kinde of sweete∣nesse, it seemes, that it were more
honourable for men to shewe some little good will to them, who desir to imploy their liues, and their la∣bours under the authority of my Lords the Prelates, to liue and dy at their feete for the glory of God and the good of soules, which ar very glad to finde themselues assisted and comforted by them, and doe ac∣cept of the little services which they can doe. 16. O how highly do I commend that good and gallant Pastor in Paris, who did so holily, and so ingeniously say as followeth. Let us doe better then the Regulars, and let us not busie our selues with crying out Hierarchy, Hierarchy: for infallibly, if wee doe better then they, wee shall conserue our Hierarchy, and wee shall neede to be in no feare least it diminish, or that wee shalbee entred into by a breach, or that it shall grow to bee dissipated. But till such time, as wee
see our selues in that condition, why shall wee not serue our selues of the holy labours of so many good ser∣vants of God; who are withall, of our owne flesh, and bone, and of our owne blood, and our brethren, and who might perhaps haue beene that which wee are, and perhaps better then wee: But for the loue of God, they would not accept it. If all the World heere had a heart, and a tongue like that of this worthy per∣sonage, the Gallican Church, would be a Heauen upon earth, but as soone as men permit the infernall Dragon to whisle there, and that he promise certaine divinities, and sublime great∣nesses, a thousand divisions, and a thousand sorts of miseries enter in, which God of his great goodnesse shall remooue if it pleaseth him, as I beseech him, with all the powers of my soule to doe. As for that, which one of the chiefe men of Paris
sayd, concerning proper interest, the offerings, the respects, the ho∣nour, the power, and such other things as these, I wilbee farre from objecting it, and so doubtlesse these things, would not be good for the Hierarchy, and sure, there is no such matter amongst them. Besides that, this is without the compasse of my designe, and I haue somewhat else to doe, then to touch those strings which sound not well, and it would never become me well to doe it, since it was so ill taken, at the hands of that great person, a Doctor of theGenebrard de Hierar∣chia. facultie of Paris, an Arch-bishop, and a man of so great reputation. I had rather make Saint Paul say this word, which issued out of an Apo∣stolicall, and Seraphicall heart. Noli frater cibo tuo perdere eum, pro quo Christus mortuus est. As if hee would say, alas doe not amuse your selues about your owne
commodities, nor about your owne greatnesse, doe not hinder the good nd comfort, and perhaps the salva∣ion of those soules, which are bathed n the blood of Christ our Lord. Though this should cost you some∣what, it will never cost you so much, as it cost him, who imployed even to the last droppe of his blood upon it. If the Regulars doe good to your flocke, will you bee offended with them for that? if they doe them no good, the World indeed is much deceived, which beleeues, and daily sees the contrary. Salus populi su∣prema lex esto. The Law of Lawes, is the safety of the people, and the assistance of soules, and it is evident∣ly seene, that both the people and God himselfe haue blessed, and as it were, canonized a million of inno∣cent actions of good Religious men, who haue assisted a World of per∣sons. If I durst descend deeply into
this matter, and shewe you the ne∣cessity, which the Church conceiues it selfe to haue of this succor, so fa of would it be, from tearing this Hie∣rarchy in peeces, that you would evidently see, that perhaps it would haue prooved a meere Anarchy, (a was sayd by a great Arch-bishop of France) if the goodnesse of God had not sent this helpe. But I will not enter upon this Discourse, nor giue any manner of offence to any, it sufficeth for me, to plead the cause of God, and of his servants, shew∣ing the innocency of their procee∣ding, and the purity of their inten∣tion.
THE THIRD REASON. That Religious and Priviledged men do abase the authority of my Lords, the Bishops, and become, as it were, insolent by reason of that power, which is imparted to them, by their Priviledges. THis is the source of all our great and most important difference. There is no∣thing so insupportable as contempt, specially when it growes upon any an from his inferiour; contempt, hether it be truely offered, or but magined, produceth most prejudi∣iall effects. If Regulars haue indeede ōmitted this sin, it is certainly worthy f blame, and intolerable; but so, if it e not true, without doubt they who ould needs suggest this to our Lords he Prelates, and perswade them to
beleeue it, hath beene a little in th wrong; and to omit the speaking  any thing which may offend them,  will onely say, that their zeale, ha had a little more of the smoake, the of the fire. At the worst hand, the is no mischiefe without a remedy and when the objection were tru men should rather apply a plaist with some lenity, then teare off th arme, which hath some little hurt  it; and which afterward might do good seruice, being cured, and rest∣red to former health. 2. But I maintaine, that this is  meere, and most ougly slander, an I hope, that, by the helpe of God I shall make the matter so cleare, th no man of a good minde, wilbee ¦ble to refuse me his beleefe, nor eu contradict me with reason. There hath not beene any tim when the Diuell hath not endeauor to put jealousie into the mindes
the greatest, and to make Religious en, who are his capitall, and irre∣onciliable enemies, to be suspected. Who would euer haue beleeved, that n France there could haue bin found ny Prelate, whom Saint Bernard ight put into jealousie and paine? And yet the while, Iosilinus the Bi∣hop of Soissons wrote backe to himEp. 213.  terrible letter, whereof the title was this. Bernardo Abbati salutem n Domino, & non spiritum blasphe∣iae. The poore Abbot, being stro∣en with this word, as if it had beene  pointed stone, or a bolt of thun∣er, made this answere. Minimè uidem ego spiritum blasphemiae habere e arbitror, &c. Et quoniam vt video, ondum quieuit indign tio vestra, qua orsian adversus Ecclesiae conculcato∣es justius incanduisset, etiam nobis di∣o, Schismaticos vos, aut fomitem esse candali, nec dixi, nec scripsi, nec cre∣idi, & dico securus. In the meane
time, I beleeue that the occasion which this most reverend Bisho tooke, was from this, that th Churches of Paris, of Rimes, o Chaalons, and of Bourges, were no so perfect, and that the Councell o King Lewis the 8th. did seeme to carr that King to consent that Saint Ber∣nard might assist those Churches, an the Prelates; now this holy Abbot being full of the spirit of Charitie wrote thus to my Lord of Soessom who was of the Councell. Miru valdé, si contra vestrum consilium h fiunt; mirum magis & malum, si ve∣stro consilio fiunt; etenim consulere ta∣lia, manifeste Schisma fabricare est Deo resistere, Ecclesiam ancillare, & novam in servitutem redigere ecclesi∣asticam libertatem. Now the ene∣mies of Saint Bernard did blow up this discourse, and cast into the mind of the good Bishop so many shadows and false rumors, that in fine, hee
broke out, and called S. Bernard a blas∣phemer, and a man possessed with the maligne spirit of blasphemy, before those clouds could be well dispersed. This caused much scandall in France, and God was greatly offended there∣by; but in the end, all was accom∣modated, and men came to see cleare∣ly, that it was but a craft of Lucifer who desired to make those two An∣gels, fight with one another, and to make the Hierarchies heere on earth revolt, as hee had made those of Heaven rebell before. 3. It hath often arrived in the Church, that sometimes good Pre∣lates should heate, and band them∣selues against the Regulars, and ever with very good pretexts, but time, patience, truth, and God haue clea∣red all, and turned the storme into calme. Sometimes the Iacobins haue thoght they should haue bin swallow∣ed up; somtimes the Cordeliers; some∣times the other mendicant Religious,
sometimes the Iesuites, and some∣times the Order it selfe of Saint Be∣net; as beeing too powerfull, and having for too long a time, disposed of the Keies of St. Peter. But yet certainly, it would be good to see the plat-forme of this mighty building; and to know uppon what this great complaint is grounded, which is the spring and force of o∣ther complaints: for is it perhaps, that Religious men haue a desire to carry away the Miters and Crosiers of my Lords the Bishops? Is it be∣cause they debate about hauing the upper end of the board, and to be seated in the places of most honour? Is it, that they Preach whether they will or no, or in their Dioceses; and that they make themselues little Mo∣narches in the Empire of others? Doth any one of them heare Con∣fessions without their consent, or at least, of their Vicars generall, accor∣ding
to the Councell of Trent? Is it perhaps, that they haue more cre∣dit and beleefe, amongst the people, more auditors at their Sermons, and after a sort, more power in apparance then many others? Deere God, what is the matter, and how shall men be able to behaue themselues? If these Religious be vulgar persons, men dis∣pise them: If there bee never so little in them which is more eminent, men enter into jealousies, and say. There is no remedy, but these men must be humbled. In fine, what is that which they doe whereby indeede the great power of the Prelates of the Church, is abased? Is it, that they haue too many Priviledges, and too great au∣thority to absolue sinnes? Is it that they take Confessions within fifteene dayes of Easter, and Minister the Communion excepting onely vpon Easter day, which the Canons, and the Councells haue excepted? Is it
that men visite not the Blessed Sacra∣ment in their Churches, and that men enter not upon taking conziance of their Regularity? Is it, that they are not entirely and without excepti∣on dependant upon my Lords the Bi∣shops in all and every thing that can be thought of? Is it, that they doe insolently abuse the favours, and Pri∣viledges, which the See Apostolike hath given them? or else, is it because, they doe not forsake the use of their Priviledges vppon the least word of their Bishop, even when he growes stiffe without reason against such a power, as is established by God? I doe even draw my wits dry, to say all that which I can bring to memo∣ry, for the finding of the mother∣roote, from which all these thornes grow and sprout; and these sharpe nestes, which pricke, so many hearts at this day, and teare the union of the Church, making division a∣mongst
the Children of God, and (which is worst) both parties con∣ceiue themselues to haue reason; per∣haps whosoever bee deceived, hee is deceived without any fault of his, but et in fine, he is deceiued. 4. During the warres betweene France, and the Dukes of Burgundie, there chanced a certaine thing, which may well serue my turne. The men of Lewis the 11. going foorth one mor∣ning before day, to make some disco∣very in the Country, saw an incre∣dible number of reedes growing out of a marrish ground. They firmely beleeved that it was some troupes of light horse, who had a minde to make some enterprize upon the Kings Armie. Others thought, that they were Lanciers, who came to make a roade for some surprise. There were never men more afraid. They all at full gallop retired themselues into the grosse of their Army, they put the
Campe into Alarme, and thrust feare into the most valiant heares of the French Army, expecting instantly some shrewd skirmish. As soone a the twy-light stroke through th night, and beganne to open the day, and that the morning Starre, had al∣ready disclosed a little light, me saw that this was nothing but empty Canes and Reedes, which waved a the discretion of the wind; so as tha horrible feare was instantly changed into a publike laughter, and fell by way of confusion upon those childis scoutes, for having made so foolis and so frivolous a report. They who loue not Religious men and who goe tossing up and downe to discover some little passage, some doubtfull Canon of some Provinciall Synod, and indeede, some I kno not what; beeing all wrapped up ey∣ther in the night of passion, or of pro∣per interest, doe represent the Orders
of Religious men, as of Armies all camped, and resolved to assault nd subdue the authority of my ords the Prelates. They tell them ales without ceasing, and make most range reports, they cast so many eares into their mindes, and paint ut the businesse so hideously, they al∣eadge so many cases hapned, and not apned too, they tickle them so de∣ightfully about the delicate point of their authority, and the power of the Crosier, that they shake even such, as are most immoveable. Who would not beleeve men so learned, and who make profession of so much zeale, and iety, and who haue done nothing but cry out aboue these thirty yeares? But yet in truth, if wee shall behold the beame of that rising Sunne of truth, and looke on them a little neere at hand, it wilbe found, that these armed men be but reedes, and people voyd of all that interest and
ambition, which is layd to their charge, and who of all things are thinking least of contending with that lawfull authoritie, which God hath given to my Lords the Bishops, and to the Pastors of the Church. 5. Let us beginne in the name of God to see, and weigh this truth which is of so much importance. I the Religious doe nothing without reason, without right, without auow, without authority, nay (I will say more) without being obliged in con∣science, is there any man of common sence, who can blame them for it? For if they attempt any thing beyond this, there is indeede no excuse, nor any cloake which can cover them, & they must be reduced into tearmes of reason. But is it not fit, that every man defend his right, and that every one enjoy what is his owne, and which is justly acquired by him? There are now so many ages, since Regulars are in possession of their pri∣viledges,
and shall they suffer them o bee lost and abolished by a mor∣ings worke? Priviledges well giuen, ery authenticall, granted by so ma∣y, and so holy Popes, admitted by o many holy Prelates through out e Christian world; authorised by ur Kings, recorded or permitted by so any Soveraigne Courts of justice; btayned by the sweate of so many rowes, by the effusion of so much lood, by meanes of so long, so reat, so holy labours, of so many, and o worthy personages, the very Suns f their several ages, must all this, I say, ee suffered to perish by a mornings orke? And al this upon what reason?  will not name it, but I rather choose o beseech you to weigh it well in the ght of God, and in the scales of the anctuarie. 6. But there is much more then his, which is, that the holy Canons orbid in tearmes expresse, worthy to e well observed, and shew that Re∣gulars
cannot commit this unwo∣thinesse, without hurting their co∣science, and (that which greatly i∣ports) without doing much wron both to the Pope, and to the Churc Let us heare the Canon, and th Pope. Cum et si sponte volueris, de ∣reL. 1. Dec. Greg. tit. 43 de arbitris. c. 5. tamen nequiveris sine licentia Ro Pont. renuneiare Priuilegijs, vel Ind gentijs libertatis, quae Monasterium ¦lud indicant ad jus, & proprietat Romanae Ecclesiae pertinere. Such  are the houses of the Order of Sai Francis, and the other Mendican Pope Gregory speaking to an Abbo who desired to forgoe all his Priv∣ledges at the instance of the Bisho (who prest him much) makes hi know his fault, and tels him, that h was doing that, which is aboue  power, and contrary to his consc∣ence, and contrary to the authori of the See Apostolike, and again the sacred and setled stile of th
Church. The Lawes of the Church, sse much further then this, for ey declare that if Regulars should nounce all their Priviledges, all that ould stand for nothing, and bee of o value. Nay yet further, they are ommaunded under paine of excom∣unication, not to alienate any ing of their temporals, and much sle of their spirituals: So that it is ot now the Religious whom men ppose, but the Pope, the See Apo∣olike, the Church, and they oppose ntiquitie. Let us heare the wordes. nnocent the third, to the Arch-bi∣hopC. si diligen∣ti de for competenti. of Piso. Asseruisti te usque ad aec tempora tenuisse, quod licitum sit erico renunciare saltem in tempora bus causis juri suo, &c. immemor con∣itutionis, quae cavetur pacto privato∣um, juri publico minime derogari. Cum gitur hoc jus in Milevitensi, & Car∣haginensi Concilijs sit specialiter pro∣mulgatum, nè Clerici Clericos, relicto
suo Pontifice, ad judicia publica p∣trahunt, alioqui causam perdant, & communione habeantur extranei, & manifeste patet, quod non solum invi∣sed etiam voluntarij pacisci non po∣sunt, ut saecularia judicia subeant; cu non sit beneficium hoc personale, cui nunciare valeat, sed potiús toti Col¦gio Ecclesiastico publicé sit indultu cui privatorum pactio derogare non p¦test. Quod habet locum à fortiori Reg. 99. om. 1. 9. 36. act. 1. Regularibus (saith Emanuel Rodericu quia clerici habent liberam volun∣tem, Regulares verò non habent vell nec nolle; ideo non potest praejudicare ¦rum consensus in judicem non suu. All this Article deserues to bee rea as also the Article 2. of the questio 27. where hee bringeth many proh∣bitions to alienate the goods  Churches and Monasteries, eue under the paine of Excommunicat∣on. That of Paul the second, in the extravagant Ambitiosae is express
It is a thing worthy of remarke, hich a great Prelate sayd one day in n assembly of Prelates, that this af∣aire went full to iustle vpon the ope, and that the bottome of the usinesse tended but to some perni∣ious diuision and schisme. I would name him for honors sake, ere it not, that he is still liuing, and hat perhaps he would not wish to be ited vpon this occasion. If the Popes, who haue giuen hem these Privileges, shall take them way againe, there is no more to be one, but to bow downe the head, to bey with humility, and to be con∣ent. But that the Regulars should egrade themselues, that they should ffend the See Apostolick, that they hould doe wrong to millions of ules, that they should renounce the uours imparted to them by Kings, his counsaile cannot be fitly giuen hem, especially when a man con∣siders
to what this businesse tende and the motiues whereby God seet that men are drawne, and the intere which the Church hath herein, an the saluation of soules, and in fin that they are excommunicated,  they do it of themselues. 7. But this goeth yet further, fo they who call in question the force  Priviledges granted by Popes, gro to shake whole Kingdomes, Chap¦ters, Commonalties, and they ouer¦turne the peace of the Church. An in fine, for what cause, and for wh is the question? Alas, he who foun into the bottome of this business cannot chuse but haue his hart tran∣perst. But you will say, it is not the Pr∣viledge which we question; but r¦ther the misuse, and intollerable ¦buse which growes thereby. I am not such a Sot, as that I w defend and Canonize an abuse, or y
deny, that some abuse may slide in; or that some indiscreet persons may ot be found. The world was neuer ithout such, nor euer will be, vn∣esse God worke a miracle. But be ou pleased, to let the abuses and ust complaints which you haue to ake, be set downe, and infallibly hey shall be remedied, without noise, ithout dispute, and without scan∣all. Might I be so bold, as to aske hether they who giue you these im∣ressions against vs, be impeccable or o? whether they commit any aults? whether euer they fall into ny indiscretion? If they confesse ot themselues like other men? If hen you shall haue taken all the eligious away; they of whom you eane to serue your selues, shall not rop downe from heauen, and be onfirmed in grace, without so much s tripping at any time? whether hey and you shall neuer be in any
difference with one another, notwith∣standing rhat Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, had disputes betweene them∣selues; and two Angels are found in Daniel to haue fought with one ano∣ther more then twenty dayes? Haue you no feare my Lords of the pas∣sage of that old Roman, ExurgenTacit; magis alij homines, quam alij mores; and that other, Refodeo Antigonum; and can you ever hope to meete with a whole commonalty, yea or even with any one single man, in whom in fine, you finde nothing to be wished otherwaies, and who may commit some indiscretion? doe you judge of a whole bodie, by some one part, which is out of joynt; and of a whole Order, by one indiscreete man, o for some simple thing which perhaps hee may haue done without malice, and with great innocency? Di Christ our Lord excommunicate all his Apostles, because one of theIohn 6.
was a Divell? For so hee was named by Christ himselfe. And doe you be∣leeue, that of all those Oblati of St. Charles, of whom you spoake but now, no one did ever commit any fault? If this be so, shewe us our abuses; if wee give you not contentment, if wee alleadge not reasons which are to be of full weight, and worthy of beeing receiued; if wee doe nto pro∣duce as many Authenticall Bulls as can be desired; wee shall at least bee ready to submit our selues to all kinde of satisfaction, and to liue and dye at your feete, and under those just lawes which you shalbee pleased to pre∣scribe. But first, we must haue three words, and they are these. To Vnderstand, to Consider, and to Iudge. And to keepe your selues from prejudging, and to make sup∣position of nothing, which may not be solidly averred, and that after the
parties be heard by word of mouth, for otherwise there will never bee a ende. Onely you wilbee pleased to consider things maturely, for you cannot condemne us without fault, but by condemning Popes, Coun∣cels, Kings, Cardinalls, and the grea∣ter part of my Lords the Prelates of France, your Predecessours, whom you arraigne in arraigning us. 8. Three great Arch-bishops, all yet aliue, and the chiefe of this King∣dome, haue told mee more the once, that they haue never derived more honour, and service from any, then from Religious men. A hundred Bishops haue sayd as much, and I will make it good, that there is no man, who serveth and honoreth my Lords the Prelates, with a better heart, and with lesse interest, then good Religious men doe, nor who would imploy their liues, and their heads more frankly for the service of
God, and of my Lords the Bishops, f there were neede. Never (sayth S. ugustine) did I see better people, hen those who persever in Religious rders, and neuer worse, then those ho depart from thence. Serue your lues of the former, and leaue the tter, since you haue so great assu∣nce from so great a Bishop, for ey being so good, how can they be  wicked, as to disesteeme the Pre∣tes, whom all the world doth e∣eeme so much. If Religious men doe wel, why do ou put your selues in paine? If they o ill, command their Superiours to ke order with them: and if they do t content you with reasons which e full of life and strength; and in e, if they doe not their duty, but at they tollerate others faults, vse u that power, which God and the ouncell giueth you, and when this albe done, where is that contemptConc. . Sess. 21. .
and diminution of your authorities 9. If you find that it be a charg of conscience to you, that they tak Confessions at Easter, I say, if it b but for that, I wil easily deliver you the scruple; for I will shew you by a by, that there is no conscience  this, I say, none at all, and perhap there is more obligation of consc∣ence, not to hinder it, as I shall sh in the due place. It is said in divi∣ty, that if a man hath two or thr good Authors for an opinion,  may follow it with a good cons∣ence, and without any feare at  Now they will alledge you m then twelue Popes, more then a h∣dreth Prelats, more then two hun∣dreth Authors, to shew; that  both may, and ought to be done good conscience; and that perh otherwise, one may do more  then good to soules. And theref by this occasion, nothing at all of
authority of my Lords the Prelates do perish, nor of the right of the Pa∣stors, and Parsons, and Curats, nor euen of their profit. And wherein is then the contempt? 10. But some man preacheth too licentiously, and words fall imperti∣nently from him to the scandall of Bishops. This indeede, is without all excuse, stoppe you therefore his mouth, take his Pulpit from him, get his Superiour to send him from thence; let his indiscreet zeale be pu∣nished: there is nothing so reaso∣nable as this. For if there be any thing in Prelats to be wished other∣wise, it is not in publicke that we must proclaime it, and so begin to mangle the reputation of my Lords the Prelats. Their name, and their life also ought to be as the Sunne, which is euer crowned with beames and glory, and a man must neuer be so aduenturous, as to interpose the
Moone of any passion, or indiscre∣tion, to eclipse these faire lights of the world. It is not euery bodies cas to say as Saint Bernard did long a∣goe. Clauditis nobis ora, vtinam &Ep. 42. ad Hon. Archl. oculos claudatis, &c. Some one will haue giuen himselfe leaue, and will haue spoken indiscreetly, and fifty others will haue esteemed it to bee their tryumph to speake well of you. Alas, must so many honest men suffer for the indiscretion of some one, and must the head be cut off, because the little toe is not right. 11. But perhaps you would faine see, if the Blessed Sacrament bee well and decently conserved and kept; i there be nothing in it but that, doe but vouchsafe one day to goe thither to say Masse, and giue the Commu∣nion, and you shall see all at your case; if it be upon some other motiue that serues for the glory of God, since Popes, Councels, Canons, Custome,
and possession do so oppose it. Good God, how many great and holy Pre∣ates who are gone before you, did eaue the world as they found it. They ived, and suffered others to liue in eace: they were in a manner adored y the people; they left behind them  memory so sweete, and full of be∣ediction. What is this which hath rrived since that time, that the Hea∣en and the earth must be thus revol∣ed? Many great Prelates haue pro∣eeded so farre, as to say, that if they ere not assisted by Religious men, hey would infallibly leaue both their Miter, and their Crosier: A Bishop∣ricke beeing such an Office, and harge, that euen an Angell would ardly beare it without great feare, as he Councell saith. When any man is so bold as to inde fault with any thing concerning he power which our most Christian ings, and the Gallican Church
enjoy; wee are wont to answere, th because they haue so infinitly oblige the See Apostolike, and for that t French-men haue shedde so muc blood in defence of the Church, the haue very well deserved these fauo and are in a most just possession ther∣of, and that men ought not quest∣on them. And so my Lords, gi mee leaue to tell you, after the sam manner, that the ancient Religiou men haue endeavored to serue the V∣niversall Church, and in particular this most Christian Church of Fran with so great fidelity, so much l∣bour, so much blood, and the loss of so many liues, that Popes an Kings haue thought it fit to acknow∣ledge their good and acceptable ser∣vices by imparting some favours an priviledges to them; you neede bu reade our Annals of France, wher you shall see that which I dare no say, and which modestie also will no
permit mee to expresse. 12. It is your greatnes, my Lords, to haue men at your feete, who are sometimes so great, as that they may seeme to obscure others. Alex∣ander the great sayd, that his great∣nesse consisted in that all his souldiers were Alexanders. Christ our Lord affirmed, that hee would haue his servants appeare to bee more then himselfe. Opera quae ego facio, & ipseIohn 14. faciet, & majara horum faciet. A King of Aegypt there was, who to shewe his greatnesse, made an Idoll, which all the World was to adore, of a Basen wherein hee washed his feete. What jealous apprehension can you haue of the greatnesse of Regulars; since notwithstanding that they were a hundred times greater then they are, yet still you see them prostrate at your feete whensoever you will. Are they to Preach? be∣hold they are at your feete. Must
they take holy Orders? behold they are at your feete. Must they haue po∣wer to heare Confessions in your Di∣oceses? Behold they are at your feet. Must they obtaine some extraordi∣nary favour, and haue leaue to ab∣solue from cases reserved? Behold they are at your feete. Doe they go to your Townes, or doe they depart from rhence? Behold they are still at your feete. Can any body feare af∣ter all this, that they who in effect are ever at your feete, may enter in parallel with you for greatnesse, and may haue designe to draw you downe, they who haue their heads at your feete? Alas, they make you affraid of them, who tremble when they are in your presence. 13. Would you permit mee to let a word or two fal from my mouth which yet I will not presse too farre? but yet it is good to call to minde, that all Regulars are not so little con∣siderable,
as that many of them be ot your owne flesh and blood, and escended of the same parents with our selues. Many of them might aue beene Arch-bishops, and Bi∣hops, and more then this? and some aue forsaken Miters, and Cardinals ats, to hide themselues vnder the oly humilitie of a religious life. If hey haue despised themselues for the oue of God; men must not inferre hereby, that they must be despica∣le to others. It is good for them, hat they are dispised, but it is not lwaies good for them, by whom hey are so dispised. Hee who reades well that Article of Saint Thomas, who saith, that piscopi sunt in statu perfectionis, and hat religious men are in via, doth row to wonder as soone as hee hath ead the whole bodie of that Article. ut let us pause here, for I haue pro∣ised that I will not plunge my selfe
too deepely into this matter. Th greatnesse of religious men is of th kinde, that they will ever esteem themselues to be very great whe their heads are at the feet of my Lord the Bishops. 14. A certayne great Docto of the Sorbonne, a deare friend  mine, and a man esteemed over a France for his pietie and learning, sai thus to me one day at Paris with th teares, after a sort, in his eyes. Ala to what passe are wee now arrived  France is full of Simoniacall and in¦cestuous persons, and of Libertin and Atheists, and yet the while o might thinke that men dispute of no∣thing but of precedences, of powers of great authority, and of castin religious men, and such as ser God, to the ground. And all th is done under a thousand faire app∣rances, as if the Church of God de∣pended upon knowing who shalbe
the most great, the most absolute, and e most redoubted; whilest yet in the eane time, Christ our Lord hath reached the direct contrary to us. ut now (sayth he) the worst is, that e youngest men are they who make ost noyse in this businesse, and ho are most full of this fervour. It reakes my heart to see, that in steed  labouring for the salvation of ules, such a coyle is kept for the ory of bodies, and for any little mbition of greatnesse. This is hat, as neere as I can remember, hich that great Personage sayd to e, who is yet full of health, and ull of vertue. And uppon that oc∣asion I alleadged this reason to him, hich seemed a very strong one: that  this were considerable in any coun∣ry of the World, it was so in France. ut I will leaue this for you to guesse , if it please you, I will only tell ou, that having imparted it to some
worthy prelates, they avowed to me that it was most true. As for that which concerneth Confession, and the rest of that kind it will fall more naturally into th next Chapter. And to ende thi Discourse, and to leaue your mout with a good relish, I will set befor2. Cor. 4. you, the Father of Bishops, and th shining Sunne of Arch-bishops. Th first of them sayth, Non enim nos∣met ipsos praedieamus, sed Iesum Chri∣stumChrisostome hom. 8. Dominum nostrum, nos autem ser∣uos vestros per Iesum. And the second: Quoniam acer∣rimum in ipsos bellum illi gerebant, at{que} in sidias undique ipsi struebant: Nam, inquit, adversum nos pugnatis, ac un potius adversum eum qui a nobis praedi∣catur? Neque enim nos ipsos praedica∣mus, nam ego servus sum, ego eorum etiam qui praedicationem excipiunt mi∣nister, operam omnem alteri navans  que ipsius gloriae causae quiduis facient.
Ita dum mihi bellum infers, ea qua illius sunt deijcis. And a little after. Vides nè a∣nimum ab omni gloriae studio purum: antum abest, inquit, ut eorum quae Domini sunt quicquam vsurpemus, ac obis arrogemus, ut etiam no sipsos prop∣er eum subijciamus. THE FOVRTH REASON. That Religious men forsake the Pa∣rishes, and so doe wrong to the Pastors and Parsons, and Curates of Churches, and consequently to Bishops. 1. ALL those former streames and torrents haue flowed out of this source, and all hose claps of thunder, and beames of lightning haue broken out of this Cloud: For (if the truth may be spo∣ken)
they are some of the Pastors and Parsons and Curates, who haue thun∣dered so ong, and so loud, that at length they haue light upon some of my Lords the Bishops. They haue brought upon the board before them, the abasement of Ecclesiasticall pow∣ers; the diminution of the authority of Ordinaries; they haue cited cer∣tayne little Canons of Provinciall Conncels; they haue founded forth with a loud voyce, this word of Pro∣prius Sacerdos; they haue made  mighty Emphasis uppon this other word, agnoscere vultum pecoris sui they presse hard upon the successio to the 72. Disciples, whom the represent; they deplore the solitude of their Parishes, and of their high Maisters, and they impure it to Re∣ligious men, who draw all to them∣selues; they represent to the World how miserably the Hierarchy of the Church is defeated, and they alleadge
a world of other inconveniences, without saying any one word touch∣ng their owne interest. And accor∣ding to this, wee must firmely, for∣sooth, beleeue, that it is not that which puts them on; but the interest of God, and the good of their flocke. And I am glad it is so, for if I were ncountred by their interest, and that  were to fight against that, in good arnest I would lay my weapons downe, for that (as is delivered by a man of a gallant wit of these dayes, in a booke which is currant in Paris) there is not a passage in Saint Au∣ustine, nor an argument how strong ever it may be, which is strong e∣ough against fiue hundred Crownes f good revenew by the yeare. 2. Supposing therefore that it is t the interest of God, and the ood of the Church, and the sal∣ation of soules, which thrusts em on: I will hope my Lords, that
I shall the more easily make you see that there is nothing to bee feared heerein of this kinde: I will not deny but that the comparison betweene them and the Disciples is fit, and that very holy personages haue very happily made it good. I will say moreover, that if it please you, wee will yet do more then they demaund; and wee will, if it please you and them, accord also that they are the second Apostles whom God sent af∣ter the first, Saint Paul, Saint Barn∣bas, and Saint Martiall and those o∣thers who were named Apostles by Iesus Christ. Wee will also accord to th which others say, that they are th Arch-angels of this Hierarchy, and you the Seraphins. I will hold  selfe to this. As much honour  pleaseth you, yea and more then y desire, for alas, wee can never gi too much: But yet when men wi
presse so hard upon that of the com∣parison of the 72. Disciples; I assure you my Lords, that the good Saint Vincentius, doth apply it so natural∣ly to Religious men of his Order, that you will esteeme it to square bet∣ter with them, then with you, or at least as well. 3. 1. Misit eos binos & binos. First this agreeth better to Religious men, who goe not but by two and two, then to others who are ever alone; and no man hath, or ought to haue any more then his cure. 2. Misit eos praedicare. Is not this the sacred Profession of the FryersLuke 10. Preachers, whom the See Aposto∣like hath qualified with this honoura∣ble name of Predicatores verbi Dei. 3. In omnem Ciuitatem & locum, See how this fits with Religious men, who haue the whole World for their Cloyster, and not for them, who are tyed to one Parish?
4. Nolite portare sacculum, neque peram, neque pecuniam in zonis, &c. This makes clearely for Religious men, but as for Pastors and Parsons and Curates, in truth it can hardly be applied to them. 5. Neque baculum, neque calceamen∣ta, &c. This is as cleare as the Sunne. 6. Curale infirmos, &c. It is wor∣king miracles whereof hee speakes; and then let us never speake more of this. 7. Ego mitto vos sicut oues in me∣diae luporum. You may well beleeue, that men seeke not greatly after such Benefices as these, and yet in the meane time, this is the highest ambi∣tion of holy Religious men, who many times are rather Martyres, then Confessors. In fine, you see that the comparison is so naturall, that a man may say it is euen made of purpose for religious men. But there is no∣thing
more easie then for good witts to finde out comparisons so naturall, and so likely, that more cannot bee desired. So that indeede to relye greatly upon this course either way, is to build upon a foundation not ve∣ry solid. And at the very most (as S. Thomas saith) they shalbe the first Dis∣ciples,Opusc. 15. c. 4. and the religious shalbe the second: for defacto, Christ our Lord did send men at severall times, the se∣cond after the first. 4. But it is yet worse, that men should put you upon an impossibility, and verily with ground little enough, by alleadging that passage which men chaunt out so much. Diligen∣tèrPro. 27. agnosce vultum pecoris tui, tuosqué greges considera. For they conclude uppon this, that resolutely things must so be done, that every one may confesse himselfe at least once in the yeare at his Parish; and that religious men must not take the Confessions of
any, within the fifteene daies of Ea∣ster. Giue your selues, I beseech you, my Lords, the patience to consider and weigh that well with all simpli∣city and candour, which I am about to say to you, and without the infu∣sion of any little drop of gall or pas∣sion: for that this word of Pastor of sheep, of Face, of Know, must needs be vnderstood of confession in a literal sence, this certainly cannot be said: Salomon had no thought thereof. There was not in that time, either Confession, or halfe Confession. And as for making a Prophecie thereof, that conceite would haue no garbe in it; especially concerning a thing impossible, or at least unprofitable, as I shall make you touch with your hands. The true literall sence of the place is this. The wise man speaketh indeede of sheepe, and it is as much as if hee had sayd: Although thou be very rich, yet haue thou care of little
things; such as sheepe are. Non enim (sayth hee) habebis jugiter potestatem:Rup. Gloss. Greg. Ian∣sen. For perhaps though thou bee rich to day, thou mayest bee poore to mor∣row, and haue neede of small helpes. A little lower I will giue one or two litterall sences, which carry propor∣tion to this. But one good Author will be found, who maketh this pas∣sage say litterally, that which men pretend against Priviledged persons. And you see well, that following a litterall sence, there is no colour to understand it of Confession. More colour would that haue, which that Dutch-man sayd, prooving that a man was not to confesse but onely to God, and bringing in David for ha∣ving sayd, Consitemini Domino quo∣niam bonus. And much more colourPsal. 105. had they who sayd, that all the World might confesse it selfe (at least in case of necessity) to all the World; Saint Iames having sayd in so expresseIames 3.
wordes, Consitemini alterutrum pec∣cata vestra. But all this is worth no∣thing, and would but make this Di∣vine Sacrament ridiculous, and in ef∣fect of no use at all. 5. But now though wee put the case, that this passage may serue for this purpose, yet shall it bee either impossible to be practised, or in ef∣fect without any profit at all. For Saint Peter is a Pastour, if ever there were any in the world, and Pope, and the Bishop, and Parson. This sheep is the sonne and subject of the Church. Let us not speake yet of the Con∣science, but onely of the Counte∣nance, Cognosce vultum pecoris tui. Is there any Parson or Curate in Pa∣ris, who knoweth the face of all his parishioners which are daily changed. Is there any Bishop that presumes to say that he knowes the face of all who are in his Dioceses? (For that the Pope should know all Christians, is
a most ridiculous thing.) Cardinall ellarmine of holy memory, was often heard to say to the most illustrious Cardinall of Roche-foveault, Monsig∣nore, veramente cisono troppo Christi∣ani al mondo. I assure you, saith he, that I am opprest with resort of men, and with visites; and I must needes a∣vow to you, that mee thinkes there are to many Christians in the world. For what meanes can a man haue to know, to serue, and to content them all? And yet neverthelesse this man was no more then an Arch-bishop, and did but speake of meere visites. And now doe but imagine whe∣ther a great Arch-bishop can know the face of all his sheepe, and yet if hee could, to what would that serue for the good of their soules? If now you will take these wordes, to know the face of your sheepe, for the condition and state of the heart, and of the conscience, this is yet far
worse: For would you haue the Pope confesse all the Christians in the World, or the Bishop all the multi∣tudes of his people, or the Pastors and Curates all their Parishoners? Though they had a hundred heades a peece, they were not able to doe it, and if men were forced to undergoe this burthen, no man living would ei∣ther be a Parson or a Bishop, or a Pope. 6. But let us put the case that all this could bee done, for what yet I beseech you would it serue? For that which a man knoweth in Confession, is just as much if hee knew it not at all, and all Lawes and rights both divine and humane, doe forbid the Confessarius to violate the secret of Confession. And Clement the 8th. hath ex∣presly forbidden the Superiours of Religious men to take the Confessi∣ons of their sheepe or subjects; and
that yet, if they should take them, they may not without Sacriledge serue themselues of that knowledge which grew to them by way of Con∣fession. And now what kinde of knowledge is that which serues for nothing? Would the Holy Ghost oblige us to haue such a knowledge of our sheepe as whereof it should forbid us to make any use at all: And who would ever confesse himselfe to you, if hee beleeved that you would ever serue your selfe of the knowledg of what hee told you? The most lear∣ned Doctors themselues, and they al∣so of the Sorbonne, teach that if the Penitent did assuredly beleeue that his Confessarius would reveale hisS. Tho. in 4. d. 17. q: 3. art. 3: major. ibid. q. 5. Confession, hee should not be obli∣ged to confesse to him; for what then would this precept serue of knowing the face of the Sheepe? And I aske you, if of themselues they would willingly go to confesse to a man, who
they beleeved would serue themselues of the knowledge of their sinnes for their owne turne? 7. What then is the meaning of these words to know their sheepe? Is it to ordayne some man to take their Confessions by and under your au∣thority? Even in conscience doe you beleeue that this is to know? In some Parish of Paris there bee many thou∣sands of soules, and more then a hundred men who wil haue beene in∣abled to take confessions. What knowledge will the Parson or Curate haue obtained of his sheep for al that? These good men who were inabled to take confessions, will haue spent themselues euen to death with labou∣ring in it the whole day, and wil haue gotten some cruell head-ache by it, will not remember the thousand part of that which men haue confessed to them, and for what then will it serue their turne, and what knowledge
will the Parson or Vicar draw from thence? will they goe tell him what hath beene Confessed to them? they will be farre from any such thought, and though they would, they cannot. Besides, the Penitent is not bound to tell his name, nor who he is. And besides, if he should declare it vntru∣ly,S. Tho. o∣pus. 15. c. 4. how shall he be conuinced there∣in? If hee Confesse himselfe eight dayes before, and doe but reconcile himselfe on Easter day, how will you know the face of that sheepe? If hee haue no mortall sinne in his soule, and that he will not then Confesse himselfe at all, how will you still come to knowe him? I assure you that when I found the bottome of this businesse, I find reason to be a∣mazed, that such a noyse is made a∣bout such a passage; and which signi∣fieth in effect nothing lesse then that which is giuen out. 8. For if to know, bee to depute
some one who may know; O then, all is lost for them. For if the Pope, and if the Bishop can appoint whom hee lists for that purpose as well or better then the Parson or Vicar, behold then the gate is open for all Religious men, and the cause is gained. For to say, that the Parson may do it, and that neither the Bishop, nor the Par∣son of Parsons, the Father of Bishops, the Vicar of Iesus Christ may not do it, this is cleerely against common sence, against more then twenty Popes, against the swift current of the Church, against two Generall Councels at the least, and against a hundred Doctors of great reputati∣on. And when a man should say that the Pastor at the Communion knoweth the face of his sheepe; and that the Canons therefore ordaine, that they onely should minister the Communion to them, and that they do thereby sufficiently comply with
the sayd passage, Cognosce vultum,S. Tho. opus. 15. c. 4. &c. what would they be able to al∣ledge against it, which might sub∣sist. For one Doctor whom they shall produce, we will produce twen∣ty, and it is well enough knowne, that the true literall sence of these words doth import no more, but that Princes should bee true Pastors of their people; or house-keepers of their family, and domestickes: and at the most it teacheth them, that the way to make a family great, is to haue great flockes of sheepe, which is the most harmelesse meanes of growing very rich, and that very soone. As for the rest, they are but morall sen∣ses, and good wits will draw forth as many of them as they list, and they may serue for the instruction of mans life. But that this should import a Commandement touching Confes∣sions, and Confessions at Easter, and be a text of so much aduantage for
Pastors; verily that I may not say any thing which sauoureth neuer so little of sharpenesse, it doth much amaze such men as are of good vnderstan∣ding, and voide of interest. 9. To say, that he should knowe them, that so he may conduct them, as is fit, this indeede were to be wish∣ed, but what conduct will you be able to giue a man, who may come to you in a presse of people, at eleauen of the clocke vpon Easter day in the mor∣ning, and whom afterward you shall not see in a twelue moneth, and per∣aduenture neuer more, for hee may change his parish. And will you be able to remember at the ende of a yeere, what he sayd to you the yeere before. But let vs here make a stop, for we haue walked too long vpon a weake planke, and vpon a passage which deserueth so little considera∣tion. 10. The great passage, whereof
men serue themselues, is the Chanter, Omnis uiriusque sexus, of Innocent he the third, in the Councell of Late∣ran, and Props Saeceraos, and the Glosse also, which doth expresly say, that a man must confesse himselfe to his proper Priest, or must haue leae of him to do otherwise. For as much as it necessary that hee confesse him∣selfe to his owne Pastor or Vicar, at the least at Easter, or else that we o∣uerturne all Ecclesiasticall Hierar∣chy. My Lords most reuerend and most illustrious, I conjure you to renew here your attentions, and your good affections, for you are greatly inte∣ressed in what I shall say. As soone as the Parsons or Curates should haue proued (if they were able) that this is not to be vnderstood of the Pope, ust so soone would you find, that by a stronger reason, they would maintaine, that it were also not to be
vnderstood of you, nor should it be permitted to you any longer to place Paenitentiaries in the Churches of allThis re∣lates to an Hospitall which was founded in Paris by S. Lewes. your Dioceses, to cause the publica∣tion of the Indulgences of the three hundreth blind men, as you are wont to do, nor yet the Iubilee in the next yeare, nor at any time afterward, by their saying a man must Confesse himselfe to his proper Priest, who is the Parson or Curate, or to them who shall be liked by him, and to no other: and it shall not be lawfull for you to allow any man to heare Con∣fessions in your Church, vnlesse it please them. Pretending, that in this they depend on none but God, hauing as much power within their parishes, as Bishops haue within their Dioceses, and as the Pope hath in Rome. And this is the language which secretly passeth amongst ma∣ny of them, who haue aimed at this marke this long time, and one of
them vpon my knowledge, hath ex∣pressed himselfe in cleere tearmes, that hee depended not vppon the Pope, nor vppon the Bishop, but vpon God alone. They will say as much of the Deanes of Chapters, who pretend to be the proper Priests of the Chapter, and as the Parsons or Vicars. They would say as much to my Lords the great Almoners of France, who are the Bishops for the Court, and you would bee put to more paines to iustifie and defend that, then the Regulars their Cause, by whom they beginne their batte∣ry, that so afterward they may also bring it in vpon you. Let vs see the force of the Canon, which they brig against you, and against us, but let vs see it with a sweet and quiet mind, without sharpenesse, without preiu∣dice, and without all imaginable re∣spect of interest, for we cannot ho∣nour you too much, nor them after
you. 11. First, what is this Glosse, and who is the Authour thereof? It is Ioannes Andraeas a Doctor of Bolo∣nia, and Doctor Bernardus Botonius, borne at Parma, and a Canon of Bolonia, who glossed the Decretals, and seemed to say, That Regulars cannot heare Confessions without li∣cence giuen by the proper Pastour, in vertue of these Priviledges. For o∣therwise they should bee equall to Parsons and Vicars. Let vs see their very words vpon the Canon, Pro∣prio Sae doti; sed ecce si Praeditatores & fratres Minores, vel alij Religiosi, non habentes populum, habent Privi∣legium vt alienos Parochianos possint recipere ad paenitentiam, nunquid suf∣ficit Priuilegium, vt Parochianum al∣terius possint recipere ad paenitentiam sine licentia proprij Sacerdotis? Dicat quod non; privilegium enim aequipa∣rat cos illis, qui à populo sunt electi,
velillis, qui ab Episcopis populo praefi∣ciuntur, & dat eis solam executionem, & ita necessaria est adhuc licentia Pro∣prij Sacerdotis. To this honest man of Bolonia, who yet is no man of great moment, and to this reason of his which is poore enough, I will oppose two great men of the same place. One is Gregory the thirteenth, and the other the Cardinall Paleotta, Arch-bishop of Bolonia, whereof the one by most expresse Buls, the other by the practise of his Dioces, haue disauowed this Glosse, and haue shewed, that men ought to make no account thereof. Whom now my Lords, would you rather beleeue, either this petty Canon, or else the Pope and the Cardinall, who were both of them Doctors of Bolonia and Oracles of the Church? and who ex∣presly affirme that Proprius Sacerdos, are the Pope, the Bishop, and the Parson also. But now take heed, that
he who makes the Glosse, doe not specifie that the Proper Pastor must be onely the Parson or Curate, but that hee bee kept to the Generall tearme, and that it be the proper Priest who giueth this leaue. And who hath euer doubted hereof. And who hath euer beene so insolent, as that he durst presume to heare Con∣fessions without the leaue of Popes, Councels, or Bishops? But if on the other side, men haue this leaue, a∣gainst whom doe they mount this Canon, and this Glosse, which is so chanted out, and maketh so much noyse to so little purpose? But let vs put the case, that this Doctor doth vnderstand the Parson, or Vicar by this word of Propius Sacerdos. Is he the Oracle of the world, and is the opinion then of one simple Doctor, an article of faith. 12. Now I oppose against this man, twenty Popes at least, who
in expresse tearmes haue disavowed this Glosse, as namely Innocent the fourth, Alexander the fourth, Cle∣ment the fourth, Martin the fourth, Boniface the eight, Bennet the elea∣venth, Clement the fifth, Iohn the twenty two, Eugenius the fourth, Ni∣cholas the fifth, Sixtus the fourth, Leo the 10. Paul the third, Paul the fourth, Gregorie the thirteenth, Sixtus the fifth, Clement the eight, Paul the fifth, Gregorie the fifteenth. And now un∣der Pope Vrbanus, my Lords the Cardinals, who haue beene deputed at Rome for these affaires. For all these in expresse, precise, and formall tearmes shewe the direct contrary, as may bee seene by their severall Buls. I oppose also amongst others, two generall Councels, that of Vi∣enna in the yeare of our Lord 1311. where Phillip the Fayre, King of France, did assist to honour it with
his presence, and liked well of that which was there agreed; and that al∣so of Lateran, where the Popes, Cle∣ment the fifth, and Leo the 10. made expresse Bulls to declare the contra∣ry, and that the Mendicant Priests who were Religious, and should be aurhorized by the Pope, might ab∣solutely heare Confessions, preser∣ving ever charity, the authority of the ordinaries, and not diminishing at all their authority. And the same also doth the Councell of Trent affirme. Moreo∣ver I oppose at least fifty Doctors, greatly learned, and many of them canonized Saints, who doe clearely hold the contrary; and shewe that the Canon, Omnis vtriusque, cannot any way hinder Priviledged persons from hearing Confessions, without wrong to any. I oppose besides the consent of the whole World; for the generall pra∣ctise
of the Church hath beene such, as I haue said, in Italy, France, Ger∣many, Polonia, England, Spaine, Flan∣ders, in the East, in the West, in the South, and in the North, in the old and in the new World, and this without contradiction of others, then some very few persons, who haue alwayes beene condemned. I oppose yet further the authority of our Kings, and of the Soveraigne Courts of Iustice of the Realme, who haue received Regulars, and haue beene pleased that they should enjoy their priviledges, and haue main∣tayned them therein; and haue ser∣ved themselues of them, and with good successe. And one of our good and vertuous French-men, and aL. de Mo∣narch. 3. p. l. 2. c. 14. Ep. 150. learned Doctor of the Sorbon, hath greatly praysed this passage of Petrus Blesensis, Tunc salubriter disponitur vita Regum, cum Religiosorum horta∣menta sectantur, & ducuntur consilio
Sapientium. And in effect all Kings, and aboue them all, our owne, who are the very Sonnes of Kings, and the Flower de Luces of the World, haue proceeded thus. I oppose withall the judgement of many wise, learned, and most vertu∣ous Parsons and Vicars, who them∣selues haue exhorted their Parisho∣ners to confesse themselues to good Regulars, where they beleeue, that they may bee better assisted for the salvation of their soules. For every one of them sayth, and sayth truely, what doth this import me, so that my flocke be saved? for my part I am so much the more discharged, who haue, God helpe me, other worke enough to doe. May not I be secure in point of conscience, since the Pope, the Councells, so many Do∣ctors, so many Saints assure me that I am discharged? Besides that I ob∣serue that the best Parishoners, and
they who frequent my parish most, and who honour mee the most, are they who haue their soules best cul∣tivated with vertue; and make most account of devotion. Provided that I know they be well Confessed, this ought to serue my turne. Besides a great scruple which I haue uppon my soule, is the feare I am in, lest they whose Confessions I apply my selfe to heare, may perhaps not worthi∣ly acquit themselues, and the fault thereof fall uppon mee, and now I am delivered of this remorse when they goe to a place, where morrally I ought to bee assured that I am dis∣charged in the sight of God. Must then such a noyse be made for a little interest, or for a little ayre of honor, and for a certaine, I know not what, which is not worth the speaking of? Now I haue heard this very language spoken in Paris it selfe, and that by the principall Parsons and Vicars of
the Towne, men of vertue and ho∣nour, and who haue a very great care of the true Hierarchy of the Church, and to saue their sheepe, and to performe their Office exactly well. What shall I say to you of that noble Chancellour of the Vni∣versity of Paris? Though formerly hee had beene a little too stiffe and warme in the businesse, yet he advi∣sed himselfe better afterwards, and sayd, Status Curatorum debet cum bo∣naGers. 10. 4. de statib. Ecclesiastici c. 3. de sta∣tu curato∣rum consi∣derat. 7. gratia suscipere statum Privilegia∣torum, tanquam co-adjutores missos à Superioribus, &c. Yea, and when he is at the top of his zeale for the Par∣sons and Vicars, he doth very judi∣ciously adde, Salva sempter rationa∣bili authoritate Praelatorum. So that we must either condemne Popes and Kings, and so many holy Bishops for having shewed little judgement, and having had little reason in giving the power which they haue giuen
to Religious men, or else, sayth Ger∣son, the Parsons and Vicars haue beene much to blame in opposing themselues to them, who haue bin so well, so justifiably, and so ancient∣ly authorized and maintained in their priviledges. Finally, I oppose the Parliament of Paris, which is the Parliament of Peeres, and the paragon of par∣liaments, which hath made two so∣lemne decrees among the rest, the one in fauour of the Iacobins, in the yeare of our Lord 1505. and in the behalfe of one who was called Gally, and the other in fauour of the Corde∣liers, in the yeare 1531. and it went against a Councellor of the parlia∣ment it selfe, called Lovys du Bellay, parson and Arch-priest of Saint Se∣verine, and Arch-deacon of Paris, who pretended to make Religious men be hindered from hearing Con∣fessions, and was directly rejected
from his demaund, and Religious men maintayned in the use of their priviledges. This sufficeth, and I wil say nothing of other parliaments, which are wont to honour the De∣crees of the parliament of Paris, and not to contest them. 13. So that you see worlds, Popes, Councels, Kings, Prelates, the Pro∣uinciall Synods of Langres, 1452. of Paris 1557. of Aix 1585. of Chartres 1526. of Roan 1581. of Troyes and o∣thers, as that of Bordeaux 1582. of Bourges, 1584. and before all this, of Angers 1291. You see the decrees of Parliaments, the possession of fiue hundreth yeares, the vniuersall cu∣stome, Buls, Decrees, Sentences, Hi∣stories, Condemnations of Contra∣dictors, a whole troupe of Authors, the most wise Pastors and Vicars themselues, the common Dictamen of the Church, the incredible good which arriueth by it, you see, I say, all
this in fauour of Regulars on the one side, and on the other a petty Canon of Bolonia, who in fine is not indeede contrary to vs, though he be so in ap∣parance. 14. Rendring therefore to my Lords the Prelates that which their quality deserues, and their vertues require, that which the Councell of Trent ordaynes, that which use, right and custome haue made to passe in the nature of a Law, and hono∣ring parsons and Curates, and lo∣ving them with particular affection, and withall exhorting all devout men to doe honour to their parsons or Curates, to frequent their pari∣shes, to pay in all their rights, and yet notwithstanding hauing those so authentical priviledges in their hands and the possession of so many yeares; why doe men complaine so much of poore Religious men, who very of∣ten reape no other thing but much
paine and travaile? Oh, no man know∣eth what it is to be a good Confessari∣us, but such a man as is in a very or∣dinary exercise thereof: Alas, what a huge patience is needfull, what kinde of longanimity, what a condiscen∣ding, what a company of repetiti∣ons must bee endured, how many uncleannesses, what hazards, what a company of ill houres? Is there per∣haps so great pleasure in feeding up∣pon nothing but the sinnes of the people, and with Saint Peter to de∣voure Dragons, Vipers, and a milli∣on of bruite beasts, full of venoime? I doe rather thinke that men should haue pitty of such poore men, then enuy, and giue thankes to these poore Martyres and Confessours for their paines they suffer, rather then to ar∣raigne them thus, and make warre upon them. Some of my Lords the prelates, haue themselues beene willing to
heare Confessions, and they haue done it with great edification, but wee haue knowne of very few, who haue long continued in that course; so tough, so dangerous, and so great∣ly wearisome is that businesse. 15. As for us, if wee were to take our turne in pleading, certainely I would cite no other Canon then that of Omnis vtriusque sexus, with the Glosse of one of our Synodes of France. The Text sayth that a man must confesse himselfe to his Proper Priest, or else haue his leaue to Con∣fesse himselfe to another. Now, who is this Proper Priest, who may giue the leaue? Let us heare the Synode of Langres in the yeare of our Lord 1421. Ne remaneat aliqua haestitatio, quis proprius dicatur Sacerdos, decla∣ramus prout etiam jura & doctores de∣clarant, quod Proprius Sacerdos est Pa∣pa, ejus Legatus, Paenitentiarius, Dio∣cesanus, & Vicarius Generalis; & ille
cui cura suae Parochialis Ecclesiae est commissa. After this I beseech you what can more be sayd? 16. There resteth onely now this complaint, that parishes are forsa∣ken, and that consequently Priests studie not; that men goe not to their Sermons; that for spite they leaue all; that Religious men deuoure all, and that their Churches swell with people, whilest parishes are forsaken to the great contempt of the Hierarchy of the Church. That now few are found who will bee par∣sons or Vicars, especially in Villa∣ges; and therefore Bishops grow to finde much difficulty in furnishing their Dioceses; by meanes whereof all goes to ruine, and soules are damned, and yet Bishops in the meane time are as much obliged in the sight of God to haue care of their Dioceses; as the Pope hath of his, and of the Vniversall Church. Be∣sides,
that Priests finding them∣selues not to bee imployed, and that persons of quality goe to Con∣fesse themselues elsewhere, and that men make no great account of their Sermons, they spend not their time in studie; and not studing, they giue themselues to idlenesse, and from idlenesse growes the rest, in such sort, that Regulars are the cause of these mischiefes, and that secular priests grow to bee irregular, and it belongeth to Bishops to redresse these things, who groane in the meane time under this burthen, and know not how to apply good and ef∣fectuall remedies. 17. Behold here great store of crimes hudled vp one vpon another, and behold a grieuous mortall sinne, whereof (by mischance) the Regulars meane not to confesse themselues to be guilty. And the reason is, be∣cause they knowe it not, and they
found themselues vpon this, that non entis proprié non est scientia. And they make good that they are not the cause of these mischiefes in the strength of these maximes of Lawe, which is receiued throughout the whole world. Qui vtitur iure suo, ne∣mini facit iniuriam. For what? shall it not be lawfull for me to doe well, for feare least others do ill for spight? What will you say if God haue sent Religious men into the world, as Re∣natus Benedictus said, to awake them of the Church, who were sleeping? And certainely these are the motiues which Popes assigne in their Buls of priuiledges, and which deserue to be read and well weighed, with a mind full of respect and piety. God him∣selfe discouered this to Pope Innocent the third, when he shewed him the Church, as if it had bene falling to the ground, and Saint Dominicke, and Saint Francis, who shouldred it
vp so happily, that they kept it on foote, and restored it to the former place. But let vs passe from this dis∣course, which yet neuerthelesse is not impertinent. For considering the in∣credible good which God hath vouchsafed to worke by meanes of Regulars ouer the whole world, wee haue reason to praise his infinite goodnesse, to render him all glory for it, and to hope that they may yet be able to serue him in the assistance of many soules. 18. O how I loue that good and gallant Parson in Paris, whom all you my Lords do also loue, and veri∣ly he deserues it, who sayd thus after an Apostolicall manner, and with a generous heart. Let vs do better then Religious men, and beleeue me the Re∣ligious men will be more affraid of vs, then we of them. The world followeth vertue, or the opinion of vertue, or both together: that which we should doe, Re∣ligious
men striue to doe, but let vs striue to do that which they do, and their Houses will be more forsaken then ours. Let vs adorne our Churches as they do, let vs make learned and deuoute Ser∣mons which may greatly edifie our peo∣ple, let vs liue as we speake, let vs cul∣tiuate the soules of our Parishioners, let vs make choice of Priests of good liues, let all go orderly in our Churches, let vs lay all our interests at the feete of the Crucifixe, and this will be the most powerfull meanes to defend vs, and to mainetaine vs in our rights, and to haue cause to feare nothing. But other∣wise to make such a noyse, and to doe nothing, but cry out without ceasing, and to tosse Excommunications vp and downe, and to be sending threats, all this makes for nothing but discourse without producing any fruit, and mens minds are so made, that by this meanes they rather growe wild, then soft and sweete, and restored to the way of the
antient piety of France. In fine, this man liueth after this manner, and not onely he, but some others also, who are adored in their parishes; and all men do so loue them, and they are so desired, and euen as it were opprest with businesse, that men cannot see them, but with halfe an eye. And as for those others who are euer cry∣ing out, they breede more feare then enuy in such as would drawe neere to them; and they estrange their pa∣rishioners from them, who beleeue that there is some other thing in the businesse then the pure loue of God, the saluation of soules, and the pre∣seruation of the Hierarchy. I be∣seech God to preserue this most ver∣tuous Pastor, and bestow vpon him a great heape of benedictions, and grant that all the rest may walke the same pace, and doe so much good, that Regulars may haue no more to doe. O, in how great repose, and
with how ioyfull a heart would they pray God, for so many and so worthy labourers? 19. Let vs come to that other exception, that Benefices remaine voyde, and that now in effect men doe finde no persons capable to fill them with, especially in countrey townes and villages. Now here I must cleerely auow either my simpli∣city, or my too great credulity. For in very truth I was of opinion, that there had not beene halfe a Benefice which enow had not extreamle desi∣red to get, and to heape one vpon another, and that not being able to procure them by any other meanes, men buy them out right with ready money; and that they vse a thousand trickes to serue one anothers turnes; and that Simony was neuer so refi∣ned, nor lesse apprehended to be ill, and all the rest of that which com∣mon fame is spreading in all compa∣nies.
Verily I beleeued all this, and I confesse I did it as a thing most cer∣taine, and without all doubt. But, my Lords, since you haue told me the contrary (for you haue sayd it) I will resolutely giue my minde this law, and I will make it stoope to this yoake, that I will beleeue you with∣out contradiction. But, my Lords, you will pardon me if still I tell you, that although I beleeue the thing, yet I cannot force my heart to beleeue the cause which is alledged; namely, that Regulars are the cause thereof. For how can this be? Is it because they get their Benefices? let them haue no more of them. Is it that they diuert Secular Priests from taking those Benefices? excommunicate them. Is it that they carry away all the stations or Indul∣gences? They haue none but such as please you, and oftentimes they haue but the refuse of others. Is it because
they debaush secular Priests make them bee punished by their superiors; and if they will not, doe it you. Is it because they doe not Counsell them to studie? Alas, some times they say that the Iesuites make too many men learned, and too full of knowledge; and sometimes the di∣rect contrary. Good God, whom shall wee beleeue? If I feared not to offend some, and if I had not pro∣mised that I would not anger any, I would acquaint you very clearely with the true source of all these mise∣ries, but I had rather leaue it to your thought; and I will impose per∣fect silence uppon my selfe, saving onely in this that I declare to you clearely with a strong voyce, and with much truth, that it is not good Religious men, who are the cause of these disorders. 20. So farre of it is, that Re∣gulars should bee the cause, that a
hundred Bishops will tell you on the other side, when there hath beene some disorder in Bourgs and Villa∣ges, they haue served themselues of Regulars, to put things in Order as before, and the successe hath proved, that the choyce was good. This is so cleare, that it needes no proofe. Whether this trouble the Order of the Church, whether it bee against the authority of Prelates, or against the right of Pastours, or against rea∣son, I make the most reverend Charles the Bishop of Langres, the Iudge; who in his Synode, after hee had commaunded the publication of that Canon, Omnis vtriusque, sayth these very words. Nè detur materia fra∣tribus Mendicantibus querelandi, vo∣lumus quod in fine publicationis con∣stitutionis praedictae, Omnis vtriusque sexus, &c. subinferatur, & publice, quod per hoc non intendimus praejudi∣care Privilegijs super audiendis Con∣fessionibus,
eisdem fratribus concessis: subjungendo quod fratres nobis praesen∣tati possunt audire Confessiones li∣bere, & confitentibus eisdem, pae∣nitentias salutares impartiri de com∣missis, &c. All that which he demaundeth is, that men doe it vnder his authority, and this is done, and it is more then most reasonable that it should be so. But in the meane time you see that it is he who is called the Proper Priest, he who sendeth whom he will, and who serueth himselfe of good Religi∣ous men, for the helpe of parishes. And doe you not beleeue that other Bishops haue the same Dictamen with this great Peere of France, and Bishop of Langres, who held this lan∣guage? 21. Let vs adde to this, that if euer there were little cause of complaining vpon this title, it is in this age of ours. No, my Lords, doe not any longer
feare that now Secular Priests will not proue such as you desire, or that parsonages will be in want of men ve∣ry well able to serue the Cures, or for the seruice also of other Benefi∣ces. For the fatherly prouidence of God hath sent a new Renforce, by a most vertuous congregation of holy Priests, who beeing full of know∣ledge and piety, will supply all these wants, according to the vocation which God hath giuen them, to re∣forme secular Clergy. By the exam∣ple of their liues they will shew what is to bee done, by their endeauours they will fill such places as shalbee voyde, both in City and Countrey, and they will yeeld good labourers will refuse to take no paines, and will gladly spread their Charity ouer the whole World, as they haue alrea∣die begunne to doe in many places, and will also by little and little grow substituting excellent Ecclesiasticall
men, to make this Church of France flourish both in Villages and Townes. One onely thing I feare, that after men shall haue cryed hard against Re∣ligious men, they will also beginne to cry out against these, every one interpreting their zeale according to his owne fancy; and banding them∣selues perhaps as stiffely against them, as against Religious, and alleadging a thousand things according to their passions and humours. Now if this should happen, you would clearely discerne even from that instant, that the noyse which is made both against the one, and a∣gainst the other, proceedes from some other roote then of meere cha∣rity, and of a true desire of the good of the true Hierarchy. To tell you more of this would serue for nothing to my purpose, one∣ly I will say franckly, that there will neuer be good labourers enow; that
there is more worke cut out, then we shall be able to sow, and that the heart of a Bishop, which ought to be a heart paternall and Apostolicall, ought to imbrace all them who may serue to cultiuate the faire field of the Church of God. 22. There is escaping from my hand (and I know not how to keepe it backe) a passage, which seemeth pardonable to a man, who defendeth so good a cause. Aristotle saith, that, Ex quibus constamus, ex ijs nutrimur, & conseruamur in esse. This being so, my Lords, it is still to be considered, that Regulars haue not lost their time, nor done any great wrong to them, who haue done them the ho∣nour to imploy them; and that in∣deed they are not yet to be cast out of the way. Certainly it hath pleased the infinite goodnesse of God, to serue himselfe of them either for plan∣tation of our faith, or else of pitty in
an eminent degree; and that in a man∣ner, ouer the whole world. Is it not true, that it was Saint Ber∣nard who made Campayne flourish? St. Columbanus, Burgundy? St. Martin, Tourayne? Saint Anselme, Normandy? Saint Dominicke, Languedoc, and Guyenne? Saint Vincent, Britany? Saint Thomas and Saint Bonauenture, the King Saint Lewes and Fraunce? Saint Augustine the Monke, all Eng∣land? And now in our dayes is it not they, who haue planted the Crosse of Iesus Christ in all those new worlds, and who are planting it now whilest I am speaking, in the heart of Ae∣thiopia, in Persia, in the East, and throughout the foure Winds of the world. May they not well be thought to helpe towards the entertaining of the Church, since they haue sweate bloud and water to plant it, and are bedewing it with their teares, and with their blood, and sealing it with
their heads and liues? For a little I know not what, must the occasion alas, be lost of drawing so many ex∣emplar seruices out of their labours? vnder colour of some little indiscre∣tion of any single man, who may be transported by his zeale. That a∣mendment which might be desired, can it not possibly be procured with∣out such a deale of businesse, and con∣fused noise? O my God, there are so many abhominations in the world, vpon which we daily looke, and yet men open not their mouthes, and hardly thinke that it concernes them at all, and now it seemes that all con∣sisteth in dragging Religious men af∣ter them, as if that being once done, we were instantly to see vertue ride in Tryumph. I would to Christ there were no impediment but that, and  would to Christ that all this did urne vpon no other thing, but that f the pure zeale of the seruice of
God. If euery one might make his owne complaints, good God, what a terrible discourse would grow vpon it, but let not the Diuine Maiesty be pleased, that so great a misfortune should ariue. It is better to hold ones peace, and to labour in silence and humility. Bona facere, & mala pati Apostolicum est, sayd the great Saint Bernard. 23. That, my Lords, which is to bee much weighed is, that by this course they are not the Regulars whom men assault, but the Privile∣dges themselues, and the Popes who gaue them, and the authority of the See Apostolicke; for all this is but a leuell at the same aime, and Generall Councells, and Canonized Saints, and the doctrine of the Church recei∣ved by the whole world, and practi∣sed through so many ages, and iudg∣ed by so many sentences. And all this must be done for
point of honour, or of power, and in a businesse, which so many great Cardinals full of wisedome, and so many holy and venerable old men, who were growne gray in the Go∣uernement of the Church, would ne∣uer alter. I find that my most illustrious and most reuerend Lord, the Cardinall of Rochfaucault, who is of so deli∣cate a conscience, so graue in his iudgements, and of so exemplar a life, did say very well when he sayd. I care not what habit men weare, but I euer take the best. As long as Religious men serue to good purpose I do willing∣ly serue my selfe of them; when they forget themselues, I will also forget them. When Doctors and Seculars, and Pastors do well, I will loue them, and shall be glad to employ them. In fine, when a man is to make his choyce, he must euer take the best, whatsoeuer ha∣bite he weare. Behold this is a saying
worthy of him. 24. I would to God that he with any other, who resembled him, were arbitrator of this cause in difference, to calme this Tempest, and to ap∣pease all things with the spirite of . For there is good meanes for it, when that which may be sayd on both sides, may bee heard: allowing to my Lords the Prelates, more honour then euer themselues desire, as also to the Pa∣stors of particular Churches, and leauing also Religious men in liberty to enioy their right in repose, and with respect and honor. These words of Abraham cast themselues into my mouth, Facta est rixa inter pastoresGen. 3. gregum Abraham & Lot, &c. Dixit ergo Abraham ad Lot, rè quaeso sit iur∣gum inter me & te, & inter pastores meos & pastores tuos, fratres enim su∣mus. Ecce vniuersia terra coam te est, recede à me, obscero: si ad sinistram
ieris, ego dexteram tenebo; si tu dexte∣ram elegeris, ego ad sinistram pergam, &c. Elegitque sib Lot regionem circa Iordanem, & recessit ab Oriente. Make you the choyce, my Lords, and take you the faire Easterne Sunne to your selues; those first beames of the day of honour are due to you; the most liuely Orientall spring of light was made for you. You are they whom the world must honour, as e∣uery one looketh towards the rising Sunne. The sweet dewes of Indulgences, the Easterne winds of Missions, and the powers of commanding and sen∣ding hither and thether, ought to issue out of your mouthes: all the sweete∣nesses of heauen passe by your hands, iust as the fauours of nature beginne from the East. Be you therefore the Orients of the world, according to the stile of Origen. Estote filij Orien∣tis, ecce vir oriens nomen eius, daboZachar. 6.
vobis sernum meum Orientem, & eiusZachar. 3. 1. Reg. 9. erunt optima quaeque, &c. All this is done to you. 25. Religious men, whom you honour with the name of Brothers, but who yet are in effect your sonnes, and your seruants, will place them∣selues towards the West, and will lodge all their ambition, in the set∣ting Sunne of Mortification. They will not at all mislike that the beames of honour be ecclipsed from them, so that the beames of their charity may be able to shine brightly in the dark∣nesse of sinfull soules, and that they may cause the zeale of sauing those soules, rise vp from the descent of hu∣mility. They will bee well content to see themselues in this setting quarter, where the day of honour dyes, where tempests are wont to rise in the sea, where impetuous windes and hailes are wont to grow, where the world
seemes to be in affliction and misery. That which they desire (after they shall haue receiued some beame of fauour from you) is to labour for the saluation of soules, and the conuer∣sion of sinners. Let the tempest of slanders, the hayle of murmurings, let combats and strife against infernall powers, be for them; and they will gladly vtter these excellent words. Et nox sicut dies il∣luminabitur, sicut tenebrae eius, ita & lumen eius; for sitan tenebrae conculca∣bunt me, & nox illuminatio mea in de∣licijs meis. They will doe that which Saint Paule did, Collaboro Euangelio, and they shall be that whereof Saint Dennis speaketh, Adiutores Dei & Cooperatores, If it were not that you liked better to labour in the same cli∣mate, you as fathers, they as children, you as maisters, they as seruants, you as Pastors, they as workemen, and that you loue to do like those nations
whereof Pliny speakes, who for the most part had but one arme a peece, and yet in the world there were not better Archers then they: for one lending his arme for bending the bow, another his, for entring the arrow vpon the string, and both of them employing both their forces, draw and shoote off with such stiffe∣nesse, that there is nothing which they cannot pierce. O how strong and inuincible would the Church be, if we all wrought af∣ter this manner. Frater qui adiuuatur a fratre, quasi Ciuitas firma, &c. If weProu. 18. did iust the contrary of that which S. Paule sayd, Omnes quae sua sunt quo∣runt,Philip. 2. non quae Iesu Christi. And if all Ecclesiasticall persons did valiantly tread their proper interest vnder their feete, and carry the glory of God, the good of his seruice, and the sal∣uation of soules in a high place, what a golden age would this bee? And
what a terrestriall Paradise, I beseech you, my Lords, should we find, if the Church might enioy such happinesse in this age of ours? We should ful∣ly enioy this sweete Paradise, if the Serpents did not go continually his∣sing out his temptation off, Eritis si∣cut Dij. But whilest euery one is inGen. 3. doubt to be drawne downe, and gi∣uen vp in pray to contempt, whilest both the one and the other of vs will needes conserue our selues, and be∣leeue that we do none of this but for God, and that in so doing we defend Gods right as well as our owne, it is greatly to bee feared, least it be told vs, that we do not well obserue the counsell of our Soueraigne Maister; who seeing his Apostles whom you represent, and his Disciples whom we represent (and whom we imitate the least vnworthily we can) dispute, about I knowe not what superiority, sayd to them, Quicunque volueritMath. 20.
inter vos maior fieri, sit vester mtni∣ster; & qui voluerit inter vos primus esse, eric vester seruus. We therefore, my Lords, do not pretend to debate with you about a∣ny precedence of authority, nor to partake in the honour of your great∣nesse, this is confessed to be yours, and so yours, as that it belongeth to none else. That which we pretend, is, that you leaue vs where God hath layd vs, at your feete; but so that you will be pleased to leaue vs also in that liberty, which God and his Church, and Popes, and Councels, and your Predecessors, yea and many of your selues haue giuen vs for the assistance of his sheepe, and for the comfort of those soules, for which you must answere to Christ our Lord, who hath giuen all his bloud for euery one of them. Yea there is not any one of them, of whom God doth not respectiuely
say to you, as the sonne of that Pro∣phet did to the King, Custodi virum3. Reg. 20. istum, qui si lapsus fuerit, erit anima tua ejus. A passage which Saint Gre∣gorie the great applyeth to all the Prelates of the Church. 26. When you shalbe pleased to weight all this well, my heart bids me hope, that you will do, as my Lord the Cardinall of Rets, of most happy and deare memory, and Ben∣tivoglio who is a friend to France, and to the Hierarchy, did at Paris; and as my Lord the Cardinal of Lorayne, and my Lord Bishop of Toul, whose memories are blessed, did at Nancy. For both the one and the other ha∣ving harkned to certaine persons, who suggested to them a thousand things, iust like thee, which me having en∣deauoured to perswade you now, ha∣ving had some thought to treate seri∣ously hereof, and to procure an ac∣commodation of things, and being
certainly, and fully, and sincerely in∣formed of the businesse, both the one, I say, and the other, did leaue things as they were, and would make no change at all, discerning well, that all those Discourses to the contrary, had no manner of sub∣sistance, but onely a little glistering and shewe. All the world did great∣ly commend their wisedome, and their zeale so full of judgement; and one of them told mee in plaine tearmes, that hee discovered well, how that in this businesse, there was I know not what, which savoured somewhat of a Schisme. Those great and incomparable Cardinals of Ioy∣euse, and of Perron, would never giue eare to this Discourse, but li∣ving and dying, they witnessed the contrary; serving themselues most willingly of Religious men, for the good of their Dioceses. And to shewe, that they repented not them∣selues
thereof, they resolved to an∣nexe their heartes, as the seales of their goodnesse to those former acti∣ons of theirs, and to giue them de∣positated into the hands of Religi∣ous men, who keepe them as two great treasures. 27. They who abuse your good∣nesse would make you, as it were, beleeue that if you take not the bet∣ter heed, your authorities wilbe en∣tirely beaten downe, and that all is vppon the poynt of vtter ruine. I am glad, my Lords, that they ad∣dresse themselues thus to fright you by things so poore, and of so little consideration. For I must beseech you to recall to your memories, that in the yeare 1225. or there abouts, in the raigne of Saint Lewes, Guliel∣mus de Sancto Amore, and a certaine Sigerius, with some other under∣taking young Divines, composed a Booke, wherein they put word for
word, all that which men now object against us, and more then that, and presented the Libell, to Innocent the fourth, pretending to extinguish those two holy Orders; but death came quickly vppon him, and that such a death as your selfe may reade, if it please you, together with the last wordes he spake, which you may also vouchsafe to weigh well, for they import. Alexander the fourth fol∣lowed him, who caused this Libell to be burnt, as a worke worthy of that hand which set it forth. And so the end of those two men, who wereS. Tho opus. 15. c. 4. enemies of these Orders, was very disastrous; or of one of them at least, who dyed miserably. In fine, you shall haue in Saint Thomas all those very arguments which are brought against us at this day, with the angelicall and most solid answeres of this Oracle, who, at his returne to Paris, did publikely
make good all his Doctrine, and an∣swered all them who went to assault him with their Canon shot, and with arguments, which they con∣ceived to bee omnipotent. But there hapned an accident which discovered that spirit well, whereby they were animated, who banded themselues against these. For uppon a certaine Palme-Sunday when Saint Thomas Preached publikely in the Vniver∣sity, and spake like an Angell, be∣hold a strange and very unworthy case which hapned. For a certaine silly fellow called Iuliot, a Picard, who appeared a∣bout the middle of the Sermon, and opening a great paper, wherein was contayned a list of injurious speeches against the great man, and a thousand outragious slanders a∣gainst his holy Order: After I say, that hee vomited out all this, he con∣cluded thus with a loud voyce. How
now my maisters, can you be content after all this, to heare the Sermon of so wicked a man, and of a Do∣ctor who teacheth so abhominable errors. And you brother Thomas, what doe you answere to this? Now the people was confounded to see the vnspeakeable modesty of Saint Thomas, who harkened to all that poysoned Discourse with so profound humility, and with a silence so full of modestie, and holy mortificati∣on; that they esteemed him as a Saint of Heaven, for hee did never so much as answere any one word. But the people calling up their spirits, and considering the insolency of this bold meane fellow, did that, which you may read if it please you, in the story; for I will not loade this paper with it, nor yet importune you. But so it is, that the Auditors did that, which perhaps you your selues wold haue done, if you had beene at that
Sermon; and the King caused him, and those maisters of Arte, to bee punished, who had made him com∣mit that base tricke, so full of inso∣lency and scandall. Now all those good Religious, seeing themselues opprest on all sides, and that the earth and this World fayled them; they had recourse to Heaven, and to the holy mother of God, who ap∣peared to Saint Thomas, and made him see these Words written in let∣ters of Gold: Liberavit vos Deus ab∣inimicis vestris, & de manu omnium qui oderunt vos. In a word, in the yeare of our Lord 1259. all this tempest broake up, and those holy men remained in peace. But I dare not forbeare to tell you, that all this storme grew not into that heigth, but by reason of a certaine rage, and a strong passion of a Prelate, who had seene a Nephew of his enter into the Order of Saint Dominicke, and
had never beene able to draw him thence. Alas, a little winde doth sometimes stirre up great stormes up∣pon the Sea of this World, and how many things do men ill, vnder colour of good, if they take not heed? 28. Methinkes you doe yet desire at my hands the Theses which Saint Thomas defended publikely in this matter, and the Propositions which hee maintayned against all them who disputed thereof: which was the cause why all the World yeelded to the truth, and which calmed this tem∣pest which was so blacke and so ter∣rible, that it was likely to swallow up these two Orders. I wil obay and giue you here the chiefe points therof, and I will draw them out of his booke, and doe you but see, if they be not the very same of these dayes. 1. Cum misit Deus Apostolos 12.Opusc. 15. c. 4. & 72. Discipulos, dedit illis fa∣cultatem alios mittendi, sicut fecit
Sanctus Paulus. 1 Cor. 4. 2. Multo melius potest Papa, & Episcopus delegare alios, & mittere in vineam Domini, quam Parochus. 3. Minores Angeli in caelesti Hie∣rarchia mitti possunt a superioribus, & eadem plane opera exercnt, ideoque dicuntur Seraphin & Cherubin, quia eorum opera exercent: sic in Hierarchia Ecclesiastica. 4. Papa non destruit Ecclesiasticam Hierarchiam cum mittit Monachos ad praedicandum; quod enim potest infe∣rior, ut Curatus, concedere, committen∣do curam alicui; hoc potest ejus superior, ut Episcopus, & Papa. 5. Papa in hoc non facit contra de∣creta Canorum, nec contra statuta San∣ctorum; quod si daretur eum facere contra verba statutorum, certum est eum servare intentionem statuentium, quae est vtilitas Ecclesiae. 6. Quae sunt de jure positiuo, reli∣cta sunt sub Papae dispensatione, ut est
hoc de quo quaeritur; nempe mittere Monachos ad Praedicationes, & Confes∣siones audiendas. 7. Quisquis Papae, vel Episcopo suo, vel alicui ejus vicem habenti confessus est; ille confessus est proprio Sacer∣doti. 8. Cum Episcopus subditum Sacer∣dotis absoluit perse, vel per alium cui commisit, tum Sacerdos Parochialis itâ debet se reputare cognoscere eum, ac si sibi confessus esset. Nam cognoscere po∣test aliquem, aut ex propria Confessio∣ne, aut ex sententia superioris, an sit dignus communione. 9. Licet concedatur posse aliquod malum oriri ex hoc, quod aliquis non confitetur Parocho suo, tamen multo plura & majora mala nascuntur, si quis cogatur necessario illi confiteri, vt patet experientia. 10. Quicquid Sancti Doctores & Canones videntur dicere de Monachis, quorum Officium esse dicitur magis
plangere, quam docere; hoc dicitur de Monachis illis, qui nec Sacerdotes e∣rant, neque Diaconi, sed solitarij, & Heremitae: non de ijs qui ad hoc vocati sunt, & qui non ex propria authoritate id faciunt, sed ex commissione Praelato∣rum. 11. Etiamsi daretur duos tantum Ordines a Domino esse institutos, qui possent propria authoritate praedica∣re, &c. posset tamen Ecclesia tertium statuere Ordinem, qui posset propria authoritate praedicare; multum magis eorum quiex commissione, sicut in Pri∣mitiua Ecclesia fuerunt tantum duo Ordines sacri, scilicet Presbiteri & Deaconi; & tamen postea Ecclesia mi∣nores Ordines statuit. 12. Quidam a Confessione desiste∣rent, nisi possint alijs quam suis Sa∣cerdotibus confiteri, propter multas causas. 13. Ex communi consuetudine Orientalis Ecclesiae, omnes fere Mo∣nachis
confitentur. 14. Quidam novellum sibi statuentes errorem, in tantam prorumpunt auda∣ciam, vt asserant, non posse per Epis∣copos Religiosis praedicta committi, abs∣que voluntate Parochi, & quod perni∣cio sius est, non posse hoc asserunt con∣cedi per Privilegium sedis Aposto∣licae. 15. Optimè ait S. Dion. Eccl. Hier. c. 6. summus Sacerdos per suos mini∣stros aut Sacerdotes purgans, aut illumi∣nans, ipse dicitur purgare & illumi∣nare; ergo & Episcopus eodem modo, qui autem facit per alium, per seipsum facere potest. 16. Blasphemiae vicinum est dicere, quod Episcopus non potest vsum claui∣um exercere in quemlibet suae Diaecesis, sicut & Christus posset. 17. Potest institui Religio ad subve∣niendum pauperibus in necessitatibus corporis; ergo multo magis potest insti∣tui ad subueniendum animabus per
Praedicationes, & Confessiones. 18. Quod potest inferior, potest e∣tiam Superior, quod ergo potest Cura∣tus, potest Episcopus, & potest Papa. Cui, vt ait Cyrillus, omnes iure diuino caput inclinant. 19. Alij gubernationes, alij opitula∣tiones, inquit Apost. 1. Cor. 12. Opitu∣lationesOpusc. 14. c. 23. sunt ij, qui ferunt opem maio∣ribus, vt Titus Apostolo; Archidia∣coni Episcopo, &c. Hoc autem non de∣struit Hierarchiam. 20. Alter alterius membra, & v∣num corpus in Christo. Rom. 12. Mani∣festumOpusc. 15. c. 3. est quod Ecclesiasticae vnitati derogat, quicunque Religiosis impedit ne docere possint, &c. 21. Qui Romanae Ecclesiae Privi∣legium, ab ipso summo omnium Eccle∣siarum capite traditum, auferre cona∣tur,Ibid. c. 3. hic proculdubio in haeresim labitur, vt dicitur in Decretis. Dist. 22. Cap. Omnes & à Sancto Ambrosio, qui ait se in omnibus sequi Magistram, sanctamL. 3. de sa∣cram. c. 1.
Romanam Ecclesiam. It is Pope Nicholas the second, who speaketh against them of the Church of Millan, for entring into competition with Rome, and would needes march hand in hand with the Romane Church, which Saint Tho∣mas applieth also to the point in que∣stion. 22. Ab Apostolis 7. Diaconi insti∣tuti fuerunt, qui erant in statu perfe∣ctionis;Opusc. 14. c. 23. nam relictis omnibus secuti, erant Christum. Ab horum exemplo omnes Religiones deriuatae sunt. Quem∣admodum ergo Apostolu Episcopi, di∣scipulis Parochi, sic Diaconis Religiosi successerunt. 23. Behold here is a part of the Propositions, which Saint Thomas defended at Paris, in publike manner, and with such amazement of all the Vniuersity, that there was not found a man so bold as to dare once stirre this stone. The Preface of his Booke
carrieth these very wordes in the front. Praedictus Doctor post diuinitùs ob∣tentam victoriam, Pariseos rediens, omnes dicti operis Articulos, public, & solemnitèr repetens, disputauit, fir∣mavit{que}. That which goeth immediatly be∣fore these words, and the sentence of the Pope, is a thing which I will not cite here, but let him see it, who will. I will say nothing here, which may of∣fend, or which may sauour of recrimi∣nation, or which by any ill odour of strong passion, may poyson this dis∣course, which is dedicated to pure and free, but yet strong truth. I coniure you, my Lords, to weigh well these foure words, Publice, So∣lemniter, disputauit, Firmauit. So that all Paris had the contentment to see this great person sustaine all the as∣saults of the whole world, and hee was so happy and so puissant, that he
made truth tryumph, and did with a little stone beate downe that huge Colossus, which men had erected, to the ende that falling vpon him, it might driue both himselfe and all his Order into dust. 30. That which Gulielmus de san∣cto Amore had enterprised at Paris with so ill successe, a certaine Richar∣dus Armaeanus, the Primate of Ire∣land, after he had played rex in Eng∣land, did also enterprise in Auignon in the yeare 1356. vnder Innocent the sixth, before the Pope himselfe, and the Cardinals, and presented them with a booke made aduanta∣geously in the behalfe of Parsons and Vicars, yea and also of Bishops, a∣gainst Regulars, wherein he deliue∣red the same things which had beene offered before by Gulielmus de sancto Amore; for in this businesse, there is neuer any thing but repetitions, and noyse enough? without any fruite at
all, and ordinarily the matter ends in some disastrous death. I will not tell you here, how this poore  died, but I will on∣ly put you in mind that the book was held worthy to dye with him, and that many who haue banded them∣selues against the seruants of God, haue either sooner or later, had re∣gret, and sorrow in their hearts, or else some other thing which was worse. The face of death makes the face of businesse chaunge very much. 31. The wisest men haue euer iud∣ged, that they haue no good bar∣gaine, who make themselues oppo∣sites to the seruants of God, especi∣ally in those things which are establi∣shed by his diuine Maiesty, or his Grand Vicar, and there bee a thou∣sand and a thousand Histories to shew this as lamentable and feareful, as they are authenticall. Men vse
sometimes to dispute in Diuinity, whether the Pope may erre in the Canonization of Saints, as also a∣bout the approbation of Religious Orders. For my part, I will not en∣ter at this time into that question, but I will not feare to say, that when God hath any such desire, and that he sendeth some to this effect, if any man then make opposition, God doth certainly find himselfe offended ther∣by, and is wont to resent it, and ther∣fore Saint Paule saith aloud. Itaquè qui haec spernit, non hominem spernit1. Thes. 4. sed Deum, &c. Now after points of faith, and some others of the most important of the Church, I knowe fewe thinges whereof there is more formall, cleere, and authenticall proofe, then of the point which here I defend. For twen∣ty Popes, three Generall Councels, so many Prouinciall Synodes in France, so many Cardinals, Primates,
Arch-bishops, Bishops, Canons, ex∣presse Texts, fifty Buls, Sentences of Parliaments, Iudgement of eminent Doctors in great number, consent of some Parsons and Vicars, euen of Paris, doctors of the Sorbonne, Saints, Miracles, Reasons, Arguments, pos∣session beyond the memory of man, Texts of the Gospell, particular voca∣tions of God, who hath expresly sent vs more then sixe Religious Or∣ders all entire, the authority of so many Emperours, Kings, Potentates, soueraigne Courts of Iustice, heauen and earth, such a number of ages, and the voice of the world. Is not, I say, all this sufficient to fortifie this truth against those poore reasons which they alledge, and which in very deede, & in the sight of God, and of disinteressed men, are not of such moment, as to warrant that account and noyse, which some make thereof.
There was a time when a sentence was giuen against Saint Bernard, and that from the highest Tribunall in the Church of God. The Saint seeing himselfe ouer loaden, by so mighty an authority here on earth, had re∣course to heauen and sayd, Tuum Do∣mine Iesu Tribunall appello, tuo me iu∣dicio servo; tibi committo causamEpist. 1. meam. Tu vides qui tua video, qui quaerunt & sua. It que arbiter meus esto Domine Iesu, de valtu tuo tudici∣um meum prodeat, oculi tui videant aequitatem. O Iesu bone, quam multa facta sunt, prounius animulae perditi∣one, &c. In fine, men removed both Heaven and earth at Cluny,, at Rome, in France, at Clairivaux; but at length the holy Abbot wonne the cause, and God payed him that which hee had lost, and tooke part in the businesse with his servant, and it was a miracle which hee wrought, writing this Epistle, and hee sayd boldly to
his Secretary, Scribe, Scribe, quia opus Dei est. It is for God, it is on the behalfe of God: It is by the expresse Commandement of God, it is for the saving of a soule redeemed by his blood; it is for interest, it is for the conseruation of an Order, which he hath established by meanes of a servant of his, Saint Bennet, who was our Founder, and therefore saith hee write boldly, feare nothing my good brother, neyther the hayle, nor the floud, nor the tempest, for reso∣lutely God wilbe Maister. 32. I will not, my Lords appeale to any body from you, but to your selues, and howsoever it is sayd, that a man must neuer be both Iudge and party, yet I avow to you with all can∣dour, that I confide so much in your goodnesse, your zeale towards the pure honour of God, of the Church, and of France; and I adde yet fur∣ther in the goodnesse of our cause,
which hath beene combated so often, and through the mercy of God, hath neuer beene Conquered, that for my part, I desire no other Iudges but your selues. In truth it seemes to me that you and wee in this difference are, as anciently the two Angels in Daniel were, who had both a good intention, and aymed at nothing but at the glory of God, and fought not but for the salvation of soules; and therefore God sent an Angell, who is called of great Counsell; who ac∣commodated all, and made it evi∣dently appeare who was in the right, and who in the wrong. And I will hope and beleeue so well of his eter∣nall and paternall providence, as that hee will doe the like in our case, and wil make you most evidently discerne his holy will. Sicut ergo fuerit volun∣tas in Coelo, sic fit, &c. I tell you therefore yet once a∣gaine, that I will not appeale from
you to any but your selues, but I will imitate that good Abbot, and goodSt. Bern. Ep. 213. French-man, as good as ever was in the World. You may bee pleased to remember that Pope Innocent the second, had employed him extraor∣dinarily to appease the Schisme, and hee did all that which a Saint was a∣ble to doe, who had his hands full of miracles, and was ever able to worke them. But what did the innocent Abbot gaine by this? A thousand jealousies rose up against him, a thousand slanders were darted against the white of his poore heart; the Pope him∣selfe in a Letter calling him Rebell and Traytor against the See Aposto∣licke. Who would ever haue belee∣ved this? Yet in fine, so it was. The holy man opening the Popes Letter to him, was as if hee had opened a Cloud full of fire, with a bolt of thun∣der in the midst, and with a blow as
if it had pierced his heart. But yet calling his spirits to himselfe, and adoring the admirable but secret providences of God, hee wrote in these tearmes to the Pope. Quis mihi faciet iustitiam de vobis? Si haberemEp. 213. iudicem ad quē vos trahere possem, iam nunc ostenderë vobis (vt parturiens lo∣quor) quid meremini. Extat quidē tri∣bunal Christi, sed absit ut ad illud ap∣pellem vos qui illic, si vobis necessarium & mihi possibile esset, vellem magis to∣tis viribus insistere, & respondere pro vobis. Itaquoe recurro ad eum, cui in praesenti datū est judicare de vniuersis, hoc est, ad vos, vos apello, ad vos, vos indicate inter me & vos. In quo quaeso puer vester tam male meruit de vestra paterninate, vt eum inurere & insignire placeret, Nota, & nomine Proditoris? Nunquid non me vestrum Vicariū, dignatio vestra con∣stituit, in reconciliatione Petri Pisa∣ni, &c. This vertuous Abbot firmely
thought that hee should haue met with thankes, for hauing euen de∣feated himselfe with labour to ap∣pease this Schisme; and in place there∣of hee found himselfe qualified with the name of Traytor, and a perfidi∣ous man, who had (as it were) be∣traied both the Pope and the Church. All his choller was such, as that hee had none at all, and his appealing (as for a wrong) was not to appeale at all; but to remit it to the providence of God, to make the truth appeare, and to make his innocency subsist, which was evidently afterward as you know. 33. I beseech you most humbly to consider well, that notwithstand∣ing men haue desired so many, and so many times, to stirre up this businesse in France, in Italy, in Germany, in England, and in Avignon, there hath indeede beene made a great deale of confused noyse, but the Authors
thereof haue never gathered any o∣ther fruite, then a great deale of paine, and things haue still remay∣ned in the same state they were in be∣fore. In fine, all that which ordina∣rily men got in those times, was to b able to obserue in whom there was a little passion, and in whom there was none. There was never (God be thanked) lesse reason to bee affraid then now; since now wee see France to bee filled with so many worthy Prelates, and so zealous of vertue, and of the salvation of soules, as you are. I beseech God to multiply these great fauours towards you, and ever to giue you hearts which may be truely Apostolicall; and all full of caelestiall fire, and giue grace to us, that wee may well and worthily serue the Church, under your fauours, and by imitation of you. And I pray God that wee may never bee reproached for that, for which St. Paul reproach∣eth1 Cor. 3.
the Church of Corinth. Cum sic inter vos zelu & contentio, nonne car∣nales estis, & secundū hominem ambu∣latis? Cum enim quis dicat ego quidem sum Pauli, alius autem ego Apollo, non∣ne homines estis? Quid igitur est Apol∣lo? Quid vero Paulus? Ministri ejus cui credidistis, & vnicui sicut domi∣nus dedit. Ego plantaui. There is for you my Lords, and for the Pastors and Vicars, Apollo regauit, behold this is for priviledged Persons, whom God hath sent to succour them. Deus autem incrementū dedit; Itaque neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed qui incremenū dat Deus. Qui au∣tem plantat & qui rigat vnum sunt, unusquisque autem propriam mercedem accipiet, secundū suum laborem. Dei enim sumus adjutores, &c. I pray God, I say, that the first part of this Dis∣course (all which is so Divine) may never bee verified uppon us, but that the second passage may bee verified,
which certainely is a most rich one, and able to make the Gallican Church to become a terrestiall Paradice, and the pearle, the flower, and the LillyL. 5. de con∣fid. c. 4. of all the Churches in the World. And for the accomplishing heereof, the aduice which St. Bernard (one of the Apostles of our France, gaue to Pope Eugenius, who was both his Sonne, and his Father, and his very heart) doth admirably serue in my judgement. The title is this. Quales coadiutores habere debeat Episcopus, to discharge himselfe worthily of his place, and in such sort as that he may also saue his flocke, for this is the true point of State, which imports; and if this be not done, the rest is trash. Amongst other qualities which he ascribeth to these Prelates, who haue a minde to be Saints, one is, that they take men who may serue them faithfully. These men he calleth Cooperators
and Coadiutors, and saith; Tuum est vndecunque euocare, & ascribere tibi, exemplo Moysis senes non iuuenes, sed senes, non tam aetate quam moribus, &c. Elige viros qui missi post aurum non cant, sed Christum sequantur. Qui Regibus Ioannem exhibeant, Aegyptijs Moysen, fornicantibus Phinees, Eliam idolatris, Elisaeum auaris, Petrum men∣tientibus, Paulum blasphemantibus, ne∣gociantibus Christum. Qui vulgus non spernant, sed doceant, non diuites palpent, sed terreant, pauperes non grauent, sed foueant, minas Princi∣pum non paueant, sed contemnant, &c. To doe well, a man should here set downe the whole Chapter so preci∣ous and ful of iuyce it is, but I should be importunate, and it will suffice to set downe the end thereof. Elige eos qui ad teredeant, fatigati quidem, sed non suffarimati; gloriantes quod non aurum attulerint, sed quod reliquerint pacem regnis, legem barbaris, quietem
Monasterijs. Ecclestis, Ordinem, Cleri∣cis disciplinam, Deo populum accepta∣bilem, sectatorem bonorum operum. And where shall we find such men as these? It would become me ill, to tell where, whilest I am speaking to you, my Lords, who know it so much better then I, besides that the matter speakes sufficiently for it selfe. If you feare that Saint Bernard being an Abbot and a Monke, may haue beene too fauourable to them, who should by reason of their profes∣sion, haue those qualities which he holdeth requisite for such as are to serue Popes and Prelates, let vs take hold of another, with whom we will make an end of this discourse. Will you bee content to beleeue Pope Gregory in this businesse? Hear∣ken then to this Oracle, who appli∣eth most happily these words of Iob, to this purpose. Quando erit Omni∣potens mecum & in circuitu meo pueri
mei, quando lauabam pedes meos bu∣tyro & Petra fundebat riuos olei. PueriIob 29. S. Greg. l. 19 c. 9. & 10. in circuitu Ecclesiae & Christi sunt qui caelestibus mandatis inseruiunt. Pedes sunt sancti Praedicatores, & inferlo∣rum operum Ministri; hi butyro elo∣quij pedes lauant. Quid ad haec nos E∣piscopi, &c. You may see the rest if itOpusc. 15. c. 4. please you, and how Saint Thomas applieth it to this question. If yet you will needs feare lest this great Pope may also perhaps remem∣ber himselfe to haue beene a Monke, and that so perhaps he may hang to∣wards the party of Religious men, in pointing at those conditions, which are not more easily, nor more emi∣nently, nor more ordinarily found, then in Religious men, who make profession thereof, let vs euen resort to Saint Charles, whom you loue so well, and let vs conclude out of his mouth, as we began by him. This holy Prelate will tell you first, that he
desireth no more of Religious men,Act. Medi∣l. part. 4. in. Instruct. wisit. 1. de Regular. but that they obserue the Councell of Trent. Now this is reasonable. Secondly, he commaundeth his visitors, that performing towards Religious men, that which the Pope hath by expresse fauour accorded to them, they doe by no meanes grateAct. Medi∣l. p. 4. Inst. Conf. vpon their Priuiledges. And this is also reasonable. Thirdly, that he should neuer bee able to haue too many Oblati, or o∣ther labourers for the sauing of soules, for as much (saith hee) as Saint Ka∣therineSerm. 3. Sy∣nod. 11. & l. 8. vitae. c. 13. of Sienna desired euen to loose heauen, for the gaining of one onely soule, and what maruell was it then if that holy Virgin would bee kissing the ground, and the place where Preachers were wont to set their feete, they being the Coopera∣tors of Iesus Christ. And there is no∣thing more pleasing to God then to see vs such; and when hee findeth a
man who with him wil beare the bur∣then of the saluation of soules, &c. Thus saith Saint Charles, and this al∣so is reasonable. He did euen burne with such a loue of God, and with so great zeale of the saluation of soules, that he could not get labourers enow by the halfe, who might attend to this holy fun∣ction; and this was his onely reason for his making the Oblati of St. Am∣brose, conceiuing that they were to proue men who would sacrifice them selues to this alone, without any o∣ther diuersion in the world, and de∣pending vpon his onely will. But I haue spoken of this already at large, and I must end all this little discourse by the mouth of a great Apostle. If, my Lords, there be any thing which by misfortune may haue offen∣ded you neuer so little in this dis∣course, which hath beene made by your commaundement, I doe most
humbly begge your pardon for it. If perhaps you may finde, that it con∣taineth strong, and pressing, and so∣lide reasons, it is God who hath in∣spired them, and therefore the glory belongeth onely to him. I beseech him with all the powers of my soule, that he will be pleased to make you gust them well, and that he will graue them profoundly in your hearts, to the end, that he who is the God of V∣nion, and not of Diuision, may estab∣lish an inuolable peace, and perfect Vnion in his Church. For as for vs, I declare thus much to you, that af∣ter we shal haue most humbly prayed the great God, to make euery one of you a Saint Charles whom you loued so well, wee shall esteeme it for the highest happinesse, and honour, and succour, to be your most humble ser∣uants, and we will say with the Di∣uine Apostle: Non enim nosmeteip∣sos praedicamus, sed Iesum Christum
Dominum nostrum, nos autem servos vestros per Iesum, &c. Omnia autem propter vos, vt gratia abundans per multos, in gratiarum actione abundet in gloriam Dei. And so my Lords, I humbly craue your holy Benedictions. Benedictus Deus. FINIS.
