3021 99840352 4850
A compendious olde treatyse / shewynge / howe that we ought to haue ye scripture in En∣glysshe / ¶Thexcusacyon of ye treatyse Though I am olde / clothed in barbarors wede Nothynge garnysshed with gaye eloquency Yet I tell the trouth / yf ye lyst to take hede Agaynst theyr frowarde / furious frenesy Which recken it for a great heresy And vnto laye people greuous outrage To haue goddes worde in their natyfe langage. Enemyes I shall haue / many a shoren crowne With forked cappes and gaye croosys of golde Which to maynteyne ther ambicions renowne Are glad laye people in ignorance to holde Yet to shewe the verite / one maye be bolde All though it be a proverbe daylye spoken Who that tellyth trouth / his head shalbe broken depiction of four women at fountain
¶Vnto the Reader. GRace and peace: not that the worlde geuyth / but from god the father and oure sauioure Iesu Christ with increace of ye holy spryt be with the and all that thurste the truthe. Amen. Cōsyderynge the malyciou¦snes of oure prelatz and theyr adherentes whiche so furiously barke ageynst the worde of God / ād specially the new testamēt translatyd and sett for∣the by Master Williā Tyndale / which they false¦ly pretēde to be sore corrupte. That ye may knowe that yt is not Tyndales translacyō yt moueth thē but only the inwarde malyce whiche they haue e∣uer had ageynst the worde of God. I haue here putt in prynte a tretyse wrytten aboute the yere of oure lorde a thousande foure hundryd. By which thou shalte playnly perceyue / that they wolde yett neuer from the begynnynge admytte any transla¦ciō to the laye people / so that it is not yt corrupte trā¦slaciō that they withstonde. For yf that were true y• ydle bellyes wolde haue had leyser I nowgh to put forth another well trāslatyd. But yt is theyr awne myscheuous lyuynge yt mouyth thē accor∣dyng as Chryste sayd Ihon̄ .iij. Euery man that workyth euyll hatyth ye lyght / ner comyth to the lyght lest hys workes shulde be reproued. &c. Thus mayst thou se that bycause theyr workes ght and not bycause yt is euyll translatyd / furiously resyste the worde of god whiche is ye trew lyght. For yet was ther neuer none trās∣latyd but other with falshed or tyrāny they putt yt downe. Wherefore I exhorte the reder not to
consydre ād note the wordes but the maner. And praye to god to sende the rulers hartes to vnder∣stōde the trewth and further the same and the god of all comforte be with the Amen. ¶Thys treatyse more thā an .C. yere olde Declareth howe owre prealatis do ferre a mysse Which of frowarde presumpcion are so bolde To forbede the worde of god in englysshe For as the prophete sayeth blyssed he is That exercyseth hym selfe diligently In scripture nyght and daye continuallyPsal. i. FOr to make vpon Anticrist I ta∣ke figure of kyng Antioche of who¦me gods lawe speakythe in ye boke of Machabeijs / for right as kyn∣ge Antioche came in ye ende well nygh of the olde lawe / and brent the bookes of gods lawe / and cōpelled the peo∣ple to do maumentry. So now Anticrist ye kyng of clergy that lynen worse then hethen prestes brē¦nerh nowe nyghe thēde of the newe lawe and the∣vāgely of Christ that is nyghe ye ende of the worl∣de to deceyue well nyghe all the worlde and ¦ue the seruauntes of god. For nowe god shal we who wyll stande by hys lawe for Satan prophetes saye is now vnbonde and hathe ben CCCC. yeris and more for to in habit ower cler∣gye /
as he dyd the clergye of the olde lawe / but no∣we wythe muche more malyce.Ye may se it is no novel∣teis that the bishops bur¦ne the gos∣pell. For as they damp¦ned Chryst so nowe ower bysshope dampne and bren goddes lawe / for bycause it is drawyn into o∣wer mother tounge. &c. It owght to be and we sa¦vyd shuld be as we shall preue by open euidence thoroughe goddes helpe. First we take witnesse of Boetius de disciplina scolarium / that saythe that childerne shuld be tawght in the bookes of Sene∣ke. And Bede expoundeth this sainge / and saythe that childerne in vertues shuld be tawght. For the bookes of Seneke ben moralles ād for they be not taught thus in there youthe they contynue styll euyll maneryd and be vnable to conceyue the sub∣tyle science of trouthe saing / the wyse man is as a clean myrror newe pullisshed.Reade Ro∣bin hode sa∣ye oure ma∣sters. Wisdem shall not enter into a wicked sowle. And moche is herof the sentence of Bede. And Algasell in his logyke sai∣eth / the sowle of mā is as a clene mirror newe pul¦lysshed in which is seyn lyghtly ye image of vertue. And for the people hath not cunnynge in youthe they have darke sowles and blinded with ignoran¦ce / so that they proffyt not in vertue / but in falsnes and malice and other vices and moche is ther of ye matter. Sythen hethen philosophers wolden the people to proffit in naturall science / howe moche more shuld Christen clerkes wyll the pepyll to pro¦fyt in sciēce of vertues / for so wold gode. For whē the lawe was geuyn to Moyses in the mounte of Synay / god gaue it to his people ī ther mother tō¦ of Ebrue / that all the people shuld vnderstande nd commaunded Moyses to reade it to them vntyll they vnderstode it / ād so he did as it is playn Deutero. xxxi. And Esdras also redde it in theyr
mother tōge / fro morow vntyll none as it is playn in the first boke of Esdras Cap. viij. And he redde it apertly in the streate & the earys of ye people were intentysly gevyn therto / in so moche that the people fell into greate weping for the miskeping of the lawe. Also goddes lawe saithe Deuter. xxxij. that fathers shuld make the lawe knowen to theyr son∣nes ād the sonnes that shuld be borne of thē shuld ryse and teache these thynges to ther sonnes. And the holy apostle saynt Peter in ye fourth chapter of his fyrst booke speakyth after this maner / sayen¦ge. Who so euer speake / speake he as the wordes of god: and every man as he hathe takyn grace of knowing / so ministre he forthe to other men It is wrytten playnly in the booke of noumbres the eleventh chapter. When ye prophet Moyses ha¦de chosen seuenty elder men / and the spryt of god rested on them and they prophesyed. Two men be¦sydes them / Eldad / and Medad / prophesyed in ye tentes / and Iosue the ministre of Moyses said to Moyses / forbed thowe them.moses letted no mā to pro¦phesye. And Moyses said what enuiest thou for me? Who shall let yt all the people prophesye / yf god gyue them his spirite? Also it is redde in the gospell that saynct Ihon euangelist said vnto Christ / lorde we shall forbyd that castith oute spiryttes in thy name / whiche folowith not vs.Luc. ix And Christ said do not forbede / for who so is not agaynst vs ys with vs. And vn¦to the same agreyth well the prophesy of Iohe which saynt Petre preachinge to the Iewes stron¦gly allegyd as Luke recyteth in the secounde cha∣pitre of the actes of the apostles sayenge after this maner. That godde nowe in the last dayes shall shedde out his spirite vppon every flesshe.
For god sayeth your sōnes and doughters shuld prophecy / and your yonge men shall se visyons.But they say only ma¦ster doctor can vnder∣stād ye scri∣pture And vpon whit sondaye god gave knowlege of hys lawe to dyuerse natiōs with out annye excep¦cyons in ther mother tonge / by the vnderstādyng of one tunge. And of thys it is notabyll sithen the laye people in the olde lawe had ther lawe in ther mother tounge / yt the lay englishe people in ye ne∣we lawe haue it as all other nacyons hathe / sy∣the Christ bowght vs as he dyd other and hath gevyn to vs y• same grace as to other. For sainct Peter. Actu. xi. was reprevyd for he had bapty∣sed Cornelij / and hys felows yt were hethen mē. And Peter answeryd and saide. Yf god have ge∣vyn ye same grace to thē that he hatheto vs / who am I that maye forbyde god? As who saythe it lyethe not in ye power of men. Than who art thou that forbyddest the people to have gods lawe in ther mother tounge? we saye yt thou art Anticrist hym self. For Paule saith .i. Corin. x. I wyll eve∣ry man to speake with tounges / more for sothe to prophesy / also he saythe howe shall he saye A∣men apō thy blessyng that wortes not what thou sayst. Apō thys saithe doctor Lyre. Yf the people vnderstōd the prayer of the prest it shall the better be ladde vnto god / and the more deuoutly answer Amen.Here you re awne ma¦ster Lyre yf ye will not here Paul. Also Paule saithe in the same chapter. I wyll rather fyve wordes to be spokyn to the vnder¦standyng of men then ten thousande that they vn¦derstande not. And .lxx. doctors with other mo be∣fore the incarnacion of Christe translatyd the by∣ble owt of Ebrewe into Greke. And after the ascē∣sion many rāslated all the byble in dyuerse lāga∣ges / as into spanyshetunge frenshetunge / and al
mayne / italy and by many yeres have hade it. It was harde of a worthy mā of Almayn that y• sa∣me tyme was a flēmyng whose name was Ia∣mes Merlād which trāslated all the byble into fle¦myshe. For whiche dede he was somōned be fore the pope of great malyce. And the boke was takyn to examinacion. And truely he approuyd it. And then it was delyverd to hym agayne into confu∣siō of all hys enemys. Wurshupfull Bede in hys first booke callyd de gestis Anglorū. chapter. iij. rellyth that sainct Oswolde the Kyng of Northū¦berlande asked of the skottes an holy byshoppe Ai¦dā to preache to his people / and ye kyng him selfe in¦terpretyd it in Englishe to the people. Sythē this blessyd deade of this Kyng is alowede of all ho∣ly Churche / whye not nowe owght it as well to be allowed a man to reade the gospell in Englisshe to the people / sythen that sainct Paule saithe if o∣wer gospell be hydde / it is hydde in thē that shal∣be dampned.A feareful sayenge. And he saithe also he that knoweth not shall not be knowyn of gode. And therfore ve∣nerabilis Bede ledde by the spirite of gode trāsla¦ted a greate parte of the byble into englyshe. Who se originalles ben in many abbeys in yngland. And Cistercienc. li. v. ca. xxiiij. saythe that the eu¦uangely of Ihon̄ was drawen into englyshe by ye foresaid Bede whiche euuangely of Ihon̄ and o∣ther gospels ben yet in manye places of so olde en¦glyshe that skant can annye englyshe man reade them. For thys Bede reygnyd in the yere of owen lorde god .vij. hundred and .xxxij. Also Cistercien∣cis. li. vi. ca. i. saithe that kyng Alred ordyned opē scolys of dyuerse artes in Oxforde and he turnyd the best lawes into his moder tounge and the psal
er also / he reyhgned in the yere of owre lorde god viij. hundred .lxxiij. And sainct Thomas sayth super libr politicorū expounyng this worde bar∣barus / y• barbarus is he yt vndstondyth not yt he∣readyth in his mother tōge. Wherfore the apostle saith if I knowe not y• vertue of yt voyce to whome I speake I shalbe to hym barbarus / yt is to saye / he vndstādeth not what I saye / ne I what he saith And so all tho prestes yt vndstōdē not what they readyn by ther mother tonge be called barbarus / & therfore Bede dyd drawe into englisshe liberall artes leste englishe men shuld be come barbarus / hec Thomas. Also Lincoln. sayth in a sermō yt be¦gynnyth / Scriptū est delenitis. Yf any preste saye he cāne not preache / one remedye is / resigne he vp¦pe his būfyce.Resigne in no wise but apō a good pension Another remedy if he wyll not thus / recorde he in yt weke yt nakyd texte of the sondaye gospell yt he have ye grosse storye & tell it to the pe∣ople / yt is if he vndstōd latē / & do he this every we¦ke in ye yere he shall profyt moche. For thus prea∣chyd ower lorde sayinge / Ihon̄ .vi. The wordes that I speake to yowe be spirit & lyfe. Yf he do not vndstōde latē go he to one of his neyghbours yt vndstondeth / which wyll charctably expoune it to hym / ād thus edifye he his floke. Vpō this argu¦eth a greate clarke & saith / yf it be laufull to prea∣che yt naked texte to ye peple / it is also lefull to wryte and read it to thē. Also syre Wylliā Thorisby ar∣chebishope of Yorke did do drawe a tretyse in en∣glyshe by a worshypfull clerke whose name was ryke / in the whiche were conteyned the arti∣cles of byleve / the .vij. dedly synnes / the .vij. wor∣kes of mercy / the .x. cōmaundmētes.The same treatise is ī  church over agaynst Lō¦don stone at this houre And sent thē in small pagynes to ye cōmn people to lerne it ād to knowe it / of which yet manye a copye be in yng∣land.
Also Richerd the heremyte of Hampole dre¦we into englyshe the psalter with a glose & the les∣sons of dirige ād many other treatyces / by y• whi∣che many englyshe men have ben greatly edyfyed And they be cursed of gode yt woldē let ye people to be lewder thē they ben. But many mē nowe be ly∣ke vnto ye frēdes of Hiob / yt whyles they enforsed to deffende god they offendyd in him greuously. And thowgh suche as be slayne do myracles / n¦theles they ben stynking matters. This sayth Richerd ye heremyt expounyng this verse / Ne au∣feras de oremeo verbū veritatis vs{que} qua{que}.This pro¦phesye of Christ must be fulfilled take hede And Christ sayth yt mē shuld deame thē self to do grea∣te seruice to god in kylling of his peo∣ple. Arbitratur se obsequiū prestare deo. &c. Also a man of Lōdon whose name was Wyrynge hade a byble in englyshe of northē speache whiche was seyn of many men & it semyd to be .CC. yeres olde. Also it is knowē to many mē in ye tyme of kyng Ri¦cherd ye .ij. yt into a parlyamēt was putt a bylle by thassent of .ij. archebysshoppes & of ye clergy to ad∣nulle ye byble yt tyme trāslated into englyshe with other englysshe bookee of thexposiciō of yt gospels whiche whē it was harde & seyn of lordes & of ye comōs. The duke of lācaster Ihon̄ answered ther to tyght sharply saying this sentēce / we wyll not be refuse of all other nacions. For sythe they have godes lawe whiche is ye lawe of ower belefe ī ther owne lāgage / we wyll have owres in englysshe who so ever saye naye.pocrisie is the nature of all bisshoppes. And this he affer with a greate othe. Also Thomas Arūdell ar¦bysshoppe of Caunterbury said in a sermō at west mester / or yt buryeng of Quene / Anne / yt it was more ioye of her thā of any womā yt ever he knewe For she an alien borne hadde in englysshe all ye.
gospels wyth the doctors vpō them. And he said that she had sent thē to hym to examyn / ād he said that they were good and trewe. And he blamyd in that sermon sharply the negligence of the pre∣lats / and other mē / In so moche that he saide that he wold leave vppe the office of Chaunceler and forsake wordly busynes / and gyue hym to fulfyll his pastorall office / for that he hade seyn / and red¦de in tho bookes.Neuer tru∣st bishop as lōge as he kepeth his possessions And after this promyse he beca¦me the most cruell enemy that myght be agaynst englyshe bookes. And therfore as many men say∣ne god smot hym with a cruest 'dethe as he didde also Rycherd flemyng byshoppe of lyncolne. And yet ower bysshoppes ben so indurate and so farre strayed from god that they have no grace one to beware of another / but prowdly agaynst all rea∣sons and euidēce of gods lawes / and doctors sen∣tences / they brenne goddes wordethe whiche ha∣the brought thys realme to vndoynge for ever but if godes grace be the more / Wher is yt aunciēt blo¦de yt was in england in these da∣yes. for thys cruell deade is cause of pestilence / hungers / warres / and that also thys realme shalbe conqueryd in short tyme / as sainct Edward the kyng and confessor prophe¦syethe in his booke that begynnith thus / Sāctus Edwardus rex vidit spiritualibus oculis. ercete. And therfore it were good to the Kyng and to o∣ther lordes to make some remedy agaynst this cō∣stitucyon of Antechrist that saythe it is vnlawfull to vs englyshe men to have in englyshe goddes la¦ d therfore he brennythe and sleythe thē that teyne thys good deade / Et nūc re∣ges intelli∣gite erudi∣mini qui iu¦dicatis rer∣ram. and that is for de∣fault that the kyng and lordes knowē not ne wyll not knowether owne office in meātenāce of god & hys lawe. For as sainct Austen saithe the Kyng
with hys knyghtes representyn the godhede of Christe and prestes the manhode of Christe / Rex est vicartus diuinitatis / et sacerdos est vicarius Christi humanitatis / hec Augustinus in de que∣stionibus veteris et noue legis .ca. xci. And if the kyng wold desyer to knowe perfetly his offi∣ce / he maye fynde mē to shewe to hym bookes that truely and perfetly shall informe hym to doo his office to the plesaunce of god. But thys canne not he lerne of byshoppys for they enforme hym after Antichristes lawe and ordenaunce for hys la∣wes nowe reignen.Bishops will notte ache against their God their bely. Yet agaynst thē that sayn the gospell in englyshe wold make men to erre / wore they well / that we fynde in latyn lāgage more he retykes then of all other langages / for the decre. saythe .xxiiij. xciij. Quidam autem heretici / that there be founden syxty laten heretykes. And if mē shuld hate any lāgage for heresy thē must they ha¦te latē But gode forbede yt any lāgage shuld be ha¦ted for heresy sythē manye heretykes wer of ye disci¦ples of ye Appostles. For sainct Ihon̄ saithe they have gon̄ owt of vs but they were not of vs. And Paule saithe it behovythe heresys to be / How An¦tichrist is cause of al heresies. & ātichrist makythe many mo heretykes then there shuld be for he stoppythe so the knowyng of godes lawe / & punysheth so them that he knowyth that have it / that they dare not comen therof openly to have trewe informacion / and thys makyth laye men yt desyrē & lovē to knowe godes law to goo to gy in pryvyte / and conceyven by theyr owne w many tymes heresys the whiche heresies in tyme shuld be destroyed / yf men myght have free comenyng openly / and but if this maye be hade moche of ye people shall dye in heresy / for it lyethe
in Antichristes power to destroye all englys∣she bookes / for as fast as he brennethe / other men shall drawe / and thus the cause of heresy and of ye people that dyethe in heresy is the frowardnes of byshoppes that wyll not suffer men to haue opyn comounyng and fre in the lawe of gode and ther∣fore they be cowntable of as many sowlys as dy∣en in thys default / and are traytors to gode in stop¦pyng of his lawe the whiche was made in saluaci¦on of ye people.Is not this turninge the rotys of ye tre¦s vpward? And nowe they turne his lawe by∣ther cruell constitucyons into dampnacion of the people as it shalbe provyd apon them at the daye of dome for godes lawe saithe / Stabūt iusti in mag∣na constancia aduersus eos qui se angustianerūt / et qui abstulerunt labores eorum. &c. For that yt other men laborē they brennē / Reade Sa∣pien vi. and vij. and if owre clergy wold study well this lessen of sapiēce to yt ēde / they shuld mowe rede therin theyr oune dampnacion / but if they amend this defaulte with other defaul∣tes. Saithe not the holy man Ardemakan in the booke of questions that ye wurshupfull sacramēt of the alter maye be made in eche comē langage: For he saithe so diden the appostles. But we covett not this / but that Antechrist geue vs leaue to ha∣ue the lawe of ower beleue in englishe. Also they that haue comonyd moche with ye Iewes / saye that they haue in every lande that they be borne in / the byble in ther mother tounge / that is Ebrewe. And they be more practyse therin than annye men / ye the lewde men as the prestes. But it is red¦de in ther synagoges amonges the people of ther prestes to fulfyll ther prestes office and to the edifi¦cation of the poraile / that for worldly busines and slew the maye not studye it. Also the .iiij. evan∣gelistes
wrote the gospell in diverse langages / as Mathewe in Iurye / Marke in Italy / Luke in A∣chaie / and Ihon̄ in Asie. And all these wrotte in ye langages of the same contrys / also Thobye saithe Chap. xiij. that gode disperged / spred / or scaterid yt Iewes abrode among the hethen people that they tellynge vnto they in the merveylles of godde: they shuld knewe that there were none other gode / but gode of Israell. And gode ordyned his people to beleve his lawe wrytten among them in ther mo∣thertounge / vt pater. Ge. xvij. and Exo. xiij. In so moche the boke of Iudithe is wrytten in Calde spe¦che / vt peter per Hieronimū in prologo eiusdē. Al¦so the bookes of Daniel / and of Esdre ben wrytten in Calde / vt pater per Hieroni. in prologis eorun∣dē / also the booke of Iohelis in Arabyke ād Sy∣re speche / vt pater per Hieroni. in prologo eiusdē. Also Ezechiest the prophet prophesyed in Baby∣lon / and lefte his prophesye vnder the mother toun¦ge of Babylon / vt pater per Hieronimū in prologo eiusdem Also the prophesye of Isaie is transla∣ted into the tounge of Ethiope / as Hierom̄. cōclu∣dyth in primo prologo Gene. Then sythen the dar¦ke prophesyes were translated amonges the hethen people that they myght have knowledge of gode ād of the incarnacion of Christ / moche more it owght to be trāslatyd to englyshe people that have recei∣vyd the faythe and bounden them selfe to kepe it a∣pon payne of dampnacion / Mat. xxviij. sythen Christ comm¦unded his Apostles to preache his gospell all the worlde and exceptid no people nor lan∣age. Also Origen translated the byble owt of E¦brewe into Greke with helpe of other in the ye∣re of owre lorde God .CCxxxiiij. Also Aquila
trāslated it in ye tyme of Adriā ye emperowre in the yere of oure lorde .C. xxiiij. / also Theodosiō trāsla∣ it in ye tyme of thēperowre Contede .luij. yere after Aquila / also Simacus trāslated it in ye tyme of thē¦perowre Serene .xxx. yere after Theodosion .viij. yere after Simacus it was translated the auctor vnknowen in the tyme of Alexander the emperow¦re / And Ierome translated it into latyn / vt in cronicis Cistercienc. li. ij. ca. xxxij. And after that Ierom hade translated it into laten / he translated moche to women of the bible. And to the maydens Eustochia and Paula / he translated the bookes of Iosue of Iudicum and Ruth / and Hester / and Ecclesiastes / Ieremy / Isaie and Daniell / and the .xij. prophetes / ād the .vij. canonyke epystylles vt pater in prologo corūdem. And so all mē maye se here by Ierō that it was neuer his entēt to byn¦de the lawe of god vnder his translacion of laten but by his owne dede gevythe leaue to translate it into every speche for Ierom wrytythe ī his .lxxviij epystle to this man Atleta / that he shuld enforme his daughter in the bookes of the olde lawe and the newe / Also in his .lxxv. epistle he wrytythe to ye virgyn Semetriadis / that she shuld for to encrea¦se her selfe in vertue rede nowe apō one booke / ād nowe / apon another. And he specifiethe vnto her that she also reade the gospell / and the epistylles of the Apostles. And thus Thenglyshe men desy¦re to have the lawe of gode in englyshe / But my lor¦des say yt  maketh me heretikes & peruerteth soules. sythen it s callyd the lawe vndefyled cōuertyng sowlys in to clennes / lex dn̄i immaculata conuertens aīas / but Antechrist saithe that it is corrupte with litte∣rall lettre that it sleyth sowlys takyng his aucto∣rite of Paule / that saithe / litera occidit spiritus au¦dem
viuificat. That is ye Lettre of the ceremo∣nyes of the olde lawe sleyth the Iewes / and them that nowe vsen them / but the spirite of the newe la¦we quykenethe trewe Cristen men / sythen Christ saithe my wordes ben spritte and lyffe. Also we ta¦ke ensample of holy virgyns to love to reade the gospell as they didē / as Ratheryn / Cecyle / Lucye Agnes / Margaret / whiche alegyd the holy go∣spell to the infidels / that slewe them for the keping therof. Of these foresaid auctorites it is provyd laufull / yt bothe men ād women laufully may re∣ade and wryte gedes lawe in theyr mother tun∣ge / and they that forfenden this they shewe them selfes heyers and sonnes of the first tormentors / and werse / for they shewen them selfes the veraye disciples of Antichrist / whiche hathe ād shall pas¦se all the malyce of tyrauntes that haue ben before in stoppyng ād pervertynge of godes lawe whi∣che deade engendrythe greate vengeaunce to fall in this realme / but if it be amendid For Paule sai∣the Roma. 1. The wrathe of gode is shewyd from hevyn vpon cruelnes and vnryghtfulnes of these men that with holden the trowthe of gode in vn∣right wysnes / Reuelatur enim ira dei super omnē impictarem et iniusticiam hominum eorū qui veri¦tatem dei in iniustitia detinent. Now gode of hys mercy geve vnto ower kyng / and to ower lordes grace of trewe vnderstandyng to amende this de∣fault principally and all other / then shall we we easely to be amendid. For vntyll it be amend there shall neuer be rest and peace in thys realme Who yt fyndythe or redythe this lettre put it fur∣the in examinaciō & suffer it not to be hydde or de¦stroyed / but multyplyed for no mā knoweth what
proffyt maye come therof. For he that compi∣lede it / purpoyth with goddes helpe to mayntayne i vnto the deathe / yf neade be. And therfore all chri¦sten mē and women / praye that the worde of god maye be vnbounde / and delyvered from the po∣wer of Antichrist / and renne amonge his people. Amen. ¶Emprented at Marlborow in the lāde of Hes∣sen / be my Hans Luft / in the yere of owre lorde M. CCCCC. and .XXX.
