3484 99853468 18851
GODLIE meditations vpon THE LORDES PRAYER, THE beleefe, and ten commaundemen∣tes, with other comfortable meditati∣ons, praiers and exercises. Whereunto is annexed a defence of the do∣ctrine of gods eternall election and predesti∣nation, gathered by the constant martyr of God Iohn Bradford in the tyme of his imprisonment. The contentes wherof appeare in the page nexte folowyng. POST TENEBRAS LVX AFTER DARK∣NES, LIGHT. Nowe fyrst prynted by Rouland Hall, dwel∣lyng in gutter lane at the signe of the halfe Egle and key, the. 12. of October 1562.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of this boke. Instructions concerning praierr A meditation vpon the lordes praier. A meditation vpon the beleife. A meditation vpon the x. commaundementes. A meditation concerning praier. A breife paraphrase vpon the lords praier. A meditation of the comminge of Christe to Iudgement &c A meditation of the sobre vsage of the body and pleasures in this life. An other meditation to the same effecte. A meditation for the exercise of mortificatiōs. A meditation of the prouidence of god. A meditation of the presence of god. A meditation of gods power &c. A meditation of death. A meditation vpon the passion. A confession of synnes. An other confession of synnes. A praier for the remission of synnes. An other praier for remission of synnes. A praier for deliuerance from synne &c. A praier for the obtaining of faith. A praier for repentance. A communication betwene Sathan and oure consience. A defence of predestination. A treatise of election and freewill. A sūme of the doctrine of election and pre∣destination.
TO THE READER. HEre hast thou (good reader) suche godlye meditations, praiers and other exercises of that worthye witnes of god Iohn Bradford, as god by his singuler prouidence hath be∣therto preserued and now at the length broughte to light for thy comsort and commoditie. Daylye and howerlye was this his exercise, to talke with god by faith∣full and hartye meditation and praier with power pearcynge the heauens, and many suche godlye exercises dyd he leaue behinde him, which either time hath consumed or elles suche as keepe them in store to their owne priuate vse, doe little consider what benefite they withold from the church of god, whiche if they shall yet brotherly communicate, there shall not lacke good will and diligence to set them abroad. In the meane season, let vs with thankfulnes receyue, reade, and practise these, as meanes to quicken our spirites, to stirre vp our dulle hartes to a more feruenre inuocatiō of gods holy name. Which howe farre it is frō that it shuld be in vs, and what nede we haue thereof, if oure deade senses cannot feele, here may we see and perceiue. Here may we learne to flee vnto god by praier, that we runne not on still with this vnthankfull world, into for∣getfulnes
of his great benefites powered vp∣on vs, especially for the libertie of his gospell, which we (in muche mercye restored nowe vnto vs againe) so vnthankfully receaue, so vn∣godly neglect, so wickedly abuse. God graūt vs his good spirit to work in vs this good work: to loke about vs in time: to consider our state past and presēt, as in deed we haue great cause to do, & so with hartie praier flee vnto god to preuent the plagues that are at hand, lest with double woe we find the la∣ter ende worse then the beginning.
Instructions to be obserued concernynge Prayer. There be nyne thynges that pertayne to the knowledge of trew prayer. FIrste to knowe what prayer is. Secondlye, howe manye sortes of praier there be. Third¦lye, the necessitie of prayer. Fourthlye, to whom we ought to pray. By whom we must pray. Where to praye, and what to praye. The excellencye of prayer. What we must do that our prayers may be hearde. What prayer is. PRaier is a simple, vnfained, hum¦ble and ardent openinge of the heart before God, wherein we ei¦ther aske thīgs nedeful, or giue than¦kes for benefits receaued. Paull in ye first to timothe &. 2. Chap. calleth it by fowre sōdrie names in one sen∣tence,
to witte, praier, supplication, intercession and thanks geuing. In latyn, Deprecatio, Obsecratio, inte recssio, et gratiarum actio. Wherof the first is for the aduoiding and preuenting of e∣uil, the second is an earnest and far∣uent calling vpō god for any thing, ye thirde is an intercession for other, the fourth is a praisinge of God for thinges receaued. ¶ There be .ii. maner of waies how we shoulde praye. 2. First publikly, and that is called comō praier: and priuatlie, as when men praye alone, and that is called priuat prayer: and howe bothe these two are allowed before god ye scrip∣ture beareth testimony by the exam¦ple of all the holye men and women before and after Christ. ¶ Of the necessitie of praier. 3. There be .iiii. thinges ye prouoke vs to pray, first the commaundemēt of god, secondlie sinne in vs, whiche
driueth vs of necessity to god for suc∣cor, life, & mercy, thirdlie our weake nature being vnable to doe any good requireth praier to strengthen it, euen as a house requireth principal pillers for ye vpholding of it, fourth∣lie the sutteltie of the enemye (who priuilie lurketh in ye inwarde parts, waitinge to ouerthrowe vs euen in those things which we thinke to be best done) styreth vs vehementlye therevnto. ¶ To whom we ought to praie. 4. Thre thinges pertaine to hym that must be praied vnto, first that he haue such eares as may heare al the worlde at ones, secondlie that he be in al places at ones, thirdlie that he haue such power that he may be able to helpe, and such mercie that he wil delyuer. By whom we shoulde praye 5. Christ only is the way by whom we haue free accesse vnto the father
and for whom our praiers are accep∣ted (our infirmites notwithstāding) withoute whom al oure prayers are abhominable. Where to pray and what to pray. 6. As touching the place where we should pray, seyng al places are one, there is none forbidden: onelye the cōmon praier must be made in what place so euer the congregatyon of Christ doth assemble. 7. What to praye, lyeth in the ne∣cessitie of euery man: & for as muche as we nede both spirituall and cor∣porall things, we may bouldly aske thē both. For as to aske spiritual gif¦tes it is profitable & commaunded, so to aske corporall, it is necessarie and allowed. Of the excellencie of prayer. 8. The worthines of praier consis∣teth in .ii. thinges: in the dingnitye of the commaunder who is god the fountayne of all goodnes, who also commaundeth onely good thinges, and in the effect ye foloweth it, which
is the obtaininge of whatsoeuer we desire faithfully, according to ye will of God. What to doe that we may be heard 9. First we muste put of oure owne rightuousnes, pride, and estimation of our selues, and put on christ with his rightuousnes: secondlye, an ear∣nest faith and faruent loue, with the putting of all rancnor, malice & en∣uie is required: finally trewe re∣pentaūce knitteth vp the knot, for in it are contained al the vertues afore∣named. I. Breadford.
A meditation of the lordes praier. Our father. THou good lord, which madest heauen & earth the sea and all that is therin, together with Gene. 1. thy dearelye beloued sonne Iesus Chrysts, and with thy holy spirite: Thou the same god, which openedst thy selfe Genes. 3. to Adam by thy promise: Thou the Gene. 12. 22 23. 24, 25. God of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob: Thou which broughtest thy people of Israell forth of Egipt wt a migh∣tie Exod. 13. 14 15. &c. hand and a stretched out power: Thou which gauest thy lawe vpon mounte Sinai: Thou which spakest Exod. 19. 20 by thy prophets, & last of all in these latter dayes by thy dearlye beloued Heb. 1. sonne Iesus Christ, whom ye woldest should be made a second Adam, that 1. cor. 15. as by ye first we are childrē of wrath, carnall and full of concupiscence: so Rom. 5. by him we might be made children of grace and spiritual, by communi∣cating with him ye qualitie, merites
vertues, and grace of hys fleshe, throughe the operation of the holye spirite, as he communicated with vs the substaunce of oure fleshe in the Mat. 1. Luck. 1. wombe of ye virgin Marie, by the o∣peration of the same holy spirit, be∣ing that blessed sede which was pro∣mised to Adam, Abraham, Isaac Ia∣cob, Gene. 3. 12. 26. 28. Psal. 89. Dauid, which should brouse the Serpents heade, which should bring the blessing on all nations, whiche shuld raigne ouer thi house for euer, and mightilye ouercome thine and 2. Reg. 7. Luk. 1. Psal. 110. our enemies, as in dede he did by his incarnation, natiuitie, circumcisiō, erile, baptisme, fastinge, tentation, doctrine, dedes, mracles, workings, agonies, bloudy praier, passiō, death resurrection, and ascension, and yet he stil doth by his mediation and in∣tercession for vs, and at the length Rom. 8. he will on al partes fully accōplishe by hys commynge to Iudgemente, which wilbe sodenly in ye twinkring Mat. 24. 1. Cor. 15. 1. Thess. 4. 2. Cor. 5. of an eye, in the blast of a trompete and shoute of an Archangell, when he shalbe sene wyth thousandes of Saintes & innumerable thousandes
of Angels, all the whole worlde be∣ing on fire, and all people that euer were, are or shalbe then standing be∣fore his tribunall or iudgement seat to render an accompte of that they haue done in thys bodye, be it good or bad: Thou I say, this god whiche Exod. 32. 33 Psal, 5. Ioel. 2. art holye, rightuouse, trewe, wyse, pure, chast, mightie, merciful, good, graciouse, a hater of sinne, an auen∣ger of vnrightuousnes &c, woldeste that I which am borne in sinne and Psal 51. Eph. 2. Genes. 9. 8. Ierem. 17. conceyued in iniquitie, which by na∣ture am a childe of wrathe (for my hart is so vnsearcheably euell that out of it springeth corrupt concupis∣sence, so that the inclination there∣of is prone to euell alwaies euen frō my youth vp: as is my vnderstāding and mynde so darkened, that I can∣not perceyue those thinges, that be 2. Cor. 2. 2. cor. 3. of god of my selfe, and all the wyse∣dome whiche I receyue from Adam naturallye or other wyse attayne by labour or studye before regenera∣tion: I cānot thinke a good thought muche lesse wyshe it or consent vn∣to it and least of all doe it) thou I
saye yet wouldest that I being such a one, in whom dwelleth continuall Rom. . emnitie against thee, that I whiche am nothinge but sinne and one that doeth euel alwaies before thee, shuld call thee and beleue thee this god & father of our lorde and Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ, to be in very dede my fa∣ther, that is, thou wouldest I should be moste assured, that thou of thyne owne good will, whiche thou barest to me wardes before I was, yea be∣fore When and wherefore god is be∣come oure father. Ephe. 1. the worlde was, hast in Christe chosen me to be thy child, & through him art become my most louinge fa∣ther, from whō I should loke for all good thinges, & be most certainelye perswaded, that loke howe muche thou art more then mā, so much thy loue and fatherlye prouidence to∣wards me passeth the loue & proui∣dence of anye father towardes hys childe, in louing me, caring how to help me, prouiding for me, nourter∣ing We should be certaine and with∣out doubt that god is our father. me, & helping me in al my nedes. So certaine ye woldest haue me to be of this, yt to doubt of it, doth most dis¦please thee & dishonor thee, as either
yu were not true, or not able to doe The great test disho∣nor to god is to doubt these thynges, or els becamest not my father in respecte of thine owne goodnes ī christ only, but also in re∣spect of my worthynes and deserts. And yt I should not wauer or doubte Causes to confirme our faythe that god is our father. of thys that thou arte my deare fa∣ther & I thy childe for euer through Iesus Christe, it is required in the first commaundement, which sayth I am ye lord thy god, thou shalt haue none other goddes but me: agayne, thy sonne doth here commaunde me to call thee by the name of father: moreouer in the firste article of my belefe I professe the same in saying, I beleue in god the father almighty: besydes this their are manye other things to confirme me herin, as the creation and gouernemente of the world generally, and of euery crea∣ture particularly, for al is made and kept for man and so for me, to serue me for my commoditye, necessitye & admonition. Againe the creation of me, in that thou hast made me after thy Image, hauīg a reasōable soule, body, shape &c. where thou mightest
haue made mea tode, a Serpent, a swine, deformed frātike &c. moreouer thy wōderful cōseruacion, norishing and keping of me hitherto in my in∣fancie, childhode, youth &c. Al these I say, should cōfirme my faith of thy fatherlie loue. But of all things the opening of thy selfe by thy worde & promise of grace, made after mans fall, first to Adam, then to Abraham Isaac, Iacob, and so to other, beyng published by the prophetes frō time to time, and last of all accomplished by thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, in 2. Cor. 1. whom thy promises are yea & Amē: The opening of thy self thus, I say, in and by Christ, is the most chiefe & sure certificat, that thou arte my fa∣ther for his sake, & I thy deare child, although of my selfe I am most vn∣worthie. For thou accordinge to thy promises, hast not spared thy deare Iohn. 3. sonne Iesus Christ, but giuen hym to ye death of ye crosse for my sinnes. Thou woldest he shuld be made flesh of our fleshe, and bloude of our bloud in the wombe of the virgine Marie, by the operation of the holy Spirite Ephe. 5.
that we by the working of the same spirite, throughe the merites of hys fleshe & bloud, might be made fleshe of his fleshe and bloud of his bloud, that is, as he hath the substaunce of our fleshe & bloud: euen so we might haue and foreuer enioye in him and through him, the qualities, vertues and gifts of rightuousnes, holines, innocencie, immortalitie, and glory, wherewith he hath endued our na∣ture in his owne person for vs all; that as now in faith & hope we haue ye same, so in his cōming we might fully enioye them in very dede, for then shall oure bodies nowe vile, be Phil. 3. 1. Iohn. 3 like to his glorious body. Herein a∣pereth thy loue, not yt we loued thee but that ye louest vs, & hast giuen thy sonne for vs: herin doest yu cōmende vnto vs thy loue, yt when we were yet sinners, Christe thy dersonne Rom. 5. died for vs, so yt nothing shuld sepa∣rate vs from thy loue in christ Ies{us}, Rom. 8. nether death nor hunger &c. For if when we were enemies, we were re¦cōciled Rom. . vnto thee by the death of thy sōne, much more we being recōciled
shalbe saued by his life. And yt I shuld not doubt herof, but certeinly be per swaded all thys to pertayne to me, where I mighte haue been borne of Turkes, loe yu woldest I shoulde be borne of Christian parents, brought into thy church by baptisme, which is ye Sacrament of Adoptiō, and re∣quireth What bap∣tisme is & what it re∣quireth. faith as wel of remission of my sinnes, as of sanctification and holines, to be wrought of thee in me by thy grace and holy spirit. Where I mighte haue been borne in an ig∣norant time and region, yu woldest I I shuld be borne in this time and re∣gion, wherin is more knowlege re∣ueled, then euer was here or in ma∣ny places is. Where I mighte haue been of a corrupt iudgemente, & en∣tangled with many errours, loe yu of thy goodnes, as thou hast reformed my Iudgement, so doest thou keepe it, and nowe for the same iudgemen¦tes sake doest vouchsalfe somewhat by the crosse to try me. By al which thinges I shuld confirme my faythe of thys, that thou alwayes haste been, arte and wylte be for euer
my deare father: in respect wherof I should, be as certaine of saluation & of these aheritaunce of heauen for e∣uer: what is the effecte or fruite that cōmeth of thy, cer∣tteine per∣swasiō that god is our father. : thankfull, cast my whole care on thee, trust on thee, and call on thee, with comforte: and certaine hope for all. thinges that I wants. For in yt thou hāst giuen to mē this benefite to be thy childe vndeserued, vndeseced on my behalfe,  and onely in respect of thine owne good∣nes and grace in Christ, lest at anye time I should doubt of it: how shuld I but hope certainlie that nothinge profitable to me can be denied, in yt thi power is infinite? For as thi good will is declared in adoptinge me, so nothing can be finally wanting me, which may make for my weale (for yt shuld improue thy power to be al∣mighty) in yt thi wil is so boūteously already declared: wheras my beee requireth to beleue in thee ye father almightie, in consideration whereof I shoulde in all thynges behaue my self as a child, reioyse in thee, praise thee, truste in thee, feare thee serue thee, loue thee, call vpon thee &c.
But alas how heauie harted am I? How vnthankfull am I? Howe full of vnbeleife, & doubtinge of this thy riche mercie? Howe litle doe I loue thee, feare thee, call vpon thee. &c. Oh be mercifull vnto me, forgyue me good father for thine owne sake, and graunt me the spirit of thy chil∣dren, to reuele thy self vnto me, and Iesus Christe thy deare sonne oure lord, by whō we are made thy chil∣dren, that I may truly knowe thee, hartely loue thee, faithefully hange vpon thee in al my nedes, with good hope call vpon thee, render faithful∣ly this honour to thee, that thou art my god & father, & I thy deare childe through thy grace in Christ, and so alwaies be endued with an assured hope of thy goodnes, and a faithfull obedient hart in all things to thy ho¦ly will. At thy hands and from thee as I must loke for al things, so come I vnto thee and praye thee to gyue me these thinges whiche thy deare children haue, and thou requirest of me, that I might come & aske them of thee, as now I doe through Iesus
Christ our lord. As by this word (father) I am taught to glory of thee and in thee, and all that euer thou hast (for thou art who¦ly mine, my lord, my god, my father) so by this word (Our) I am taught to glory of all the good, that al & euery of thy seruants that euer were, are, or shalbe, had, haue, and shall haue. For now I am taught to beleue, yt thou hast called me into the commu∣nion of thy churche & people, whom hereby I perceiue yu hast commaun∣ded, to be carefull for me, as for thē selues, and in all their praiers to be as mindful of me, as of themselues. Againe as by this word (Father) I am taught to remēber & render my due∣tie I owe to thee wards, faith, loue feare, obedience &c: so by thy worde (our) I am taught my dutie towards thy people to be carefull for them & to take their sorow, pouerty, & affli∣ction &c as mine owne: and therfore to labour to helpe them in hart and hand, after my vocation & habilitie, vtterly abhorring all pride, selfloue arrogancie, & contempt of any. By reason wherof I haue great cause to
lament & to reioyse. To lament be∣cause I am so farre frō cōsideration, much more frō doig my dutie to thy people in thoughts, words, or dedes. To reioyse, because I am called of thee, & placed ī the blessed societie of thy saints, & made a mēber & citizen of the heauenly Ierusalem, and be∣cause thou hast giuē in commaūde∣ment to all thy church to be as care full for me, as for themselues. But alas howe farre am I herefrō? As I am giltie of vnthankfulnes for this thy calling me into the blessed cōmunion of thy deare sōne, & chur∣che, yea of thy selfe: so am I giltie of selfloue, vnmercifulnes, pride, arro∣gantie, forgetfulnes, cōtempt of thy children: for els I could not but be o∣ther wise affected & otherwise labour then I do. Oh be mercifull vnto me good father, forgiue me, & graūt for christs sake, that as my tonge soū∣deth this word (our) so I may in hart fele the true loye of thy blessed com∣munion, and the true loue & cōpas∣sion whiche thy children haue and fele towards their brethen, that I
may reioyse in all trouble, in respect of that ioyefull communion: that I maye denye my selfe to honour thy children vpō earth, and endeuer my selfe to doe them good for thy sake through Ies{us} christ our lord. I come onely to thee to giue me that which I cannot nor muste not els where haue, and thou requirest it of me, yt therefore I shuld as thy childe come and craue it to thy glory. Which art in heauen. AS by these words (Oure father) I am taught to glorie and reioyse for the blessed cōmunion which I am called to wt thee, deare father, with thy Christ, and with thy holye church: so also am I heare taught by these words (Which art in heauen) to re∣ioyse in respect of the place and bles∣sed Ioyes, whereunto at the length in thy good tyme I shall come. For now I may perceiue, that as heauē is thy home, so is it mine also, being (as I am) thy child through Christ, although heare for a time I am bo∣dely
on earth and in miserie. Againe by these wordes (which arte in heauen) I am admonished, not one∣ly to discerne thee from earthly fa∣thers, and to knowe how that thou art almightie, present in all places, and of most puritie, to cōfirme ther∣by my faith, to be prouoked ye more to feare thee, to reuerence thee &c: but also I am admonished to iudge of thy fatherly loue by heauenly be∣nefites, and not by corporall simply and alonely, for often times the wic¦ked prosper more in the worlde, and haue more worldly benefites, then thy children. So that by this I see thou woldest pul vp my minde from earth and earthly things, to heauen and heauenly thinges; and that I should see further by corporall be∣nefites, thy heauenly prouidence for me. For if yu place me thus on earth and thus blesse me as thou doest & hitherto hast done from my youthe vp, in that thou art nothing so care∣ful for my body as for my soule, how shuld I but thinke much of thy pro∣uidence for it in thy home, where is
such glory, as yt eie hath not sene &c. of which thinges, these corporall be∣nefites of thine, giuen me on earth, should be as it were inductions, and the taking of them away, admoniti∣ons to be more mindefull of perma∣nent thinges, and lesse mindefull of transitorie thinges. By reasō hereof I haue great cause to lament, and to reioyce. To lamēt because I am so earthly minded, so litle desirous of my home, so vnthāk¦full for thy prouidence, and fatherly correction here on earth. To reioyce because of my home, and the greate glory thereof, because thou doest so prouide for me here, because thou doest so correct and chastē me &c. but alas I am altogether a wretch, earth¦lie & vnthankful, not onely for these corporall benefites, health, ryches, frendes, fame, wisedome &c: for thy fatherly correction, sicknes, tempta∣cion &c: but also for thy heauenly be¦nefites, for Christ Iesus, for the pro¦mise of thy spirit, for thy gospell &c. Yea euen for heauen it selfe and thy whole glorye, as the Israelits were
for the land of Canaan, & therefore neuer enioyed it but perished in the Psal. 106. wildernes. I am proude in prosperi∣tie and forget thee, waxing secure & careles. &c: I am impacient in the crosse, and to much consider worldly discommoditie. Oh deare father for∣giue me, for thy Christes sake all mine vnthankfulnes, loue of thys world, contempt and obliuion of thy heauenly benefites, and graunte me thi holy spirit, to illuminate the eies of my minde with the light and liue∣ly knowledge of thy presence, power wisdom, & goodnes in thi creatures, but specially in christ iesus thy sōne, & so by the same spirit enflame mine affections, that I may desire nothing in earth but thee, and to be present with thee, that my conuersaciō may be in heauen cōtinually. Frō when∣ce graunt me stil to loke for the lord Col. 3. Phil. 3. Ies{us}, to make this my vile body like vnto his owne glorious and immor¦tal bodye, according to his owne po∣wer by whiche he is able to doe all things. As yu hast giuē me to be thy childe: so I praye the giue me these things which be ye properties of thy
childrē giuen frō y• in thy good time. Halowed be thy name. THy name is that wherby thou art knowen: for names serue to discerne, and knowe one thinge from an other. Nowe thoughe thou art knowen by thy creatures, yet in this our corrupt estate, thei serue but to make vs excuseles. Therfore pro¦perly, Rom. 1. most liuely, and cōfortably yu art knowen by thy holy worde, and specially by thy promise of grace, and freely pardoning and receiuinge vs into thy fauour for christ Ies{us} sake. For the which goodnes in Christ, yu art praised & magnified, accordinge to thy name, that is, so much as mē Psal. 48. 138 know thee in Christ, they magnifye How gods name is ha¦lowed. thee, & praise thee, which here thou callest halowing or sanctifieng: not that thou arte the more holye in re∣spect of thy self, but in respect of mē: who the more they knowe thee, the more they cannot but sanctify thee, that is, they cannot but as n them selues by true faith, loue, feare, and spiritual seruice, honour thee: so al∣so in their outwarde behauour and
wordes, they cannot but liue in such sorte, as other seing them, maye in and by their holines & godly conuer¦satiō, be occasioned, as to know thee so to sanctify thy name accordingly. And therfore thou settest forth here The chiefe desyre of gods chil∣dren. vnto me what is the chiefe and principall wyshe and desyre of thy children and people, namelye, that thou in Christe mightest be truelye knowen and honored bothe of them selues, and of others inwardlye and outwardly. By reasō wherof easely a man may perceiue by the cōtrary, y• the greatest sorow & greife thy peo¦ple The grea∣test greife of goddes people. haue, is ignoraunce of thee, false seruice or religion, and wicked con∣uersation. Against the whiche they pray and labour diligētly after their vocations, as they for the obtaining of the others, both to others and to them selues, doe take no smal payne in praier, studie, and godly exercise. By reason hereof I se that I am far from this desyre and lamentation which is in thy children: I see myne ignoraunce of the true knowledge Our igno∣raunce. of thee and thy name, for ells it had
not neded thee so by thy worde to haue reueled thy self: I see also mine ignoraunce of the excellencie of the same. For els woldst y• not haue told me, that the sanctifinge of thy name is the chiefest thing, yu requirest of e∣uery mā. Again I se my great want Our greate nede. of holines, for els thou nedest not to teach me, to seke & pray for y• I want not. Moreouer I se my great peruer∣sitie, whiche woulde not seke at thy hands for sanctification, although I Our peruer¦sitie. se my nede therof. For els yu woldest not haue cōmaunded me to pray for it, if I seinge my want, wolde haue praied vnto the therfore. Last of al I Gods loue see thy wonderfull goodnes, whiche wilt vndoubtedly giue vnto me sanc¦tification & holynes: for yu woldest not that I shuld aske for that thing that yu wilte not giue me. So that I haue great cause to lament and re∣ioyse. To lament, because I am so farre from this desire and lamenta∣cion, which thy chyldren haue: also because of my ignoraunce, pouertie peruersitie, vnthankefulnes &c. but most of all because thy holye name,
worde, and religiō is so blasphemed both in doctrine and in liuing of ma∣ny, especially in thys Realme. To reioyse I haue greate cause, for thy exceding goodnes and merry, which woldeste so disclose thy selfe by thy workes, word, & gospel: which wol∣dest opē these things thus vnto me and also giue vnto me & others sanc¦tification in thy sight by saithe; & in the sight of men by purenes of life & godly conuersation. But alas I doe hartely neither the one nor y• other, that is lame or reioyce: as yu father which serchest my hart doest righte well know, Oh be merciful vnto me and forgiue me, yea giue me, of thin owne pitie, thy holy spirit, to reuele & opē to my mind effectually my mi¦serable estate & condicion, my igno∣raunce, peruersitie, & my carelesnes for thy true honor & dishonor in such sort, y• I may hartely lament these e∣uills, & haue them pardoned & taken frō me through iesus christ our lord. Againe good father giue me y• same thy holi spirit to reuele to me thy na¦me, word, & gospell, y• I maye liuely knowe thee, vnfainedly loue thee, hartely o¦bey thee, and aboue all thinges de∣sire and labour by all meanes law∣full that al godlines in doctrine and conuersation may be exercised both in me and in all others, for whom yu woldest I shuld pray. Heare thinke vpon the state of reli∣gion, and the life of the professours of the gospell, that you may lament some, pray for some, and giue than∣kes for some. Let thy kingdome come. THy kingdome is in .ii. sortes to be consydered, vniuersally and particularly. Uniuersally accor¦ding Gods king¦dome in re¦spect of his power. to thy power, wherewith thou gouernest all thinges euery where, in earthe, heauen, hell deuilles, An∣gells, men, beasts, foules, fishes, & all creatures animate & inanimate, sensible and insensible. Of this king¦dome spake Dauid when he sayde: thy kingdome ruleth ouer al. Parti¦cularly thy kingdome is to be consi∣dered Psa. 104. according to thy grace where∣with
thou raignest only in thy chur¦che Gods king¦dome in re¦spect of his grace. and elect people, ruling and go∣uerning al & euery mēber of thy chur¦che to thy glory & their eternal com∣fort: not that out of this church I ex¦clude thy power (for as therewyth thou defendest thy people, so thou pu¦nishest thy enemies) but because thy grace is specially cōsidered, being (as it were) the verye keper that kepeth and guydeth thy people. The tyme Gods king¦dome in re¦spect of his glorye. wilbe when this kingdome of grace and power, now being as distincte, shalbe vnited & made one kingdome of glory: which wilbe when Chryst shal giue vp his kīgdome into thyne handes, that is in the resurrection, whan deathe the last enemye shalbe subdued, and thou shalt be all in all. In the meane season this kingdome of grace is miraculously & mightely How gods kingdome heare is cō¦serued and enlarged. propagated, enlarged, and gouer∣ned by y• true ministery of thy word and Sacraments, thorow the wor∣king of thy holy spirite. And this is the meane and way, wherby as thou didest firste plante, so doest thou en∣large, amplifie and preserue y• same.
This kingdome of grace begon, con¦tinued, & enlarged by the true prea∣ching of thy gospell and ministratiō of thy Sacramentes, is the thynge which Christ teacheth here thy chil∣dren to pray for, that it might come, that is to say, that thy gospel might so mightely, purely, & plentuouslye be preached (maugre the head of all thyne enemies) that the numbre of thine elect might be brought in, and so the kingdome of thy glory myght appere. So that as I see thy chidren desire, pray, & labour, y• thy gospell might be truely preached, hard, and liued in themselues, & in others: so they lament the not preaching & re∣fusing, the not liuing & vnbeleuing thy gospel: yea they lament the ling ring of the coming of thy christ, for in his coming they know thei shalbe like vnto him, and hauing this hope they purifie thēselnes as he is pure. By reason hereof I see first that I 1. Iohn. 3. am farre from this desire and lamen¦ting, which thy children haue, I see my ignoraunce of thy kingdome and Our igno∣raunce. power euery wher, of thy grace only in thy church, & of thy glorye, when
all the enemyes of thy grace shalbe cast downe, & thy glorye and power shall embrace eche other. I se my ig∣noraūce how acceptable a seruice to thee is the true preaching & the hea∣rig of thy gospell: for els yu hadst not neded to haue placed thys petition next to the petition of the sanctifiing of thy name. Againe I see here my vnhablenes to enter into thy kyng∣dome, Our nede and to attayne to it. For ells what nede shuld I haue to praye for that to come from thee, which other wise maye be archeiued. Thirdly I our peruer¦sitie se also my peruersitie, & contempt of thy kingdome & grace. For although I se my want, yet I wold not desire thy kingdome to come, if yu didest not commaunde me to praye so: for yf I wold haue praied for it, yu woldst not haue cōmaūded me. Last of all I see gods good¦nes. thy goodnes, which wilt bringe thy kingdome, & that as generally by sē¦ding forth ministers to preach truli: so particularly by regenerating me more and more, and by geuing me as grace here, so glorye els where: for thou woldest not I shoulde praye for that, whiche thou wylte denye.
So that I haue great cause to lamēt and reioyse. To lament because of my miserable estate and condition, because of my sinne, ignoraunce, re∣bellion, peruersitie, Satans power, contempt of thy grace, thy gospel & ministerie, here or ells where. To reioyse because of thy goodnes and great mercy, which hast brought me into thy church, kepest me in it, and wilte doe so still: also because of the Ministerie of thy worde and Sacra∣mentes, by which the holye ghost is and wilbe effectuall: and finally be∣cause of y• great glory, whervnto yu hast called me, & now wilt giue vnto me, asking the same. But alas how vnthankfull I am & sorowles, lorde thou knowest for my hart is not hid from thee &c. Oh be mercifull vnto me and forgiue me, good father, and graunte the Spirit of thy children, to reueale vnto me my ignoraunce of thy kingedome, my pouertie and peruersitie, that I maye lament the same, and daily labour for thy helpe and thy holy spirit, to suppresse the kingdome of sinne in my self and in
others. Againe graūt me that same thy holy spirit to reueale to me thy kingdome of power, grace, and glo∣ry, to kindle mine affections, to re∣generate me more & more, to raigne in me, as in a pece of thy kingdome, to giue to me to desire, to pray, and to labour for thy kingdome, both to my selfe and to others effectually, to thy glory, & to assure my conscience of thy goodnes, that thou wylt giue me grace, and glory &c. Here cal to mind the state of the mi∣nisterie & ministers, the light and life of gospellers, therrours & here∣sies which mē be entangled withal. Thy will be done. AS thy power is infinite, so is thy Gods om∣nipotent wil vnkno¦wen & vn∣reueled. wisdome accordingly. Wherby as we maye perceyue, that no∣thinge is or can be done against thy power, or otherwise then by it: so is there not nor cannot be any thinge done against, or otherwise, then by thy omnipotent & secret will, which is alwaies, as thou art, good holie,
and iuste, howe far so euer it seme o∣therwise to oure folishe reason and indgemēt. And therfore here we are taught to pray that thy wil may be done here wythoute synne on mans behalfe, as it is on the Angells be∣halfe in heauen. Againe for asmuch as thou art in∣comprehensible Godds wil reueled & knowen. of thy selfe as well concerning thy power as cōcerning thy wisdome, we may not according therto search thee, but rather adore and worshippe thy maiestie, & trem∣ble at thy Iudgements and works, and therefore praye alwayes, that we maye be content with thy wil, and be borome thereto. And for as∣much as thou hast reuealed to vs so muche of thy wyll in thy word wri∣ten as is necessarye for vs in thys life to know, yea as we can attaine vnto, and a lytle further: we ought to take all thynges done there a∣gaynste as synne and transgres∣syon, althoughe thou canste vse the same synne to serue thy prouy∣dence. Of the which prouidence w can not nor maye not Iudge further
then thou hast & shalte open it vnto vs. So that this peticion (Thy will be done) is not simplie to be vnderstand concerninge thy omnipotent wil vn reueled, against the which nothing is nor can be done, but rather concer¦ning thy will reueled in thy lawe & gospel, the which thou here teachest me that we shuld desire, not only to know it, but also to doe it, and that in suche perfection & willingnes, as it is in heauen. The which thinge I perceiue hereby that thy childrē doe desire daily in & for themselues and others, & do lament the contrary, in whōsoeuer it be, so that often their eies gushe out with riuers of teares because men kepe not thy lawes. Psa. 119. By reason hereof I see that I am farre from the syghes and teares of thy people. I see my ignoraun∣ce Our igno∣raunce. of thy wyll yf thou hadeste not opened the same by thine owne mouth. I see my ignoraūce, how ac¦ceptable a seruyce obedyence to thy wil is, and therfore doest yu place this
peticion amonges the fyrst and con∣tinual desires of thy childrē. Againe I se my pouertie in godly obediēce, which had nede to be taught to pray Our nede for it, therby to signifie vnto me my want and vnhabilitie to attayne it, but by thy gift. Thirdly I se my dis∣obedience: Our disobe¦dience. for els neuer woldst thou haue cōmaunded me to haue praied for the doing of thy will, if I seinge my want, wold haue prayed so. Last of all I se thy goodnes, whiche gods good¦nes. wilt giue to me and others to obey thy will: that is, to loue thee wyth al our harts, to loue our neighbour as our selfes, to die to our selues, to liue to thee, to take vp oure crosse and to followe thee, to beleue, to re∣pent &c: for ells thou woldest neuer haue bidden vs, to pray for a thinge which we shuld not loke for. So that I haue great cause to lamēt and reioyce. To lament, because of my miserable state and condition, because of my sinne, ignoraunce, po¦uertie, and peruersitie, also because thy will is euerye where either not knowen, or contēned, and Sathans
will, the wil of the world, and of the fleshe readily obeyed. To reioyse I haue great cause, for that thou hast opened thy selfe and will vnto man∣kind, for that also▪ thou peculiarlye hast taught me these things, and be∣cause also thou wilt graūt me grace to doe the same. But alas howe vn∣thankfull I am, and how hard har∣ted, thou Lorde doest knowe. Oh be mercifull vnto me and forgyue me. I pray thee graciouse god graūt me thy holy spirit, to reueale to me my ignoraunce of thy will, my pouertie and peruersitie, that I may hartely bewayle it &c, and by thy helpe and working of the same spirit may sup¦presse the will of the fleshe. Agayne graunt me thy holy spirit, to reuele to me thy will declared in thy lawe and gospell, that I may truly know the same, and enflame so my affecti∣ons, that I maye will and loue the same, in such sort, that it may be my meate and drynke to doe thy wyll. Here cal to minde the .x. cōmaūde∣mentes of god particularly or gene∣rally, what therin he requireth, and
praye for the same particularlye as you se your nede, & that not only for your self but also for other. Praye for patience to suffer what crosse soeuer god shal laye vpō you, & pray for thē that be vnder y• crosse that they maye be pacient: praye for spirituall wisedome in euery crosse peculiarlye, or publikelye, that you may see and loue gods will. Geue vs this day our daily Bread. BY Breade the foode of the bodye, is vnderstande all thynges ne∣cessarye Bread. for thys corporall life, as meate, drinke, health, suc∣cesse in vocatyon &c. By this word Gyue, we shoulde vnderstande, that Gyue. not onelye spyrytuall thynges, but also corporall benefytes are goddes free gyftes, and come not for our worthynes, or traueyle taken a∣boute the same, althoughe ours traueyls be often tymes meanes, by the whiche god doth gyue corpo∣rall thinges.
By dailye is vnderstande the con∣tented Daily. mindes of thy children wyth that which is sufficient for the pre∣sent time, as hauinge hope in thee, y• they shal not want, but daily shal receyue at thy handes plentie and e∣nough of all thinges. By this word our, is as well vnderstande publike Our. benefytes, as peace in the common weall, good Magistrats, seasonable wether, good lawes &c: as particu∣lar benefites, as be children, health name, successe in the workes of our vocation, &c. And besides this, by it we shuld se the care euē for corporal things, which thy children haue for others aswel as for themselues. So that here I may learne how far I am frō that I should be, and I see thy children are come vnto. I se my ignoraunce also, how that as spiri∣tuall thinges do come from thee: so doe temporall thinges: and as they come from thee, so are they conser∣ued and kepte of thee. And there∣fore thy chyldren are thankefull and looke for theym as thy meare gyftes, notwythestandynge
the meanes whiche they vse if they haue them. How be it they vse them but as meanes, for except yu worke therwith, all is in vaine. Psal. 127. Againe here I am taught to be con∣tent with sufficient for the present time, as thy children be which haue the shortnes of this life alwaies be∣fore their eyes, and therefore they aske but for daily sustenaūce, know¦ing this life to be cōpared to a day, yea a watch, a sounde, a shadow, &c. Moreouer I may learne to se the cō∣passion and brotherly care, thy chil∣dren haue one for an other. Last of al here I may see thy goodnes, whi∣ch as thou wilt geue me all thinges necessarie for this life (or els yu wol∣dest not bid me aske &c) so thou com∣maundest all men to praye and care for me, and that bodely, much more then if they be able, they are cōmaū∣ded to help me both in bodie & soule. By reasō wherof I haue great cause to lament and reioyse. To lament because I am not so affected, as thy children be, because of my ignoraūce my ingratitude, my peruersitie and
contempt of thy goodnes, and of the necessitie of thy people, whiche alas be in greate miserie, some in exile, some in prisō, some in pouertie, sick∣nes. &c. To reioyce I haue greate cause, because of thy goodnes, in teaching me these thinges, in com∣maundinge me to aske what soeuer I wante, in geuinge me so manye thinges vnasked, in keping the be∣nefits giuen me, in commaundinge men to care for me, to praie for me, to helpe me. &c. But alas, how farre I am from true lamentacion and re∣ioysing, lorde thou knowest. Oh be mercifull vnto me, and help me, for∣geue me, and graunte me thy holie spirit, to reueale to me my nede, ig∣noraunce, great ingratitude, & con∣tempt of thy mercies & thy people, and that in such sorte, that I might hartely lament and bewaile my mi∣serie, and throughe thy goodnes be altered with thy people, to mourne for the miseries of thy children, as for mine owne. Againe reueale to me thy goodnes (dere father) euē in corporall things
that I maye see thy mercy, thy pre∣sence, power, wisedome, and righte∣ousnes in euery creature, and corpo∣rall benefites, and that in such sort, that I maye be throughly affected, truly to reuerence, feare, loue, obey thee, hange vpon thee, to be thank∣full to thee, & in all my nede to come vnto the, not only when I haue or∣dinarie meanes by the which thou cōmonly workest, but also when I haue none, yea when al meanes and helpes are cleane against me. Here remēber the state of your chil∣dren, and familie, also your parents neighbours, kinse folkes, also your frendes, contrey, and magistrates &c: as you shall haue tyme thereto and by goddes good Spirite shalbe prouoked. ¶ Forgeue vs oure debtes, as we for∣geue them that are debtours vn∣to vs. BY oure Debtes are vnderstande, Debtes. not onely things we haue done,
ut the omissiō and leauing vndone of the good things we ought to doe. By oure, is not onely vnderstande the particular sinnes of one, but al∣so Our. generally the sinnes of al and eue∣ry one of thy church. By forgyuenes, is vnderstande free Forgeue∣nes. pardon and remission of synnes, by the merites and desertes of thy dere sonne Iesus Christe, who gaue him self a raunsome for vs. By oure forgeuing of other mens As we for∣giue &c. offences to vs warde, is vnderstand thy good wyll, not onelye that it pleaseth thee that we shoulde liue in lone and amytye, but also that thou wouldeste haue vs to be cer∣tayne of thy pardonynge vs of our synnes. For as certayne as we are that we pardone them that of∣fende vs, so certayne shoulde we be that thou doeste pardone vs: whereof the forgeuing our trespas∣sers is (as it were) a sacrament vn∣to vs. So that by this petitiō I am taught
to se that thy children, althoughe by imputation they be pure from sinne yet they acknowledge sinne to be & remaine in them, and therefore doe they pray for the remissiō & forgeue¦nes of the same. Againe I am taught hereby, to see how thy children doe consider & take to hart, not only the euells they doe, but also the good thy leaue vndone. And therfore they praye thee harte∣ly for pardon. Moreouer I am here taught, to see that thy children are carefull for o∣ther mē, and for their trespases, and therefore praye, that they mighte be pardoned in saing, oure sinnes, and not my synnes. Besides this I am taught here to see, how thy children not onely for∣geue all that offende them, but also pray for the pardoning of the offen∣ces of their enemies, and such as of∣fende them. So farre are they from malicousnes, pride, reuengemēt &c. Last of all I am taught to see howe mercifull thou art, which wilt haue
me to aske pardon: wherof thou wol¦dest that we shuld ī no point doubt, but be most assured, that for Christs sake thou herest vs, and that not on¦ly for our selues, but also for manie others, for y• doest not commaunde vs to aske for anye thinge thou wilt not geue vs. By reason whereof I haue greate cause to lament, and reioyse. To la∣mēt because of my miserable estate, which am so farre from these affecti∣ons, that are in thy children: which am so ignoraunt & careles of sinne, not onely in leauing good vndone, but also in doing euel, and that dai∣lie in thought worde and dede &c. I speake not of my carelesnes for o∣ther folkes sinnes, as of my parēts, children, familie, magestrats &c nei∣ther of the sinnes of them, to whom I haue geuen occasion to sinne. To reioyse I haue great cause, be∣cause of thy mercy in opening to me these things, in cōmaundinge me to praye for pardon, in promisinge me pardon, and in cōmaundinge others to pray for me. I ought surely to be
perswaded of thy mercy, though my sinnes be innumerable. For I se not onely in this but in euerye petition howe that euery one of thy churche praieth for me: yea christ thy sonne who sitteth on thy right hād, praieth for me &c. Oh deare father be merci∣full vnto me, and forgyue me al my sinnes, and of thy goodnes geue me thy holy spirit to opē mine eies, that I may se sinne, y• better to know it, y• more truly to hate it, & most earnest¦ly to striue agaist it, & that effectual∣ly both in my selfe, and others. Again, graunt me the same thy ho∣ly spirit to reuele vnto me the reme∣die of sinne by christ only, & to worke in me faith, to embrace the same thy Christ and mercies in him, that I may henseforth be endued with thy holy spirite more & more to beginne and obey thy good wil continually, & to encrease in the same for euer. Here call to mind the special sinnes Praye for thē to whō you haue geuen any occasion of sinne. you haue committed heretofore. Re¦member, if you haue occasioned any to sinne, to praye for them by name: remēber that gods lawe shuld be so
dere vnto vs y• the breaking thereof in others, shoulde be an occasion to make vs to lament with teares &c. Leade vs not into tentacion. BEcause of our continuall & great infirmities, because of the greate diligence & subtilties of our ene∣mies, and because y• art wont to pu∣nishe the great∣test punish¦ment. Remedie a¦gainst euel is praier. Our sinnes should not be forgot∣ten of vs, if we wolde haue them forgotten with god. Commodi¦ties comīg by remem¦bring oure sinnes, be thankeful∣nes, vigy∣lancy and gētlenes to offenders. sinne wt sinne (which of all pu∣nishmētes is y• greatest & most to be feared) In this peticion y• wouldest haue thy children to haue y• same in remēberaunce, & for a remedy hereof y• hast appointed praier. So that y• on¦ly cause why anie are ouercome & led into tentation, is for y• they forget, what they desire in y• peticion going before this: which shuld be neuer out of their memorie, to prouoke thē to be more thākful to thee, & more vigi¦lant & heedie herafter for falling in∣to like perills. For which to be auoi¦ded, y• doest most graciously set forth a remedy, in cōmaūdinge vs to pray after pardon for oure sinnes past, for thy grace to guide vs, so that we be not ledde into tentacion, but might be delyuered from euyll. And be∣cause thou wouldeste haue all thy
childrē to hange wholye vpon thee, Whye we pray not suffer vs not to be ledde. &c. to feare thee onely, and only to loue thee, thou doest not teache them to praye, suffer vs not to be ledde, but leade vs not into tentation, that (I say) they might onely feare thee, & certainly know that Sathan hathe no power ouer so much as a pigge, but what soeuer thou geueste vnto Mat. 8. him, and of thy secret but most iuste iudgement doest appoint him to vse, not as he will (for then we were all loste) but as thou wilt, which canst wil nothing, but that which is most iust. As to geue them to the guidīg of Sathan, which wil not be guided by thy grace, as y• diddst Saul &c. Occasions to euell are in two sor∣tes. Occasions to euell in ii. sorts. One by prosperitie & successe, another by aduersitie & the crosse &c. the euells coming of successe, com∣mōly are vnthankfulnes, prid, secu∣ritie, & forgetting our selues, forget∣ting of others, forgetfulnes of god, of our mortalitie &c. The euells cō∣ming of aduersytie, commonly are impatiencie, murmuring, grutchīg dispayring, contemning of god, flat¦tering
of men, stealing, lieng &c, wt manye other euells, wherto tenta∣tions will entise a man that is lefte to him selfe: whereas to one that is guided with gods spirit, tentacions are but trialls to the glorye of god, what temp¦tations are to the god¦ly, & what they are to the wicded comfort of the tempted, and edifieng of thy church. But as I saied, yf a man be left alone, tentacions entise euen to the deuyll hym selfe. And therfore thy children pray to be de∣liuered from euill, vnderstandinge thereby Sathan him self, the sower and supporter of all euell. And this thy children doe aswell for others, as for them selues. So that I maye learne hereout many good thyngs. First to remember often our infir∣mitie and weakenes, and the daun∣gerous estate we stand in in the re∣spect of our fleshe, of the world which is full of euill, of Sathan which se∣keth to sifte vs and as a roring lion to destroy vs, & of our sinnes, which deserue all kindes of punishements and correction: that I mighte with thy children feare thee, watch, pray and desire the daye of redemption
from all euells. Againe I may learne here, that to auoide all daūgers & euell, is not in y• power of mā, but only thy worke. By reason wherof I should consider thy great goodnes, whiche hither to hast kept me frō so many euels, both of soule & body, yea of name, goods &c: as thou hast done in my infancy, childhode, youth, middle age &c. Thirdly I may learne here, that I shuld be careful for others, both that they might be deliuered frō their e∣uells, & that they might be preserued frō tentatiō, & from being ouercome in the same, and therefore y• teachest me to pray, not deliuer me frō euell simply, but deliuer vs from euell. Last of all I am taught hereby, so see thy goodnes towards me which wilt deliuer me from euell, and frō being ouercome in tentations. For thou woldst not haue me to aske for that, which I shoulde not loke for at thy handes certainely. By reason wherof thou woldest haue me to be in a certaintie of saluatiō, for euer. For ells I cannot beleue my prayer
to be heard, if that finallye I should not be deliuered from euell. And therefore thou ioynest hereto Thine is the kyng∣dome. &c. a geuinge of thankes, whiche with thy Church I should saye (For thine is the kingdome, thine is the power, thine is the glorye for euer) By reason whereof I haue great cause to lament, and to reioyce. To lament because of my corruptiō, in∣firmitie, weaknes, obliuion, and carelesnes for thy people, ingrati∣tude &c: because of Sathans power, vigilancie, & prudencie, which hath ouercome most graue, wise and holy men, wherof some neuer recouered: as Cain, Cham, Achitophel, Saul, udas &c. To reioyse because of thy goodnes, whiche teachest me this, & she west me the remedie, commaun∣dest all thy Church to praye for me,  wilt at length deliuer me from all uel, and giue me glory. But alas I m all together careles & miserable. Oh be mercifull vnto me dere father and for christs sake forgiue me al my innes: Graunt me thy holy spi∣rit to reuele to me mine infirmties,
weaknes, perils, daūgers &c: in such sort, that as I may hartely lamente my miseries, so I maye aske and obtaine thy grace to guyde me from all euill for euer more. Againe graunt me the same thy ho¦ly spirite, to reuele to me thy loue & kindnes towards me (and that in e∣ternitie) in such sort, that I maye be throughlye perswaded of the same, become thankfull vnto thee, & daily expecte and loke for the reuelacion of thy kingdome, power, and glory, as one that foreuer shall haue the fruction of the same, through thyne owne goodnes and mercy in Christ, prepared for me before the beginnīg and foundation of the worlde was layed. Here cal to mind our securitie, Sa∣thans vigilancie, oure negligence, his diligence, our infirmitie, his ha∣bilitie, oure ignoraunce, his crafte and subtilitie, &c. Item call to mind how that he hath ouerthrowen for a time many of the deare Saintes of god, to whom we are to be compared in nothinge: a
Adam, Eue, Lot, Iudas, Thamer, Moises, Aaron, Mirtan, Sampson, Gedeon, Clie, Dauid, Salomon, Ezechias, Iosias, Peter, Thomas, and innumerable moe. Item call to minde the goodnes of god, and of oure Shepeherd Christ, whiche hathe kepte vs hitherto, ke∣peth vs still, & teacheth vs here to know that he will kepe vs for euer. For he wold not haue vs to aske for deliueraunce from euell, if that he wold not we should certainely loke for the same. If thou doubt of finall perseueraunce, y• dishonourest god. Be certaine therfore, rest in hope, be stil in his word. Se also how he hath commaunded his whole church and euery member thereof, to praye for thee aswell as for them selues, in these and all other thinges. Now and then goe about to recken how manye and diuers kindes of e∣uells there be, that thereby, as you may knowe you are deliuered from none, but by gods greate goodnes: so you may see that the number of e∣uells that you haue, are nothing to
be compared to the multitude of e∣uills wherwith (yf your christ were not) the deuil wold all to beraye and dawbe you. But what are all the miseries and euels that can be, to be compared to the least ioye, prepared for vs in hea∣uen? Oh thinke of those ioyes, and pray that when the tyde of death cō∣meth, we may hale forth of the ha∣uen of this fleshe & this world ioye∣fully. In praieng this petitiō call to minde the euells you haue been in, the euells you are in, and the euells you may fall in, if god shuld not pre∣serue you, that you might be stirred vp the more to thankfullnes to pray¦er, to trust in god, to modestie &c. For thine is the kingdome, thine is the power, thine is the glory for euer.
AS in the beginnīg of this praier by these words (our father which art in heauen) thy children are excited & stirred vp to a ful confidence of ob∣taining the petitions folowing & al things necessary: So in y• latter end yu hast added for the same purpose, these wordes (For thine is the kingdome thin is &c) Wherin I am taught these many things: First that in prayer I shuld haue such consideration of thy kingdome, power, glory and eterni∣tie, that my mind shuld be striken wt an admiration of the same. Second∣ly that I shoulde so consider them, e∣specially in praier, that I shuld not doubt, but that thou workest, rulest & gouernest all things euery where in all persons and creatures, moste wysely, iustelye, and mercifully. Thirdely that in praier all my peti∣cions shuld tend to the setting forth of thy power, of thy kingdome, and of thy glorye. Laste of all that in prayer I shoulde in no wyse doubte of beinge heard but be assured, that thou which hast commaunded me to pray, and hast promised to here me, doest moste graciousely for thy mer∣cyes sake and truthes sake heare my peticions, according to thy good wil throughe Iesus Christe thy deare sonne our lord and onely sauiour.
By reason whereof I haue greate cause to lament and reioyce. To la∣ment, because I consider not these thinges in praier, in suche sorte, as should moue me to admiracion and gratitude: because I consider not thy power, and wisedome generally in all things: because I am so careles, for thy kingdome: and because I am so full of dubitacion and doubtinge of thy goodnes. To reioyce I haue greate cause, because thou reuelest these thinges vnto me on this sorte: because of thy power, kingdome and glory, which maketh to the hearing of my praiers, and helping of me: be cause thou wilt vse me as thine in∣strument to set forth thy kingdome, power, & glory: and because it plea∣seth thee to here my praiers and as∣suredly wilt saue me for euer. But alas how farre am I frō these lamentacions and reioycinges? by reason wherof I deserue damnaciō. Oh be mercifull vnto me▪ forgeue me, and of thy  graunte me thy holy spirit  reueale to me my blindnes, obliuion, and contempt of
thy kingdome, power and glory, wt the greatnes of my doubtings: that I maye hartely as lament them, so haue them pardoned, and taken frō me throughe the merites of Iesus Christ thy sonne. Againe geue me thy holy spirit, to reueile to me in such sort thy kyng∣dome, power, glorye, and eternitie, that I maye alwaies haue the same before myne eies, be moued wyth thadmiration therof, labour effectu∣ally to set forth y• same, and finallye as to haue the sruicon thereof after this life: so encrease an assured, certain and liuely expectacion of the same, that I maye alwaies & in all thynges reioyce in thee thorowe Christe, and geue lauds thankes & praises perpetually vnto thy moste holy name, oh blessed father, sonne and holye ghost, thre persons & one god, to whom be all honour & glory world without ende. Here thinke, that if the kingdome power, glory and eternitie be gods which is our father, what our digni∣tie is, whiche be his chyldren: yf the
power be our fathers, of whō shuld we be affraies? yf the deuell be sub∣iect to the lords power & kingdome (as he is) howe can the subiect haue power ouer vs, which be sonnes and heires, in that he hath not power o∣uer porketts wtoute the prouidence and permission of god? Therfore ful well shuld we pray, lead vs not into temptation, rather then let vs not be led into tentation. For power is the lords, and the deuell hath none, but that he hathe of gods gifte. No he were not of capacitie, to receaue power, yf god did not make hym of capacitie, althoughe the exe∣cution of it, is rather of gods permis∣sion. ¶Geue all thankes, praise, and glorye, to god oure father throughe Christ oure lord and sauiour. So be it.
A meditation vp∣on the twelue articles of the Christian faith. I beleue in god the father. &c. THy people (oh lord god the father of our saui∣our Iesus Christe) doe here in saieng this ar∣ticle (I beleue in god the fa¦ther almighty &c) by faith knowe that thou togither with Ie∣sus Christ and the holy ghost, diddest create all thinges that be in heauen and in earth (for by heauen and earth are vnderstand all thinges therein). And as they knowe thys, so they by the same faith doe see thee the same god the father the sonne and the holy ghoste, to gouerne all thinges after thy great wisedome, power, rightu∣ousnes, and mercy, vsing euery crea∣ture they see as meanes to put thē in remembrance of fearing, reueren cing, trusting, & louing the: for in e∣uery creature they beholde thy pre∣sence, power, wisedome and mercy,
Againe by this worde (Father) they declare their beleife, how that they are not onely thy creatures, and all that euer they haue to be thy graci∣ouse gyftes and blessinges, but also how that they are thy childrē, derely beloued & cared for of thee through Iesus christ. Where throughe (not∣withstanding theyr vnworthines) as they conceyue a sure hope of thy goodnes and fatherly loue towards them in soule and bodye for euer: so are they thankfull for their creati∣on, & for that thou hast made thē thy excellet creatures, lords of al. They are thankfull for the creation of all creatures, & vse the same wt thanke∣fulnes, as visible tokens of thy in∣uisible loue: they are thankefull for thy conseruing and keping them, & for the gouerning them and all this world, lamenting that they are no∣more thankfull, that they beleue no deper, that reason hath so greate a swing with them in these matters. But I moste gracious good lorde and father, thoughe I say, I beleue in thee my father almyghtye maker of heauen
and earthe, yet thou knoweste that I am full of muche doubtinge, not onelye of this whether thou art my good, almighty, and moste louinge deare father in christ (because I fele in my selfe suche a conscience of vn∣worthines, & so great want of those thinges which thou requirest of thy children, and so transfer the cause of my being thy childe in part to my¦self where it is due onely and wholy alwaies to thy mercye and grace in Christe) but also thou knowest my doubting of my creation and gouer∣naunce, and of the creation and go∣uernaunce of al this world (as I de∣clare by my vnthankfulnes for my creation, for mine adoption, for my gubernation, for thy prouidence for me) or ells deare father I could not but hartely with thy childrē reioyce and praise thy holye name, and that continually, being hence forth care∣full for nothinge but howe to please thee & profit thy people, & that they might praise thy name in all things for ouermore, desiringe the sanctifi∣cation of thy name, the comming of
thy kingdome, the doing of thy will vpon earth as it is in heauen. Thou mightest haue made me a dogge, but of thy goodnes hast made me a creature after thine Image: y• mightest haue made me a Turcke, a Iewe, a Sarracen, but thou hast made me a christiā, a member of thy Churche, thou after my birth migh¦test haue lefte me, and in all nede haue made no prouidence for me, as we sometimes see hath hapned vnto others, but yet thou neuer diddest so with me, and yet I am of all others most vnthankfull. Thy creatures I thankefully vse not, thy inuisible loue by thy mani∣folde visible tokens I consider not, as nowe, I shoulde by this apparell of my bodye, by this corporall helth by this light, by this my hearinge, seinge, feelinge, memorye, vnder∣standinge, time, place, companye, creatures, and benefites, aswell in keping innumerable euils from me bothe in soule and bodye, which ells could not but come to me: as also in gyuinge to me presently so manye
thinges as wtout thy especiall grace & working I neuer could haue had, or presently could kepe them. In thy creatures I see not thy power, for I feare the not, I see not thy presence for I reuerence thee not, I see not thy wisdome, for I adore the not, I see not thy mercy, for I loue the not I praise the not but in lipps & tonge and therfore in that al thy creatures doe teache me, crie out vpon me to be thankefull to the, to loue, feare, serue thee and trust in the and that cōtinually, in that I doe not so, they cannot but crie out vpon me and a∣gainst me in thy sight, & in the day of Iudgement wyll weapon themsel∣ues against me. Oh that I did nowe consider this. Oh that my blinde eyes & my deafe eares were opened: oh that my mi∣serable and folyshe harte were made wyse and conuerted. This onelye thou canste doe whyche haste all mennes heartes in thy handes to bowe▪ them as pleaseth the: bowe my hearte good Lorde into thy tes∣tymonyes, open my eyes make
me to here for thi mercies sake, that I maye beleue and so loue the, be thankefull to thee, amende in all things and serue the, though not as thy deare seruantes doe, yet at the least as other brute creatures doe, that is to obey the and to be profita∣ble to others. Now for asmuch as my sinnes let this and all good thinges from me, I besech the pardon me al my sinnes accordinge to thy gracious promyse for our lord Iesus Christ sake. Amē. I beleue in Iesus Christe hys one∣lye sonne &c. THy seruantes (O Christe Iesu) and people doe know by faith, that as thou art almighty and god wyth the father by whom all things were made, and are ruled (for thou art god eternall coequall and consubstanciall with the father and the holy ghost) so thou art man and haste taken oure nature vpon thee by the operation of the holy ghost in the wombe of the virgin mary, and
arte become the blessed sede whiche hast brused y• serpēts head, the bles∣sed Gens. 3. sede in whō all nations are bles∣sed, the prophet whom Moises dyde Gens. 23. Deut. 18. Exod, 25. prophecpe of, the samplare he sawe in the mount, the truth and body of al the types, figures, and shadowes of the olde lawe, the Messias Christ and sauiour of thy people, the aduo∣cat and redemer, the pacifier of gods wrath for sinnes, the opener of hea∣nen, and geuer of euerlasting life. This they knowe thou broughtest to passe in thy humane nature, by thy incarnation and natiuitye, by thy beinge here on earth, by thy ly∣ning, teaching, fastinge, praieng, e∣specially by thy suffering vnder Pon¦tius Pilate, by thy death, buriall, resur∣rection, ascension vnto the heauens, and raygning on the righte hand of the father, from whence thou shalte come to iudge bothe the quicke & the dead: and as they knowe this, so by faithe they applye it also to them∣selues, that for their sake thou waste made man, didest praye, faste, wast tempted didest die, rosest againe, &
diddest ascend into heauen, and there art set their aduocate, bishoppe, and high prieste, alwaies appearinge in gods sighte for them, from whence they looke for thee, knowige that  wilt not enter into iudgement with them to damne them, which woul∣dest damne thy selfe for them. By this faith they felt these affecti∣ons in them selues, namely the ba∣tred of sinne, the feare of god, the loue of god, trust in thee, and loue to thy church. The hatred of sinne thei felt because it is so foule a thīg as wold not be washed away with any other thing then with thy preciouse bloud shedinge: the feare of god, because his anger is so greate against sinne that no lesse pryce coulde pacifie his wrath then thy most painful death: the loue of god, because he hathe so loued them that he would not spare thee his deare sonne for them, euer whā they were his enemyes: trust in thee, because thou haddest no re∣spect to thy selfe but most willingly didest geue thy self wholly to be our sauiour and seruant: loue to thy peo∣ple
and church, because generally & particularly in euery mēber of the same, they see howe deare they are to thee, and therefore they can not but be so to them. Oh howe doe they imitate and folowe thy foote steppes? how doe they reioyce when they are in anye thinge by afflec∣tion made lyke to thee? Oh howe doe they lament their sinnes, ingra∣titude, vnbeliefe, loue thee, and wholly yelde themselues vnto thee? where as I (o graciouse god & deare sauiour Iesus Christ) though I saie I beleue in thee which was concey∣ued by the holy ghost, yet alas I doe but bable this, for nothinge is ells in me but vnbeliefe. Of thy power & loue, of thine anger & mercy I haue but an opinion, as my insensiblenes and vnthankfulnes doth declare. If a man should shewe me frendship but in a trifle, or suffer anye thinge at all for me, I could not but be thā∣full: and thou besides my creation, hast redemed me and brought me in∣to the number of gods childrē (then which thinge nothinge is greater)
and loe I am vnthankfull. Thou hast suffred much for me: frō heauen thou cammest into earthe to fetch me into heauen, but I regarde it not. Thou barest my sinnes on thy back suffering a most bitter death, but I am so farre from thankefulnes, that I stil more and more loth the. Thou woldest enter into a cōmuniō wt me, taking my nature vnto thee cō¦cerning the substance thereof, that I might enter into a cōmnuiō with thee cōcerning the qualities wher▪ in thy self thou hast endued it, but I consider it not. Thou diddest die to delyuer me from death, but I still more and more geu thee cause to die: so ingrate ful am I. Thou diddest arise to iustifye me, but I with the Iewes wold stil kept thee down, because I wold not leaue my wickednes. Thou ascendedst to heauen to take possession for me there, to be alwaies in the syght of thy father for me, to send me downe giftes, to praye for me: but I daielye am pullinge the
downe againe, as muche as in me ieth, I am altogether earthly, I hide my self out of thy sight by forgettīg thee, I reiecte and abuse thy gifts, I neglecte praier. Thou art nowe in a redynesse to come to iudge hoth quick and dead, but I tremble not at this geare, nor beseche thee before thou come, to be merciful vnto me & not to enter in∣to iudgement with me, yea I thinke nothing at al of thy comming: mali∣ō cogitant iudicium, the wicked consy∣der not the ende, they thinke not on thy iudgement. Thou woldst bring me to thy father y• I might find grace, but I put this of, & therfor am worthi to fele thee a iudge, wt refuse to fele thee a sauior. Now y• cause of al these things is vnbeliefe, the which though it be na¦turall by reason of the corruption of our nature, pet I haue augmented the same maliciously in not laborīg there against, and continuing in al synnes and wickednesse: by reason whereof I deserue most iustelye thy anger therevpon, euen reiection frō
thy face for euer. Longe hast thou mourned euen wt displeasure & anger the incredulity of my heart, calling me there from, and offering me thy grace, which I haue neglected and reiected, and ther¦fore am neuer worthi to haue it any more offered vnto me, muche more then I am vnworthy to haue grace gyuen me to receiue thy mercy. Alas what shall I doe? shall I di∣spraier or as long as I can, kepe me vnmindfull of my mysery? o sauiour Christ Iesu wilt not thou be merci∣full vnto me? thou diddest die for me when I deserued it not, and nowe is thy mercye shortned? wilt not thou geue me thy grace, and take frō my hart this horrible vnbeliefe? Shall I neuer loue the? shall I neuer hath sinne? shall I neuer, as wt my mouth I say: I beleue in Iesus Christ, so in hart say the same? shall Sathan possesst me for euer? o christe Iesus whiche hast led captiuitie captiue, what? wilt not thou helpe me? thoughe I desyre it not as I shuld, yet giue me to desyre whan thou wilt.
Thou diddest appeare to destroye the worke of the deuil: thou seest his worke, in me: good christ destroy his worke but not thy worke: saue me for thy great mercies sake. Geue me to beleue in thee, in thy death, resur∣rection, & ascension: pardone me my sinnes, and mortifye now in me my corrupt affections, reyse me vp and iustify me, regenerat me daily more and more, geue me faith of immor∣talitie, resurrectiō of this body, geue me faith to ascend into heauen, and to be certaine that thou hast alrea∣dy taken possessiō for me there: Geue me to loke for thy comming, and to be ready in thy cōming to find mer∣cy to euerlasting life &c. I beleue in the holy ghost. &c. O Holy spirite the third person in trinity, whiche diddest descend vpon Christ our sauiour in hys baptisme in the likenes of a doue, thy children know that with the father and the sonne thou madest and ru∣lest all creatures visible and inuisy∣ble,
they know thee in their redemp∣tion to be no lesse willing & louinge then the father and the sonne: for y• diddest alwaies declare Christ to be the sonne of god & gauest testimony in wardly in the harts of thy elect, to beleue and embrace the same, & out∣wardely by miracles and wonders they know thee to be the comforter and gouernour, whom Christe dyd promise in his corporal absēce shuld teach, rule, kepe, comforte and go∣uerne his church and people. Againe, as in the former parte of their beleife they cōsider the works of creatyon and redemption, so in thys parte they consyder the place where the same is moste effectuall & taketh place, euen thy holy churche which is catholick, that is, extēding it selfe to all times, to all places, to all kinds of people. For in this church only they know that as all things were made, so the worke of redemption was taken in hand, that y• blessed trinitye, migh∣test in this church be praysed, mag∣nified, serued, & worshipped for euer.
This church is nothinge ells but a communion and societie of saintes: that is, not onelye a societye of all such as be, haue been, or shal be thy people, but also a societye or parta∣king of Christe Iesus whiche is the head of the same: yea by him of thee (oh blessed father) which art y• head of Christ, and of thee (oh holy ghost) whiche nowe shadowest and sittest vpon the same to hatch and cherishe it as the hen her chekins, by the ex∣tending of thy winges, not onely to defende them frō their enemies, but also to couer their sinnes and to re∣mitte them in this life, beginning al¦so here the resurrection of the fleshe and euerlasting life, the which thou wilt in the ende of the world consū∣mate, so that they shall not nede to be couered for sinne: for then shall they be pure and haue gtoriouse bo∣dies, immortall and spirituall, the which shal haue the fruition of eter∣nal ieye, life euerlasting, and glory, suche as the eye hathe not sene, the eare hath heard, nor the hart of man
can conceiue. For then christ Iesus shall geue vp his kingedome to god the father, that god may be al in all concerning the gouernaunce of it by the ministration of his word and o∣ther meanes wherby now he gouer¦neth it, that it maye be his fathers kingdome, we beig become like vn∣to him: that is, as to the manhod of 1. iohn. 3. Christ the godhead is vnited and is al in al without any other meanes, euen so god shalbe in vs, assuminge then not only in the person of christ the humaine nature, but also al the humaine nature of his church which be members of Christ, the wicked & reprobate being separate then from this cōmunion & cast into eternall perditiō with Sathan, & antichrist, there to be in tormentes and hor∣rour for euer. By reason of this their faith, they are thankfull to the (o holye spirite) whiche hast taught them this & gy∣uen them to beleue it. By reason of this faith they singu∣larly praye loue, & helpe thy church here militāt, & labour to be holy .
By reason of this faith they cōfesse them selues sinners, they desire and beleue pardone of their sinnes, they are rysen and ryse daily concerning the inwards man, and doe feele the life eternall begone in them, more & more laboringe, praying, wishings and desyringe for the same whollye and perfectly. Where as (oh lorde god and most graciouse holy spirit) thou knowest that it is otherwise wt me. I doe but bable wt my lippes in saying, I beleue in the holy ghost, for I am vnthankful for calling me into thy church, I doe not liue holely, I confesse not, I la∣ment not my sinnes, I pray not for remission of them, I stand in doubte thereof: as I fele not my selfe rysen from a sinnefull life as I should be, or as I fele not life begone in me, as it is in thy deare children, so doe I doubt herof, whether I haue pardon of my sinnes, whether I am regene∣rate, whether I fele truly euerlast∣ing life (the which thinge doth most displease thee) and yet wt my tonge I saye I beleue in the holye ghost. Oh I
besech thee (good holy spirit) for thy loue sake which moued the to agree and be willinge to patifye and open thy goodnes, not only in the worke of creation (for thou dyddest lye vp∣on the waters and as the benne her chickins dyddest, as it were, hatche the worke of creatiō) but also in the worke of redemption, and therefore diddest descend and abide not onely vpon Christ in his baptisme, but al∣so on the apostles & church in fyerye tonges visibly the fyfte daye after Christes resurrection: as now thou doest inuisybly, generally, and par∣ticularly sitte vpon thy Church and children, beinge the consolator the cōforter, the teacher and leader, the guider and gouernour of vs all. For this thy loues sake (I saye) I besech thee to be mercifull vnto me, and forgeue me my doubting, vnbe∣liefe, ingratitude and horrible mon∣strous vncleanes and synne; and vt∣terly take them from me. Bring me vnto thy church which thou guidest, that is guide me, make me holy and by faith couple me to christ, by chari∣tie
to thy people: that is geue me the communion of saints wt thy saincts, ouer shadowe my synnes, reyse me vp to rightuousnes, beginne in me euerlasting life, and nowe more and more to expert and loke for all these great mercies, and at length to pos∣sesse eternal felicity wt thee, o blessed trenitie the father the sonne and the holy ghost, thre persons and one al∣mightie, eternal, most iuste, wise and good god: to whom be all glory power and do∣minion now and for euer.
A meditation vp∣on the ten commaundementes. ¶ I am the lord thy god which brought thee oute of the land of Egipt. &c. O Good lord and deare father, here y• woldest I should knowe that thou, which brough∣test thy people of Is∣raell out of Egypt with a mightie hand and a stretched out power, whiche gauest thy lawe vpon mounte Sinai in great thun∣dering, lighting, fier, which spakest by the prophetes, and diddest sende thy dearelye beloued sonne Iesus Christ coequall and consubstantiall with thee in power, maiestie, & glo∣ry, to take vpon him our nature by the operatiō of the holy ghost in the wombe of y• virgin Marie, of whose substaunce he was made and borne man, but pure without synne, that we by byrth children of wrath, by hym myghte be made thy chyldren, children of grace, communicatinge
with him rightuousnes, bolines, & immortality by the working of the spirit, as he communicated wyth vs fleshe and bloude (but not infected wt synne, as is ours) by the working of the same holy spirit: which spirit af∣ter his bitter death, resurrectiō, and ascension into the heauens, he sent plentifully and by a visible signe vn¦to his Apostles and Disciples: by whom he published, the gospell tho∣rowe out the whole worlde, and so continually hathe done from age to age, doth, and will doe vnto the end of the worlde by the mynysterie of preaching: Thou woldest I say that we shoulde knowe and beleue, that thou this Almightye lord and god, which on this sorte hast reueled and opened thy selfe, art the one alone, very true and eternall almighty god which madest and rulest heauē and earth, and all things visyble and in∣uisyble, together with this thy dear¦ly beloued sonne Iesus Christ, and with the holy spirit, consubstantiall and coeternall with thee deare fa∣ther: Not onelye this, but also thou
woldest that I shuld knowe and be∣leue, that by the same thy dearly be∣loued sonne, thou hast broughte me from the tirannie and captiuitie of Sathan, & this sinfull world (wher∣of the captiuity of Egipt vnder pha∣rao, was a figure) and in his blonde shedde vpon the crosse, y• hast made a couenaunt with me, whiche thou wilt neuer forget, that thou art and wilt be my lord and my god, that is, thou wilt forgeue me my sinnes and be wholy mine with all thy power, wisedome, rightuousnes, treweth, glory & mercy. Wherfore although I might cōfirme my faith by the in∣numerable mercies hither to powred vpon me moste aboundantly, as thy children of Israel might haue done and did confirme their faith, by the manifolde benefites powred vpon them in the desert: yet specially the seale of thy couenaunt, I meane thy holy Sacrament of baptisme, wher∣in thy holye name was not in vaine called vpō me (O deare father, swet sonne and sauiour Iesus Christ, and most graciouse good holy gost) shuld
most assuredly confirme, and euen on all sides seale vp my faith of this thy couenaunt that y• art my lorde and my god: euen as Abraham and thy people of Israell did by the Sa∣crament of Circumcision, which as the Apostell calleth the seale or sig∣nacle of rightuousnes: so doest thou call it being but the signe of thy co∣uenaunt in dede, yet thy very coue∣naunt, because as thy word is moste true and cānot lye, as thy couenaūt is a couenaunt of peare vnfallible and euerlasting: euen so the Sacra∣ment and seale of the same is a most true testimonial and witnes therof. In consideracion therfore of this, that thou the almighty god, of thine owne goodnes hast vouched safe not onelye to make me a creature after shine owne Image & likenes, which mightest haue made me a beaste: to geue vnto me a reasonable soule, en∣dewed with memorie, iudgemēt &c: which mightest haue made me an fote without witte or discretiō &c: to endue me with a body be wetifyed with right shape, limmes, health &c,
which mightest haue made me a cee∣ple, lame blind &c: gratiously to en∣rich me concerning fortune, frends, liuinge, name &c: whiche mightest haue made me a slaue, destitute of al frendes, and helpes for this life: but also hast vouchedsafe, that I being a a miser, borne in sinne, conceiued in iniquitie, to whom nothing is dewe (more then to a Turcke, Iewe, or Saracen) but eternall damnation, should be called into the number of thy people, enroledde in thy boke, & now in thy couenaunt, so that thou wt all that euer thou hast arte mine: for which causes sake hitherto thou hast kepte me cherished, defended, spared, & fatherly chastised me and now graciously doest kepe me and care for me, geuing me to liue, be, & moue in thee, expecting also & wai¦ting how thou mightest shewe mer∣cy vpon me: In consideration (I say) Esai. 30. of this, most iustely and reasonably thou requirest that as thou arte my lord god: so I should be thy seruaunt and one of thy people: As thou haste giuen thy self wholy vnto me, to be
mine with all thy power wisedome &c (For he that geueth him self ge∣ueth all he hath) so shuld I be who∣ly thine, and geue ouer my self vnto thee to be guided wt thy wisedome, defended with thy power, holpē, re∣leiued, and comforted by thy mercy. First therfore to beginne with al, thou commaūdest that I shuld haue none other gods in thy sight: that is to say, as I should haue thee for my lord & god to loke for all good thīgs moste assuredly at thy handes, and therfore I should put all my trust in thee, be thankefull vnto thee, loue thee, feare thee, obey thee, and call vpon thy holy name in al my nedes: so shuld I geue this faith, loue, feare obedience, thankfulnes and inuoca∣tion or praier, to none other, no not in my hart, but onely to thee or for thee where thou commaundest. All this to doe (oh lorde god) and that wt most ioieful hart, I haue great cause. For what a thing is it that thou Ie∣houah woldest uouchesalfe to make me, as thou haste do? to geue thy sōne for me, and to become my ode
Oh what am I that thou woldest I shoulde put my trust in thee? Thys y• doest that I mighte neuer be con∣founded, but might be most happie. What am I that y• woldest I should feare thee? Where the onely cause, whye y• requirest this of me, is not onelye because thou haste power to cast both bodye & soule into hell fier, & because they that feare thee not, shal perishe: but also that y• mightest geue me thy wisdome, that it might goe well with me in the euell daye, that thou mightest reueale thy sōne to me, and thy mercye might be vp∣on me from generacion to generaci∣on. Oh what am I, that thou wol∣dest haue me to obey thee, not onely that I neuer perishe with the diso∣bediēt, but that thou mightest geue me thy holy spirit, and rewards in∣numerable? Oh what am I that y• woldest I should loue thee? y• which thinge thou doest to this ende that I might fully and wholy enioye and possesse thee, according to the nature of loue, and therfore doest thou re∣quire my whole hart, that I mighte
dwel in thee and thou in me. What am I, that thou woldest I shuld call vpon thee? verely because thou wilt geue me whatsoeuer I shall aske of thee in the name of thy deare childe Iesus Christ: and euen so woldest y• haue me thankfull, that y• mightest poure out vpon me yet more plenti∣fully, al good things. So that great cause haue I to put my trust in thee, to loue, feare, and obey thee, to call vpon thee, to be thankful vnto thee, not only in respect of the hurt which els will ensew, but also in respect of the commoditie that herby cometh vnto me: but most of all yea alonely for thy owne sake, for thy goodnes, wisedome, becutie, strength & power, trueth and great mercies. But alas (deare father) what shal I saye? As in times paste horribly I haue broken this thy lawe, in trus∣ting in thy creatures, calling vpon them, louing, fearing, and obeying many thinges besydes thee, and ra∣ther then thee: euē so at this present I am a most miserable wreth, blin∣ded I am through vnbeliefe, & mine
owne wickednes, so y• I se not firme¦ly thys thy power, wisedome good¦nes &c: but wauer and doubt of it. I loue litle or nothing, I feare lesse, I obey least of al, thankefulnes and praier are vtterly quenched in me: by reason wherof I am worthy of e∣ternall damnatiō. If after thy iusti∣ce thou shalt deale with me simplie, I am (oh lord) damned and loste for euer, for I am verye wicked. But yet in asmuch as thou bast geuē thy sōne Iesus Christ to be a slaine pro∣pitiatorie sacrifice for the sinnes of the whole world, so that he which be leueth in him shall not perish but be saued (for so thou hast promised) thy trueth nowe requireth to saue me. No wbeit here thou maiest say vnto me that I doe not beleue, and ther∣fore notwithstandinge thy trueth & promise, in that I beleue it not, thou maiest most iustly after thy Iustice, dampne me. Oh lorde god, to this I cannot otherwise answer (my vnbe∣leife is so great) but because thy mer¦cye is aboue al thy workes, and thy goodnes and loue is that which all
creatures most highly commend and magnifie, as the thing wherof thou arte called god: because y• art righte good and lone it selfe: because of this thy mercye (gracious god) yf thou wilte loke thereon and couple thy trueth therewith, then (good lord) I shalbe saued, and praise thy name for euer more. ¶ Thou shalte not make to thy selfe any grauen &c. AS the fyrste commaundemente teacheth me, as well that thou arte my god, as what god thou art, and therfore of equitie I shuld haue noone other goddes but thee: that is, I shoulde alonely hange on thee, truste in thee, loue thee, serue thee, call vpon thee, obey thee, be thankefull to thee: so because y• didst reueyle thy selfe visiblie that thou mightest visibly be worshipped, this commaundement is concerning thy worshippe, that in no point I shuld folowe in worshipping thee, the de∣uise or intent of any man, saint, An∣gell,
or spirit: but shuld take al such as Idolatrie & Image seruice, be it neuer so glorio{us}. And why: for soth because y• woldest I shoulde wor∣shippe thee as thou hast appointed by thy word. For if seruice be accep∣table, it must nedes be according to the will of him, to whom it is done, and not of him which doeth it. But in asmuch as of man none knoweth the will and pleasure, but his spirit, except he reueale by worde or signe the same: much more of thee o lord, none doeth knowe thy will, but thy spirite and they to whom thou doest reueale the same. And therfore abo∣minable euē in thy sight are al those things, which with men are in most force and estimatiō because they are not after thy word. So that the mea¦ninge of this precepte is, that as in the firste I shoulde haue none other gods but thee: so I shoulde haue no worshippe of thee, but such as thou appoitest. Herby therfore I se great cause of thankefulnes for this com∣maundement, in that thou woldest haue mine outward seruice, and that
after thy appointment, lest I should busye my braine howe best to serue thee. Good lord thou nedest not my seruice, perfecte thou wast before I was, therefore it is for mine owne commoditie that thou commaūdest me, yea euen for mine owne wealth. Thou mightest haue lettē me haue stand al day idle, but such is thi loue, that thou woldest I should goe into thy vineyarde, that wt thy seruants I mighte receiue the hier of blessed∣nes. And how great a benefite is it, If we shuld serue god after mās deuise, the burdē wold be in tollerable, for mens deuises are infinite. to deliuer me of so greate a burden wherwith I should haue bene com∣bred, if I should haue serued thee in any point after my witte and reasō. But halas, I not considering what a promotion thy seruice is, nor what an easye seruice it is, and simple (for one maye well know what to doe, & when he pleaseth thee, namely whē he serueth thee as thou hast appoin∣ted) as I am and alwaies haue been vnthankefull: so I am and alwaies haue been a greuous transgressor of this thy lawe. For as in times past, when I dyd not knowe thys com∣maūdement,
I was an Image wor∣shipper of stocks, stones &c: yea bread and wine: so nowe I am a worship∣per of myn affectiōs, offering to thē ye seruice due vnto thee, though not therby to worship thee, as I thought when I kneled to stocks and stones, bread & wine &c: yet with no lesse transgression of thy lawe: for the which I haue deserued, and doe de∣serue euerlasting damnatiō. Of thy goodnes and great mercy (deare fa∣ther) I beseche thee forgeue me for Christs sake, whom thou didst geue to be the fulfylling of the lawe to al them that should beleue. Oh father I beleue, helpe mine vnbeliefe. As thou haste of thy goodnes hitherto spared me, trāsgressing this thy ho∣ly precept: so of thy goddnes forgeue me, as well mine Idolatrie done in times paste, as that whiche of late time I haue cōmitted & doe comitte. And as yu by this commaundement hast deliuered me from the one, yt is, bowīg my self to stocks & stones: so (dere father) deliuer me frō al other bowīg my self after mine owne will
to mine owne affections: that I may haue non other god ī hart but thee, nor doe seruice to any other but on∣ly to thee, & for thee, after thy word as thou cōmaundest. Oh open mine eies to see thy wil in this thy graci∣ous precept. Geue me a will to loue it hartely, & an hart to obey it faith∣fully, for thy deare sonnes sake ies{us} Christ our lord. Amen. Thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vaine. By this commaundement I per∣ceaue (oh lord) that as in the first thou woldest in the exterior ser∣uice of thee, I shuld vtterly abandō¦mine owne will and reason, and all the reasons or good entētes of mā, and wholy geue my self to serue thee after thy wil and word: so here doest thou beginne to tell me, howe thou wilte haue my tongue to be exerci∣sed in thy seruice, and therfore thou byddest me not to take thy name in vayne: as by temeraryouse or vayne swearynge, by cursynge
praying without sense, as those boe that pray in a tonge they know not, praying without faith or attent cō∣sideracion of the thing desired, with out harty desire and certaine expec∣tacion of obtaining that which is to thy glory and my saluation: also by gesting, or folishe abusing, or negli∣gent readinge or hearing of thy ho∣ly worde, by the whiche thou, as by thy name, arte knowen: and in lyke maner by deniynge thy trueth and worde, or conceiling it when occasi∣on is offered to promote thy glorye and confirme thy trueth. By reason wherof I may well see, that y• wol∣dest haue me to vse my tonge in hum¦ble cōfessing thee and thy word and trueth after my vocacion: in pray∣inge hartely and callinge vpon thy name: in readinge and hearinge thy worde, and speaking therof withall reuerence, diligence, and attencion: in thanks geuing and praising thee for thy great mercy: in instructinge my brother and admonishinge him, when he erreth, after my calling and vocation, withall humblenes, gen∣tlenes
and loue. Thus woldest thou haue me to ex∣ercise my tongue, and not to thynke that the exercising of it in this sort, is a vaine and & vnprofitable thing, but a thinge that pleaseth thee, and profiteth my self and other. And for asmuch as thou knowest that our tongue is a slipperie mem∣ber, and we very negligent ouer it, and of the greate commoditie that might thereby come to vs and other by vsyng it in thy seruice according∣ly: thou hast added a fearfull, & most true cōmunicaciō, that though men will find no fault or punishe vs ther¦fore, yet wilt not thou hold him gilt les, that taketh thy name in vaine: As by many exāples we are taught, Leuit, 23. as in thy holye worde, so by dayelye experience, yf we woulde consyder the same. And therfore I haue great cause to geue praise and thankes to thy most holy name, for many great benefits which by this commaundemente I receyue and ought with thankeful∣nes to consider. First that it wolde
please thee, not onelye to geue me a tounge, where thou mightest haue made me speachles: but also that y• woldest haue it santified to thy ser∣uice. Againe that thou woldest not onely reuele thy name vnto vs, but also woldest geue me leaue to cal vp on it, praise and publishe it: yea thou hast commaunded me so to doe, and not onely commaunded, but hast pro¦mised, that thou wilt here my praier and that my praising of thee and cō∣fessinge thy word and trueth, shall not be in vaine. Thirdly that thou woldest al men shoulde vse theyr tounge so, that therby I might be the better instruc¦ted, admonished, and occasyoned to vse my selfe well and in the o∣bedience of thys thy holye precept. But what goe I about to recken by tale the causes of thankes for thys commaundemente, seing that they be innumerable yf a man shoulde but loke euen vpon thy ve∣rye worde, by the whyche as by thy name thou arte moste truelye kno∣wen: the whyche worde thou com∣maundest
vnto vs in this commaun¦demente &c: as thou doest prea∣chinge, pryuate admonishynge, thankes geuynge, and prayer: then the whych, nothynge is more pro∣fytable to vs in thys vale of mi∣serye. But gracyouse good lorde, I acknowledge my selfe not one∣lye to be a most vnthankeful wret∣che for thys thy holye precepte, and the greate mercyes whyche here throughe I perceaue thou haste moste gracyouselye powerd vppon me, and doest yet styll offer vnto me: but also that I am a myse∣rable transgressour of this thy most holye, good, and blessed cammaun∣demente, as alwayes I haue ben in times past. Horribly haue I abu∣sed thy name in swearynge, cursing and iestyng wyckedlye: I haue cal∣led vppon other names then thine, as the names of peter, Paule, Mary &c: yea of some, whose saluatiō is to be doubted of: I haue folishly praied in such a toūge as I knew not what I praied & saied, wt many other trās¦gresiions of this precept, wherin yet
I am cōuersant: as in seldome pray∣ing, and when I praye I am not at∣tent nor very desirous of the thinge I aske with my tounge. After praier I do not earnestly loke for the good thinges asked and praied for, & ther∣fore when I obtaine my request, I am most vnthankefull: thy worde I rede litle and most negligently, for∣getting for with what I rede: I ad∣monishe not others when I here them abuse thy holy worde: I am af∣fraied, for feare of losse of frēds, name or life, to confesse thy trueth, gospel and name, whiche was called vpon me in baptisme, and not in vaine, if I did not thus make it in vayne. But alas I cā in no wise comprehēd the multitude of my transgressions cōcerninge this thy lawe. But this is a synne aboue other synnes, that vnder thy name, word, and gospel I play the hipocrite, hauing more care for min owne name, then for thine. For yf my name were euel spoken of, it would greue me, and I would defend it: but alas I heare thine dai∣ly euel spokē of, & se it prophaned by false doctrine, and euell lyuing, but it greueth me not. After my vocati∣on I ke not nor doe not goe about to redresse these thinges in my selfe & in others. And why? because (good lord) I loue my self better then thee, and not thee with my whole harte. Thye first commaundemente hathe no place with me as it should haue, it possesseth not my hart, mind, and will as thou requirest, most to mine owne commoditie. By reason wher of I am worthy of eternall damna∣tion. Oh what shal I doe (graciouse god) which not only haue ben so gre¦uouse and filthy a swerer curser &c: so greate a callour vpon deade crea∣tures, & so heynouse a transgressor of this lawe: but also at this present doe so horriblye and hipocriticallye offende thee in takinge thy name in vaine, & that so many waies, in pray¦ing and not praying, in reading and not readinge, in speakinge and not speaking, & not cōfessig simply & frō my hart thy doctrine, trueth & name, but regardinge mine owne name farre aboue it. Shall I file frō thee?
then vndoubtedly I am more gilty, and more shall disobey this thy holy precept, adding sinne to sinne, where as y• woldest I should call vpon thy holy name (deare lord) which hast ge¦uen thy deare sonne Iesus Christ to be a mediatour for vs, that thorowe him we might finde not onely grace for the pardone of our sinnes paste: but also for the obtaining of thy ho∣ly spirit, as well the better to vnder stande, as also the better and more frankely to obey this thy holye pre∣cept for euer. For his sake (therfore dere god) pardone my sinnes paste & present, wherof this law doth accuse me, and graunt (moste graciouse fa∣ther) that I may be endued with thy holy spirit to know and loue thy ho∣ly name, word and trueth in Iesus Christ, that I maie be zelouse, wise, and constaunt, and that my tounge maye be sanctified henceforth & guy∣ded with thy holye spirite and grace to publishe, confesse and teache, af∣ter my vocation to others as occasi∣on is offered, thy trueth and gospel, to call vpon thy name in al my nede,
to geue thankes vnto thee, prayse thee, magnifye thee, and to sanctifie thy holy name as a vessel of thy mer¦cy for euer and euer. Remember that thou kepe holye the Saboth day &c. AFter thou hast told me howe in the external seruice of thee (gra¦ciouse lord) thou wilte haue my tonge vsed, so doest thou now teach me, how thou wilt haue min eares & all my whole body occupied, nam∣ly in sanctificacion and holines: that is, in those thinges which thou pe∣cularly hast appointed to be meanes immeditately to helpe to that ende: As in hearing thy word preached, & vsing the ceremonies of thee appoin¦ted euē as y• hast commaunded. For the which thinges to be exercised of thy people thou at the firste dyddest appoint a certaine daye, namely the seuenth daye, whiche therefore thou calledst thy Sabboth, that thereby they with their childrē and family, resting frō all exerior labour, which
hindreth the meditaciō of the mind, might not onely be more able to goe on throughe with their trauell and labour (for withoute some reste no∣thing can endure, in respect whereof thou woldest the very beastes which in laboure were exercised, shoulde haue the priuelege of this Saboth) but also and muche rather, that thy people might with their family and children, be instructed and taught: first by the miuistery of thy word in preaching and catecchising: secondly by the vsyng of thy sacramentes ap∣pointed after thy commaundement and institution, they might be assu∣red of thy promises: thirdly by prai∣yng they might be augmented in al godlines: and last of all by their met¦ting together & exercisinge all these thy workes of sanctification, they might increase in loue and charity: one towards another, as members of one body and fellowes of one in∣heretaunce, and thus by meeting to¦gether, praying and vsing thy sacra∣mentes, they might be instructed in thy lawe and of that Saboth, wher∣into
thou thy selfe dyddest enter af∣ter thou hadst made the world, cea∣sing from thy workes, not of conser∣uation but of creatiō, into the which as after this life and the workes of this time, they should enter: so now they beginne spiritually to enter in restinge from their owne workes whiche the olde man moueth thom vnto: not that (good lord) thou wol∣dest these workes appointed for the Saboth day, should not be exersised at any other time but onely on the seuenth day: but because yu dydst as wel ordaine thē for a pollicie to en∣dure till the comming of Christ, as also according to the reuelacion or thee in that time, didst open thy self, beginning then in figures and sha∣dowes, whose verifiēs in thy tyme were to be opened: therefore it plea∣sed thee to appoint then the seuenth day, which seuenth day, although by reason of the policie being by thee be streied, and by reason of Christ the veritie and body of all shadowes, if be abrogate from vs: yet standeth this commaundemēt in force aswell
for the workes of santificacion, that is for preaching thy word, comming to heare it, for praying, vsynge thy sacramentes, and coming together to that ende: as also for those dayes which by commō order, and on good grounde are ordained and receyued: howbeit with this libertie, that ne∣cessitie of our faith and sanctificaciō and charitie may dispēse therwith, occasion of wilfull and wittinge of∣fence being aduoided &c. So that hereby I perceyue thy will and pleasure to be, that I shuld at al times, as much as charite and neces¦sitye wyll permytte, geue ouer my self, and cause all other ouer whō I haue charge, so to doe (especially on the sondaies and other holye dayes being receyued and to that ende ap∣pointed) to the resorting to the tem∣ple and places appointed to praier, to here with meknes thy holy word and vse thy sacraments and ceremo∣nies as thou hast commaunded, and to exercise all thinges which might be to the confirmacion & propogaci∣on of thy holy religiō, or make to the
encrease of loue and charite: as ge∣uing to the pore, reconciling such as be in variaunce, visiting theficke, & euē (as it were) beginning that ab∣both wherof Esay speaketh. Esai. 1. By reason whereof I haue greate cause to thanke thee (most gracious father) that thou woldst appoint me to be in this time, wherin thou hast more plentifully reueiled thy selfe then thou dyddest, not onelye before Christes comminge, but also synce Christs assensiō. Neuer synce Eng∣land was England dyddest thou so manifestlye reueile thy trueth, as yu hast done in these daies. Great cause I haue to thanke thee that yu woldst institute the ministery of thy worde and sacramentes as meanes wher∣by thy holye spirite is effectuall to worke in oure hartes sanctification. Great cause haue I to thanke thee, that thou woldest kepe the bokes of the prophetes & Apostells vntil this time. Greate cause haue I to praise thee, that thou woldst geue me such knowledge in them as yu hast done of thy greate mercye. Greate cause
haue I to thāke thee for the good & true ministers and preachers of thy worde which thou hast sent amongs vs, and genē me grace to here them. Great cause haue I to thanke thee that in this religion thou hast geuen so longe quietnes, and harboroughe to thy church. Great cause haue I to thanke thee, for that thou woldeste make me suche a man in whom thy holye spirite mighte worke. Greate cause I haue to thanke thee whiche woldeste call me into thine eteruall Saboth and rest full of all ioye, such as the eye hathe not sene, the pare hath not harde. Greate cause haue I to thanke thee that so manye dayes are appointed for this ende, that we shoulde meete together to here thy worde and receiue thy sacramentes. Greate cause haue I to thanke thee for the institution of thy sacramen∣tes, which thou hast ordained as thy visible and palpable lordes, to the obsignation and confirmacion of the faithe of all suche as vse the same af∣ter thy commaundementes. But, in∣finite are the causes for the which I
ought to gene thee thankes for thys commaundement.
But alas I am not onely vnthank¦full, but also a most miserable trans∣gressour of it. I wil not now speake of my transgressions past cōcerning this commaundemente: presentlye they are so many that I cannot. For yu knowest howe I doe not onelye at conuenient times on ye worke daies kepe my selfe awaye from common praiers in the congregaciō & assem∣ble of thy people and frō hearing of thy worde: but also on the Sabboth dayes to ryde or goe aboute this or that worldely: busynes I am verye prest, to sitte down at this tauerne, and to goe to that mans table I am readye at the first vydding: but alas to resorte to the table of thy sonne & receyue with thankfulnes the sacra¦ment of his body and bloud for con∣firmation of my faithe, that  to learne spiritually to taste Christs bo¦dy broken and his bloude shedde for the remission of my synnes: so doe this, oh how vnwillig am I? To goe to masse and sacrynges with suche like Idolatrye, I haue been a greate time more readie then now I am to heare thy word, & vse thy sacramēts as I shuld doe, thy ministers I pray not for: thy church I am not careful for, no not nowe (good lorde) when wicked doctrine most preuaileth. Ido¦latrye, supersticion, and abominaci∣on aboundeth, the sacrament and sa¦crifice of thy deare sonne Ies{us} Christ is blasphemiusly corrupted: whē for preaching there is nothing but mas¦sing, for catechising, sensinge, for rea¦ding of the scriptures belleringing, for syngynge of Psalmes and godly songes to our edificacion, all is don in laten, with such Notes, Tunes, ditties, & descantes, that vtterly the mynde is pulled from the considera∣cion of the thinge (if men did vnder∣stande it) vnto the melody. Al which my wickednes hath brought in, my prophaning of this cōmaundement, and my not praying. Thy ministers are in prison, dispersed in other con∣tries spoiled, burnt, murdred, many fal for feare of goods, lyfe, name &c, from the trueth they haue receyued
vnto moste manifest Idolatrie: false preachers abounde amongeste thy people: thy people dearely bought e∣uen with thy bloud, are not fedde wt the breade of thy worde but with swyllings: antichrist wholy preuai∣lethe, and yet for all this, alas I am to carelesse, nothing lamenting my sinnes which be the cause of al this. O dear father forgeue me for christs sake and be mercifull vnto me, and as of thy mercye thou dyddest geue me time to repent, so geue me repen¦taunce. Graunt me thy holy spirite to open to me this thy lawe, so that I may knowe thy will in it, loue it, and alwaies obey it: thy good spirit sanctifye me and worke in me a true taste of eternall life and pleasure in the meditation of it: geue me (graci∣ous good father) one litle mouthfull of the breade that yu feddest Helye wt all, geue me that with him I maye 1. Reg. 19. come into mounte horeb. Helpe thy church, cherishe it and geue it harbo routh here and els where for christs sake: purge thy ministery from cor∣ruptiō and false ministers: send out
preachers to fede thy people, destroy antichrist & all his kingdome, geue to such as be faullē from thy trueth repentaunce, kepe others from fal∣ling, and by their falling doe yu the more confirme vs, confirme the mi∣nisters & pore people in prisō & exile, strengthen them in thy trueth, deli∣uer them if it be thy good will, geue them that with conscience they may so aunswere their aduersaries, that thy seruantes maye reioyce and the aduersaries be confounded, auengē thou thy owne cause (Oh thou god of hostes) and helpe all thy people, & me especially because I haue moste nede. Honour thy father and mother that thou mayst lyue longe &c. AFter that thou haste tolde me (good lord) thy will concerning the seruice whiche thou requi∣rest inwardly and outwardly to be geuen vnto the: now doest thou be∣gin to tel me what thy wil is that I shuld do & leaue vndone for thy sake
vnto man. And first yu settest before min eies, them whō yu for ordres sake and the more commoditie of man in this life, hast set in degre and autho¦ritie aboue me, cōprehending them vnder the name of father & mother, that I might know yt as of thee thei are commaunded to beare towards me a faithfull loue and a motherly care in the very names of father and mother, wherwith yu honorest them: so am I cōmaūded of thee to do that which is most equall & iuste (as the very brute beasts doe teach vs) that with childly affection and duetye, I shuld behaue my selfe towards thē, that is I shuld honor thē, which cō¦prephēdeth in it, loue, thankfulnes, reuerence and obedience, & that not so much because they be my parēts, and in their offices are carefull for me (for it maye be they will neg∣lecte the doinge of theyr dueties to¦wardes me) but because thou com∣maundest me so to doe, howe so euer they do. So that by thys commaun∣dement I perceiue that thou woldest
I shuld consider them whō thou hast placed in auctorite and superiour de∣gre: as parēts, maiestrats, masters or such like, and accordingly behaue my self toward them, honour them, that is to say loue them, be thankfull vnto them, reuerence them and obey them for thy sake so lōg as they pass not their bounds, that is so longe as they requyre not otherwise then yu hast geuen them commission or per∣mission to doe. And for as much as thou seest their care and offyce is greate, and oure corruption to obey is very muche, as wel to encorage them in their vo¦cation to be diligent, as to enflame me to humble obedience vnto them, therthroughe to make them more willinge to sustaine cares for me: yu addeste a promise, that is longe lyfe which so farre as it is ablessing frō thee yu wilt endue vs wt all. Wherby we may gather that a ciuel life doth much please thee and receiueth here rewards, especially if we lead it for conscieunce to thy lawe. And on the contrary part, a disobedient lyfe to
them that be in auctorite, wil bring the soner thy wrath and vengeaun∣ce in this life. All whiche worketh muche to the commendation of the state of politike & ciuell maiestrats. By reason hereof (deare father) I se my self much boundē to praise thee, and hartelye to obey thys thy com∣maundement. For in it & by it yu de∣clarest thy greate loue towarde vs, which euen in this present life our pylgermage and passage to oure home, woldst haue vs to enioye the benefite of peace, and moste semelye quietnes and order, and by this or∣der so couple vs that none shuld con∣temne or despise another, but euen highe & lowe to be and accompt thē selues as parentes & children. Par∣ticularly for my parte I cannot but say that I haue most cause to thank thee for my parētes, scholemasters, and others vnder whose tuitiō thou hast put me. No pen is able to write ye particular benifites, wc I haue her by receyued in my infancie, childhod youth, midle age, and alwais hether to. Oh how good a lord hast yu decla∣red
thy self to me, which in them and by thē hast norrished, fedde, instruc¦ted, corrected, defended and most gra¦tiously kept me. I coulde recken in∣numerable behind me & but fewe be¦fore me, so much made of & cared for as I haue bene hetherto. No smalle token of thy loue to me warde is it, that thou woldest engraue in theyr hartes and commaunde them vnder paine of damnation to be carefull ouer me, to doe me good and prouide for me, as they haue done or rather thou by thē publickly. Also for the cōmen wealth & suche as thou hast placed in aucthorie ouer me in bothe thy regeniētes, if I considered them that haue bene, and them that be, I coulde not but praise thee good lord. For no lesse praise worthy art thou for this chastening vs and admoni∣shing vs now presētly by them that be in aucthoritie, of our vngratitude and vnthankfulnes, then by such as haue bene, for all kyndes of good things. But infinite are the causes of thankfulnes which this cōmaun∣dement considered, shoulde stirre vp
in me. But alas (most mercifull fa∣ther) as I acknowlege my self most vnthankfull vnto thee for al thy be¦nifites powred vpō me in this lyfe by my parents, nources, tutoures, maysters, magistrates, bishoppes, pastours, and good frindes, euen frō my cradell vnto this hower: so vn∣to them haue I alwaies been & am, in not louing them, as my coldenes in praiynge for them and to my po∣wer in helping them, declareth: and also my not reuerencing them, my cōtemning them, & temerariousnes in my mistrusting or to narrowly & to straightly loking at them & their dewties, showeth: and not obeynge them, as by my cōtumacy appereth, not onely when anye thinge to me vnpleasant or vnprofitable, but also profitable & conuenient is required. And yet I speake not of ye euel & mut¦tering reportes, of ye offences ī trās¦gressing ye politilie lawes for appar¦rel & meates & other no smalle offen¦ces which I haue cōmytted & geuē. Oh this is a sinne deare father that
I alwaies haue ben a priuate more then a common weale mā, alwaies I seke for myn owen cōmeditie, cō∣temning that whiche maketh to the conmmoditie of others. As for my disobedience and wicked behauiour towards my owne parentes and all others whom thou hast set ouer me (deare father) no toūge can expresse it, and therfore I am worthy of dāy∣nation. But (gratious good lord and deare father) I beseche thee for thy Christes sake, to haue mercye vpon me, & pardon me, as of thy goodnes it pleased the to pardone the patri∣arkes. Thou hast geuen this com∣maundement as thy holy lawe to o∣pen to vs howe corrupte we are, and howe much we swarue frō the pat∣terne wherafter we were first made & once agreed thereto before Adams fall, that we might loth our selues and euen thereby be dryuen to seke and set by thy swete mercyes in Ie∣sus Christ, whom therfore thou did∣dest sende to fullfyll the lawe in hys fleshe that we myght borowe of him
the same, by trewe faithe: whiche of thy goodnes worke in vs by thy ho∣ly spirit, and open this lawe vnto vs that we maye more & more increase in the knowledge, loue & obedience of it to thy glory and our saluation, Amen. Deare father be mercifull to our magestrats, especially ye quenes highnes, whose hart with the resi∣due of her counsellers, tourne into thy testimonies, geue them thy wis∣dome and a zeale to the trueth accor¦ding to knowledge, that they maye vse the power they haue receyued of thee to the cherishing of thy church, that wc vs here thy worde may haue free passage and thy true worshippe may be maintained, and not onclye here but also euery where amonges those whom thou woldest we should pray for. Be mercifull to my poore parentes (gratious lorde) with my bretheren, systers, wife, childrē, fa∣mily, seruantes, kinsfolkes, neigh∣boures, as thou knowest they haue all nede. Geue vnto the hartes of all parentes, magestrates and suche as be in aurtherite here or ells where
that they maye accordinge to that yu hast put them in trust wtall, be faith∣full, deligent, carefull, and happye. Graunt vnto children, seruauntes and subiectes, that euerye one maye render loue, obedience, thankfulnes and reuerēce to al such as thou hast put in aucthorite ouer them: blesse the church and send it peace and har borough here or els where: blesse the common weale and sende vs peace: blesse the diocesses and shieres and send them good bisshops and iusti∣ces: blesse euery housholde and fami¦ly, that thy peace may be in the same cōtinually. Fynally write this law & all thy lawes in oure hartes we be sech thee yt we may kepe them Amē. Thou shalte doe no murder &c. AS in the commaundement goe∣inge nexte before, thou settests before me the personages of all such as thou for the commodytie, or∣der, and peace of mā in this life hast placed in aucthoritie, accordingly of vs for thy sake to be estemed: so dost
thou in this commaundement set be¦fore vs to loke on, the personages of all men generally, high and lowe, ouer whom thou geuest vs a charge that we shal not kil or murther thē. In which word thou comprehendest all kind of hatred or malice, in word thoughte or dede, as thy dearely be∣loued sonne expoundinge this com∣maundement Mat. 5. dothe teache. Yea be∣cause thou woldest all men shuld be deare vnto vs, beyng all of one sub∣staunce, of one similitude, comming of the same parents Adam and Eue, made of one God, redemed of one Christ, in whom we should be coup∣led as members of one body, and liue to the aide, succour and cōfort one of another, because of this (I say) easlie we may see that not onely yu forbid∣dest here to beware of all kindes of displeasures, but also thou commaū¦dest vs to beare and exercise al kinde of loue and fauoure in harte worde and dede, and that for thy commaū∣dementes sake, for els towards oure enemies our hartes wolde arise, and be great, in that they contemnynge
their dueties towards vs seme to de¦serue the like at oure handes. By reasō hereof I haue great cause to thanke thee dere father. For here by I see how that thou doest muche loue my soule which arte so carefull ouer my body, so that he which hur∣teth it displeaseth thee and he that doth it good pleaseth thee, if so be he doe it for thy sake. By this commaū¦dement now I se that it is thou that hast kept me frō doing many euels, which els I shuld haue outragiously done, & hast stirred me vp to do good to my brethrē if at any time I haue done any: euen as thou hast also kept and dost kepe presently others from doing me hurt, & hast and dost stirre vp those that do me good to do so vn to me. Oh how great is ye multitud of thy benifits (good lord) wherwith thou hast ouerwhelmed me, and the which through this cōmaundement I perceaue my self to haue receiued, presently do receiue, & so longe as I liue am like to receiue, for thou com¦maundest al men euery where to do me good, loue me, defend me, & che∣rishe
me: suche is thy loue to me in this present life & that for my body. oh how great is thy loue then to me in euerlasting life, & yt for my soule? If in a straūg cōtrey so great is thy protection, how great is it at home? But alas (dere lord) how vnthākful haue I ben & am yet stil for these thy fatherli benifits, oh min ingratitud: yea lord horribly haue I trāsgressed & still doe transgresse this thy graci∣ous precept in pride, enuie, disdaine malice, hardnes of hart, vnmerciful¦nes & contēnīg thy childrē, saints & seruāts: Self loue all together raig¦neth in me and desire of praise, rule & fame: I am so farre frō loue & mer∣cy in hart (good lord) that no man cā here it in my tonge, nor see it in my works, but rather cleane contrary, and yt generally and to thē, to whom I am most bound perticularly. By reason wherof I haue deserued euer lastinge damnnation and to be cast awaye from thy presence for euer. Oh moste gratious father forgeue me for Chrystes sake I beseche the. For to this ende diddest thou geue
this commaundement, that I seyng my corruptiō and deprauate nature by synne might come to thy mercye deserued by christ, and through faith in him, might finde not onelye par∣done of that which is paste: but also thy grace and holy spirit to beginne in me the obedience to this and al o∣ther thi holy precepts for euer more, so be it. For this thy Christes sake (deare father) I besech thee therfore to take from me and all other for whom thou woldest that we should praye, all enupe, pryde, arrogancye dysdaine, hatred and all suspitious∣nes: and graunt vnto vs bowells of mercy, humilitie, pacience, meke∣nes, longe sufferinge, gentillnes, peace, charitie and al kinde of bro∣therly loue cōfort the feble, releue the poore, help the fatherlesse, heale the sycke, blesse the afflicted, shewe thy great mercy vpō all poore priso∣ners & deliuer thē in thy good time, remember thy pitye toward straun∣gers, captiues, wydowes, and suche as be oppressed.
¶ Thou shalte not commytte adul∣terye. HEre (good lord) thou gost about to commaunde vnto me as loue in the other, so purenes and cha¦stite in this, and therfore thou saiest I shoulde not commite adultrye: in the which word thy sonne oure saui∣our Iesus Christ, doth comprehende al vncleannes, yea the very concupi∣scence and abusing of the hart in lu∣sting after any mans wife or other∣wise vnchastly. By the which, in that thou woldest haue vs to loue in our selues and others purite & cleanes, that we might be holy as thou oure god art holy, and our bodies beynge temples of thy holy spirit mighte be kept pure and accordinglye: easelye we maye see that as thou forbiddest all vncleane dedes, wordes, lokes, and thoughtes: so doest thou com∣maunde vs to loue and exercyse all puritie, chastitie, cleannes, sobryety temperancye &c. By reason whereof I haue greate cause to be thankefull vnto thee,
which not onely for the helpe & com¦moditie of man, but also for remedie of mans infirmitie, hast made womā kind and ordained the state of matri¦mony, which in thy sight is so holye and pure that thou accomptest the bedde and acte of generaciō betwene man and wife in this state of matri∣monye to be an vndefyled thynge, and such care thou hast ouer the per∣sonages marryed and their conditi∣on, that vnto damnation they sinne, which not onely goe about to defyle that bed, but within there harts doe wishe or desire it, yea which doe not indeuer thēselues wt thought, word and dede to helpe that purite & clea∣nes betwene married folks be kept. But the greate causes thou geuest vs to thanke thee for this state and ordinaunce, and for thy defendynge vs by thys commaundemente, are innumerable. Full wel I see that it is thou whi∣che by thys commaundemente not onely refraynest me, but also kepest my wyfe from impurytye whyche
ells we might bothe commyte. Greate is thy lous (Oh good lord) and more then I am able to cōsider, whych declarest thy selfe to be thus carefull ouer me concernynge the benefyttes whyche come vnto me bothe for the mynde, bodye, and goodes, by sobryetye and tem per∣auncie, whyche here thou requirest. Onely thys I cannot but see, that I haue greate cause to thanke thee whiche arte so carefull ouer me, as by thys commaundemente I well see. But alas (good lorde) what shall I saye, whiche am and haue bene so farre from thankefullnesse that I am to be accompted amongest the most vnthankfull: yea yu knowest it good lorde. Fylthely haue I broken thys lawe, & caused other so to doe, of whose repentaunce I am vncer∣tain: as also my tonge alas hath oftē ben to shamfully exercised, mynetes & my thoughts to wickedly abused. All this geare I haue encreased by myne intemperauncye in catynge, drinkinge, cherishingemy bodye &c.
I haue also hurt my bodyly health, minished that whiche I and others should lyue on, and horribly hindred all good prayers, and meditations: wherin though I haue time & place, yet alas I nothing exercise my selfe as I should doe. By reason whereof, I haue deser∣ued euerlasting damnatiō. Oh good lorde and gratious father, doe thou for thy names sake and in Christes bloud, pardon me and forgeue me I besech thee, & as thou hast most mer¦cifully hitherto spared me: so of thy mercy put awaye my trespasses, & the transgressions of those whom I haue caused to synne: let that loue which moued thee to pardon Iudas with Thamar, Dauid, Berthsabe, and the greate synner, of whom we reade in S. Luke, moue thee to par∣done Luk 7. and forgeue me also. Thou ga∣uest this commaundemente to thys ende that I might knowe my sinne and sinnefull nature and so thereby be driuen to thy Christ crucified, for whose sake I aske mercy, & also that thy good spirit maye be geuen vnto
me to purifie me and worke so in me and with me, that I may trewelye know, hartly loue, & faithfully obey this thy holy precept inwardly and outwardly now and for euer Amen. Gracious good lord, graunt to me & my wife that we may dwel together accordinge to knowledge, and maye kepe our vessells in holines: graunt (Oh lord) that we may be pure and vndestled: and graunt the same to al that be married, and to them which be vnmarried graunt, that they may liue a pure, chast, and vndefyled life, and if they haue not the gifte of sin∣glenes of life, graunt them such ma∣kes with whom they may liue holy∣ly to thy praise. Deare father geue me the gifte of Sobrietie and Tem∣perauncy, and graunt the same to al them whom thou woldest I shoulde praye for. As in times paste I haue vsed my tounge and other mem∣bers euell, so nowe good lorde graunt that I maye vse them well, chastly and godlye. This I prays thee graunt through Iesus Chryst, and finally (Oh lorde) bothe in soule
and body sanctifie me, and as in thy temple dwell in me nowe and fore∣uer more Amen. Thou shalt not steale. NOwe that thou hast taught me the seruice required of thee for me to obserue towards the per∣sonages of all men and women of e∣uery conditiō: thou beginnest to tell me what thou woldest I shoulde doe concerninge their goodes: and as in the nexte commaundemente before this thou dyddest cōmaūde vnto me sobrietie & purenes, so doest thou in this Iustice and rightuousnes, for∣bydding me to steale. Under the whi¦che word yu comprehendest al kindes of desceite. The which thing yu doest because yu woldest that I shuld geue my selfe wholy to the studie and ex∣ercise of Iustice, as in the precepts next going before, yu woldest I shuld geue ouer my selfe wholy to the ke∣ping of sobrietie & purenes. So that I see thy good pleasure herein is not that I sheuld alonely abstaine from
al thefte: but also from al fraude and craft in word or dede, yea yt I should earnestly folow and exercise all equi¦tie, trueth and Iustice. By reason whereof I see my selfe much bound to praise thee which art so carful ouer mi goods & substaūce, that if any man should goe about to steale from me, or to defraud me in any thig, yea whosoeuer goeth not about to kepe & care for that I haue as he woulde doe for his owne, the same displeaseth the. Oh lord if thou hast such care for my goodes, cattell, and such pelfe, how greate is thy care for my soule? If this one commaūdement were not, I perceaue as I for my owne parte shuld haue done and doe much worse then I haue done: so much worse had bene done to me and mine then hath ben. It is yu good lorde (I perceaue) that hast both geuē me al yt I haue, and also still conseruest and keepest the same, and not my owne poly∣cye, wysedome and industrye, for in vaine were al this, excepte yu diddest
vouchsafe to vse & take it as a meane to worke by. There is nothing ther¦fore that I haue but when soeuer I loke vpon it, by this commaunde∣ment I learne thy goodnes, strength and power, for as thou geuest it of thy mercy, so it speaketh to me that presently yu still doest kepe it for me: so that exceding great cause haue I to thanke thee for this precept dere god and most gracious lord. But alas I am so farre from thank∣fulnes (as alwaies I haue bene for all thy care for me and for all that e∣uer thou haste geuen vnto me) that as I haue vsed subtelty and crafte, yea some times thefte and briberye: so nowe (good lorde) I still when oc∣casiō is offered, do exercise the same. I liue also voluptuously of yt yu hast geuen & lent me, & nothing consider what equitie requireth, and what or how great the necessitie of the poore is, whom I doe thus defraude by ex¦cesse and prodigalitie. That whiche I borowe, I with vnwillingnes doe repaye, I vse it more negligentlye then I wold do myn owne. Lacke of
excommunicatiō, of Iustice, ye great vsery, robberie, oppression and such like wickednes as is exercised amon¦ges vs I lament not, labour not af¦ter my vocation for the redresse of the same, I pray not to thee therea∣bout, but neglecte altogether. Yea euen those things wherewith I am put in trust, or am hirid to do, those (I say) I doe with great negli∣gence, so that great is my sinne here in and worthy I am of damnation. But mercifull god I besech thee for Christes sake, to haue mercye vpon me, and to pardon me my vnthank∣fulnes, theftes, fraudes, deceytes, a∣uarice, neglegences & great careles∣nes for ye lacke of Iustice & for ye mō¦struouse oppression, vseries, excesse, riot, the which be horribly exercised in ye commō weale. For thy mercies sake in Christ Iesus (o lord) whom yu haste geuen to fullfyll the lawe for them that doe beleue, geue me trew faith and thy holy spirite, to worke in me the knowledge, loue and per∣petuall obedience of this thy holye precept and all other thy commaun∣dements
for euer. Deare lord geue vnto me and to all whom yu woldest I shoulde pray for, the hatred of al craft, and loue of all Iustice, graunt to the oppressed thy comfort, to wrongers repentaunce, to theues and deceiuers, yt they may make restitutiō, to iustices of peace, land lords & the rich of the world, yt thei may haue thee before their eies, loue their poore tenants & brethren, to laborers & artificers yt they maye be diligent in their worke & labour that wherwt they are put in trust. Thou shalte not beare false witnes a∣gainst thy neighbour. NOw doest yu (most gratio{us} lord) instruct me in this commaunde∣ment how I shuld vse my ton towards my neighbor & behaue my self concerning his name, forbidding me to beare false witnes: in ye which yu forbiddest me all kinds of slaunde∣ring, lying, hipocricy & vntrueth. And why? because as members of one bo¦die, thou woldeste we shoulde speak
trueth one to another, and be careful euery one to couer others infirmity, and wt oure toūge defend the names of others, euē as we wold that other should defend ours. So that in thys commaundement, as yu forbiddest me all kind of euell, parelous, calumni∣ous, and vntrewe speaking: so doest thou commaunde to me all kinde of godlye, honeste and trewe reporte and talke. By reason whereof I haue greate cause to praise thee, in that I se thee to be so carefull ouer my name, that all men are by thee commaunded to defend ye same. O pretio{us} god, great is thy care ouer my soule I nowe perceiue. If this commaundemente were not, I se, as I shuld haue done & doe much worse with my toūge to others then is hapened, so shoulde I haue felte of others towards me. Besydes this no small commodi∣tie is it to me that thou wouldeste all men shoulde vse treweth in all thire wordes to me. Oh howe greate a good thynge is
this vnto me? If we consider ye hurt ye cōmeth by vntrueth & by wordes, where through many are deceiued: easly may wese a wonderful benifit and care of thee for vs in this com∣maundement. But (gracious lorde) like as I ac∣knowledge my vnthankfullnes to be monstrouse and great & alwaies hathe bene hetherto: Euen so yet continue I in wonderfull hipocrisie in all my conuersation, often lying, and speaking as vainely so offensi∣uely, fleshly subtelly, calūniously, & geuig my eares to here such things as be slaūderously spokē, not repug∣ninge or admonishing other: as the slaunderer to doe as he wold be done by, to tel his tale where he shuld tel it: neither admonishing the partys slaundered of yt whiche is reported of him, thereby to take better heede, but rather I augment it. By reason whereof I haue deserued eternall damnation. But thou (good lord) be mercyfull vnto me I beseche thee for Christes sake, whom yu hast ordained to be the
ende of the lawe to all them that doe beleue, as well for pardone of that which is past, as for not imputinge the imperfection that remaineth. In his name therfore (good lorde) I be∣sech thee to pardon me, and geue me thy holye spirite to open to me this lawe and all other thy preceptes, so to vnderstand them, that I may har¦tely loue them & faithfully geue my self to the obediēce of them for euer. Graunt me thy good spirit to sancti∣fie my tonge that it may be kept frō¦lying, slaundering & al such vices, & that it maye be continually vsed in thy seruice, and speakinge that which may be to edifie, to thy glory and praise through Ie∣sus Christ oure lorde. Amen. ¶ Through vnperfectnes of copies his doinge vpon the tenth commaundement is not yet come to light. Therefore take this in good part till god send the rest.
A meditation con∣cerninge praier, with a breife para∣phrase vpon the petitions of the lords prayer. THe mind of man hath so large roumthe to receyue good things, that nothinge in dede can fully fyll it but onely god, whō then thy mynde fully possesseth, when it fully knowethe him, it fully loueth him, and in all things is framed af∣ter his wil. They therfore (dere lord god) that are thy children and haue tasted somewhat of thy goodnes, do perpetually sighe, yt is do pray vn∣til they come thereto: and in yt they loue thee also aboue all thynges, it wonderfully woūdeth them that o∣ther men do not so, that is loue thee & seke for thee with them. Wherof it commeth to passe that they are in∣flamed with continnall praiers and desires that thy kingedome mighte come euery where, and thy goodnes might be both knowē, and in life ex∣pressed
of euery man. And because there are innumera∣ble many things, whiche as well in them selues as in others be against thy glory, they are kindled with con¦tinuall praier and desire, sighing vn speakably in thy sight for ye encrease of thy spirit: & some times whē they see thy glory more put back then it was wonte to be either in themsel∣ues or in anye other, then are they much more disquieted & vexed. But because they know that yu doest rule all thinges after thy good will, and yt none other can helpe them in their neede, they often times do go aside∣all businesses laid a part, and geue them selues to godlye cogitations and talke with thee, complaininge to thee as to theyr father, of those thynges that greue them, beggyng thereto and that most earnestly thy helpe, not onely for themselues, but also for others, especiallye for those whom singularlye they embrace in thee, and often do repete and remē∣ber thy gracious benifites both to o∣thers and to themselues also, wher∣through
they are prouoked to rēer to thee harty thankes, therby being enflamed, aswell assuredlye to hope well of thy good will towards them and paciently to beare al euills, as also to study and labour to mortifye the affections of the fleshe, and to or∣der all their whole life to the seruice of their brethren and to the settinge forth of thy glory. This they know is that praier thy sonne Iesus Christ oure lorde com∣maunded to be made to thee in the chamber, ye dore being shut. In this kind of praier he himselfe did watch often, euen al the whole night: her∣in was Paule frequent, as all thy saintes be. This kind of prayer is ye true liffting vp of ye mind vnto thee, this standeth in thaffections in the hart, not in wordes & in the mouth. As thy children be endued with thy spirit, so frequent they this talke wt thee, the more thy spirit is in them, the more are they ī talke with thee. Oh geue me plentifully thy spyrite which thou hast promised to powre out vpon all fleshe, that thus I may
with thy saintes talke wt thee night and day, for thy only beloued sōnes sake Iesus Christ our lord Amen. Moreouer thy saintes, to prouoke them to this kinde of praier, doe vse first their necessitie, which they con∣sider in thre sortes, inwardly concer¦ning their soules, outwardly concer¦ning their bodies, and finally concer¦ning their names and fame, wher∣to they adde the necessitie of those that be committed to them, the ne∣cessitie of thy church, and of the com¦mon weale. Secondly they vse thy commaun∣dements, which require them vnder paine of sinne to praye to thee in all their nede. Thirdly they vse the considerati∣on of thy goodnes, which art natural¦ly merciful to yonge rauens calling vpon thee, much more then to them for whom rauens & all thinges ells¦were made, for whom thou hast not spared thy dere son, but geuē him &c. Fourthly they vse thy most swete and free promises made to heare and helpe all them that call vpon thee in
Christes name. Fiftly they vse examples, how that yu which art the god of al and rich vn¦to all them yt cal vpon thee in christs name, hast heard & holpen others cal¦ling vpon thee. Sixtly they vse the benefites geuē them before they asked, thereby not only prouoking them to aske more, but also certifieng their faith, that if thou waste so good to graunt them many thinges vnasked, nowe thou wilt not denye them any thing they aske to thy glory and their weale. Last of al they vse the reading and wayinge of psalmes and other good praiers, because they know thereby peculiarly besides ye other scripture, there is no smal helpe: as may apere by paul Ephes 5. Col 3. where be wil eth the congregaciō to vse psalmes hymmes and spiritual songes, but so that in ye hart we shuld singe and say them: not that thy children do not vse their tonges & words in praying to thee, for they do vse their tonges, speche, & words to styrre vp their in ward desire & feruency of the mino,
full wel knowing that els it were a plaine mocking of thee to pray with lipps & tounges only. Oh yt I might fele now thy spirite so to affecte me, that both with harte and mouthe I might hartely and in faith praye vn to thee. Nowe concernynge the thynges that are to be praied for, thy children know that the prayer taught by thy sonne, moste lyuelye and playnelye dothe contayne the same. And therefore they often vse it, fyrste askynge of thee their heauenlye fa∣ther throughe Chryste, that thy name myghte euerye where be had in holynesse and prayse: then that thy kingdome by regeneration & the ministery of the gospel might come. And so thirdly that willingly per∣fectly & perpetually they might stu∣dy to do, yea do in dede thy wil, with thy holy & heauēly angels & spirits. These thinges they seke & pray for, namely thy kingedome & thy righ∣tuousnes before any worldly bene∣fite. After which petitiōs, because al things, yea euen ye benifits of this
present life do come from thee, they doe godlye desire the same vnder the name of daily bread being instructed of thy wisedome, that after smal be∣nefites to aske corporall is not vn∣semely to thy children, which know both spirituall and corporal to come from thy mercy. In the other petici∣ons they pray for thinges to be takē from them, beginnig wt forgeuenes of sinnes, which were impudentlye praied for, if ye their hartes were not so brokē that they could forgeue all things to al mē for their part. They adde their profession, y• is charitie, wherby they professe that they haue forgeuen all offences done to them. Howbeit because it is not ynough to haue pardon of y• whiche is past, except thei be preserued frō new of∣fīces, they pray thee not to lead thē in  tēptations by permitting them to the peruerse suggestiō of Sathā, but rather to deliuer them from hys importunitie and power, by euel vn¦derstādinge Sathan the authour of all euell. Oh (deare god) that y• wol∣dest endue me wt thy spirite of grace
and praier with thy children accor∣dingly to make this praier alwayes whensoeuer I doe pray. As for outward euills so longe as they doe not (as it were) inforce thy people to sinne, in that christen pro∣fessiō doth accompte them amongst thy benefites: thy sonne hathe not taught thy church to pray for the ta∣king away of thē in this praier, for here he hath cōtained but those thin¦ges, for ye which al Christians gene∣rally and particularly may of faith pray at all times. It often commeth to passe that exteriour euilles, be∣cause they be not euells in dede, that is they are not against goddes grace in vs, therefore they cannot of faith be praied for to be taken away, for thy childrē y• haue faith, do alwaies preferre thy Iudgement before their owne, the which Iudgement wen thei know by that which hapneth to them, they submite themselues ther to wholly, although the spirit make his vnspeakable gronings to helpe their infirmities by prayer, not to haue them taken awaye, but y• they
might haue strenght and pacience to beare the burthē accordingly, which burden if it be to heauy in the better sense and feling therof, they in their praiers doe complaine some thyng, rather then pray to haue it taken a∣way, as oure sauiour did in the gar∣den whē he added to his complainte not my will but thy wil be done. So do thi people in al their complaints adde, not as we wil but as yu wilte, for they are taught by thy spirite no otherwise to praye for the takynge away of corporall euelles either frō them selues or from others, onlesse they by the same spirite doe certain∣ly se the same to make to thy glory: as dyd thine Apostles and seruan∣tes, when absolutly & without con¦dition they dyd aske health or mi∣racle for any, whē they healed or rai∣sed the deade by prayer: for they know nothinge can be better than when it is according to thy wil. Oh that I might alwaies know thy wil in al things, and for euer applye me self therto. Hereof it commeth that thy saynts and deare children which
loue their neighbours as thēselues, do yet notwithstāding in their prai∣ers aske vengeaunce of some, as we may reade in the psalmes of Dauid, because in prayinge & talking with thee they se by thy holy spirit (for wt∣out it is no true praier) sometimes thy Iudgements vpon some whiche they perceiue to sinne to death, and therfore ought not to be praied for, but rather to be praied against, be∣cause thy glory cānot be set forth as it shuld be without their destructiō: thy will is alwayes best & the thing wherto they frame all their desires. Therefore when they perceiue it decreed with thee suche and suche by theyr destructyon to set fourthe more myghtelye thy glorye, howe should they but desire and praye for the same, & write it as Dauid hathe done, that the godly in readinge and waying such praiers, might receiue comfort, and the vngodly be afraied: ells when that they perceiue not so manifestlye the determened Iudge∣ment of god, they in their praiers do most hartely praye for them as Sa∣muell
did for Saule, Moyses for the Israelites, Abraham for the Sodo∣mites. Oh good faher for thy mer∣cyes sake geue me the trews loue of mankinde, but yet so yt I maye loue mā for thee and in thee, and alwaies preferre thy glory aboue al thinges through Christ our lord. Now though thy children do know that thy wil cannot but be done, and nothinge can be done but that thou of thyne owne will hast determined to do, although no man shuld desire the same, yet are they earnest and frequent in praier: fyrst to render o∣bedience to thee, whiche requyreste praier as a spirituall seruice to thee: secondly because thou hast ordained praier to be as an instrumente and meane, by the which thou workeste thinges with thee already decreed & determined. Thy children doe vse prayer to offer thee their seruice, if it shall please the to vse the same. As they doe eate and drincke, whiche is a meane ordayned of thee for the cō∣seruation of their life, not lookynge hereby to lengthē their daies aboue
their boūds which already thou hast appotnted, but as becometh them, to vse thy meanes which thou hast or∣dained to serue thy prouidence: So do they (herein as men not curiouse to knowe thy prouidence further then thou reuaiest it) vse praier as a meane by y• which thou art accusto∣med to worke many of thy chidrens ere, that according to thy good wil thou maiest vse the same: they doe not thinke a mutabilitie in thee (for y• art god & arte not chaūged, wyth thee there is no variablenesse) and therfore they pray, not as mē which would haue thy determinations and ordenaunces, which are in most wis¦dome and mercy, to be altered, but ra¦ther that they might submitte their willes to shine, & make them more able to beare thy will and pleasure. They knowe thou haste promysed to helpe them callinge vpon thee, wherfore thei doubt not but thou so wilt doe and therefore praie accor∣dingly. They loue thee hartely, and therfore thei cannot but desire much s talke with thee, that is to praye,
euen as a wel manered and lauinge wife will not take vpon her to aske anye thinge of her husbande at all but that, she hopeth he wolde take in good parte and doe of his owne fres wyll, althoughe she had spoken nothing therof. When she knoweth what her housbands will is in thin∣ges, she gladely talketh with hym thereof, and accordingly as she seeth he is purposed to doe, she will often desire him to doe it: euen so thy chil∣dren (I say) which hartely loue thet, in that they know thy wisdome and wil is best, hawe can they but often talke with thes and desyre thee to  that which they know is best, which they knowe also thou woldest doe  none shuld aske or praye for y• same? Thy children vse praier as a meane by which they se plainly thy power, thy presence, thy prouidēce, mercy  goodnes towardes them in grann∣tinge their petitions, and by praier they are confirmed of them all. Yea thy children vse praier to admonishe them how that all things are in thy hands. In praier they are as it were
of thee put in mind of those thinges they haue done agaynst thee theyr good lord. By reason wherof repen¦taunce ensueth, and they conceyue a purpose to liue more purely euer af∣terwards, and more hartelye to ap∣plye themselues to all innocencye & goodnes. Who now consideryng so manye greate commodities to come by reason of prayer, would maruell why thy chyldren are much in praier and in labouring to prouoke others there vnto? For as none that is a suter to any o¦ther wit vse any thing which might offend or hinder his sute, so no man that vseth praier will flatter himself in any thinge that shoulde desplease thee, to whom by praier he moueth sute whensoeuer he prayeth: so that nothing is a more prouocacion to al kind of godlynes then praier is. And therefore not wythout cause we may see thyne Apostles and ser∣uauntes to laboure so dilygentlye, and desyre that others myghte vse, prayers for themselues and others.
As concerning outward thynges which thy childrē pray for, although they know thy wil & decree is not va¦riable & thy purpose must neds come to passe, yet doe they receiue by their praier no small commoditie. For ei∣ther they obtaine their requestes or no. If they do obtain thē, then proue they by experience that thou doeste the will of them that feare thee, & so they are more kindled to loue & serue thee. And in deed for this purpose  art wont, when thou wilt doe good to any, to styrre vp their mindes to desire y• same good of thee to thende that both thou and thy gifts may be so muche more magnisted and set by of them, by how much they haue ben ernest suters and peticioners for the same. For howe can it but en a  them with loue towards thee, to per ceiue and fele thee so to care for thē, heare them and loue them. If they doe not obtaine that they praye for, yet vndoubtedly they receiue greate comforte to see that the euyls which presse them and whereof they com∣plaine stil, doe not oppresse and ouer
come them, & therfore they receyue strength to beare y• same the better. O good father help me that I might hartely loue thee, complaine to thee in all my nedes and al∣waies by prayer to po∣wer oute my heart before thee. Amen AN OTHER paraphrase or meditation vpon the lords praser. O Almighty & eternal god of whō all fatherhode in heauen and in earth is named, whose seate is the heauen, whose foote stoole is the earth, which of thy great clemency & vnspeakable loue hast not waighed nor considered our great vnkindnes and wilfull disobedience, but accor∣ding to the good pleasure of thy eter¦nall purpose hast in thy welbeloued sonne Iesus Christ, chosen vs out of the worlde and doest accept vs farre other wise then we be in dede, to be called yea and to be in dede thyne a∣dopted sonnes, and doest vouchesafe
(oh louinge father) that we as it were heauenly children, shuld euery one of vs confesse, declare and call thee oure heauenlye father: graunt (deare father) that amonge vs thy poore children by purenes of mynds Halowed be thy name, and couscience, by singlenes of hart, by vncorrupt and innocent life, and example of vertue and godlines, thy most holy name maye be sanctified, and that so many of al other nations as thou hast ther vnto chosē and pre∣destinate, beholding our godlines & vertuous dedes that thou workest in vs, may be the more styrred to ha¦low and gloryfy thy blessed name. Oh faithfull father we beseech thee that the kingdome of thy holy spirit Thy king∣dom come of grace and prayer, of thy louinge kindnes and mercy, and of all other thy holy vertues, and of thy holye & most blessed word may continually raygne in our heartes, so that thou woldest vouchesafe therby to make vs worthye to be partakers of the realme & kingdome of thy gloriouse and blessed presence. Oh deare god and heauenly father
we humblye desyre thy goodnes to bowe our hartes vnto thee, to make Thy will be done. vs humble of mind, to make vs low in our owne fight and obedient, that like as thy deare sonne our only sa∣uiour Ies{us} Christ coūted his meate, workes, prayse, and life to be onely in obeyng to thy most blessed wyl, where in for our sakes he became o∣bedient to the death of the crosse: so we may euē vnto the very death, in lowlines, in mekenes, pacience and thankefulnes, ohey vnto thy holye wil and not to murmur and grudge norrefuse whatsoeuer thy fatherlye pietie shal thinke good to lay on vs, be it pouertie, hunger, nakednes, slcknes, slaunders, oppressions, vera¦tions, persequutions, yea or deathe it self for well doing: but in all thin¦ges seke and laboure to make these our earthly bodies seruiseable to do thy wil, and to refuse that thou wilt not, neuer to stryue nor wrastell a∣gainst thy holye will, but with thy heauenly citizens and houshold bull ded vpon the foundation of thy holy prophetes and apostelles, thy sonne
Iesus Christ being the heade corner stone, all selfwill and controuersye in opinious secluded, the lustes, de∣sieres & affections of the fleshe mor∣tified, the flatering assaultes of the vaine world, y• cruel and subtyl lay¦ings a waite of y• deuil ouercome, a∣greing together quietly, and vnited in spirit, we may frely obey vnto thy most blessed will, therein to walke all the daies of oure life. Oh deare god geue vnto our nede∣full Geue vs this daye our dailie bread. bodies necessatie sustenaunce, & take from vs all loue of worldelye things, all carefulnes and couetous¦nes, that we may the more frely wor¦shippe & serue thee. Oh mercyful fa¦ther we besech thee to geue vnto vs that heauēly bread to strenghtē our harts, I meane y• bodye of thy deare sōne Ies{us} christ y• very foode & health of our soules, that we may alwaies wt thankfulnes firmely feede on him by faith & vtterly forsake & abhorre al false doctrine & perswasiōs of mē, and all lying spirites that shall per∣swade vs any other wise of him then thy holy word doth teache & assure
vs satisfie our hungrie soules (deare father) with y• mary & fatnes of thy riche mercy promised to vs in y• same thy sonne, and of our eternall electi∣on, redcmption, iustificatiō, & glori∣fication in him. Make vs (Oh gra∣tious god) to contempne and despise this world with the vaine thinges and pleasures therof, and inwardly to hunger for thy blessed kingdome and presence, which doe thou satisfie (good god) in thy good time accordīg to thy good will and pleasure. Oh most louing god, geue vs the bread of thi diuine precepts and make our hartes perfect, that we may trulye & frely walke and liue in them all the daies of our life. Oh deare and mer∣cifull father, we besech thee geue vs the bread of thy liuely and heauenly word & the true vnderstanding ther∣of, which is the light of our pathes, the foode, strong towre and sure de∣fence of our saules, that we beinge wel sensed with this munitiō, fedde and filled with this foode, maye be worthy geastes at thy celestial feast and wedding, where we shall neuer
hunger nor want. Oh moste righteous and mercifull And for∣giue vs our trespasies. god, father and gouernor of our life, we confesse that we haue greuously sinned against thee from our youth vp vntill now in ingratitude, in vn∣thankfulnes, wilfulnes, disobedien∣ce, presumption & innumerable our negligences & sinnes whiche we frō¦time to time most hainously haue cō¦mitted, whereby we haue deserued not only sore ad greuouse plagues, but euen eternal dampnation, were it not that thou art y• lord of mercy, and hast power to shewe mercye on whom yu wilt, wherin thou art riche and plentifull to al them that cal by on thee faithfully: wherfore (dere fa¦ther) we seing our manyfold and gre¦uouse sinnes, which we haue com∣mytted against thee, & also thy great mercy, louing kindnes, pacience, and long suffering towards vs, are compelled not only to beare pacient¦ly and suffer our enemies whē they raile on vs, slaunder vs, oppresse vs, vexe vs, or trouble vs, curse, perse∣quute, & kyll vs: but also to speake
well of them, to enstructe them, to pray for them, to doe them good, to blisse them, to cloth them, feede thē, so heapyng coales of thy charity and loue vppon them, and mercyfullye to forgeue them euen as thou (deare father) for thy beloued Chrystes sake haste forgyuen vs. Thus hast thou taughte vs (good father) not as the hipocrites to loke narowlye on oure neighboures faultes, but di∣ligently to examine oure owne con∣sciences wherein we haue offended thee, & also what occasion of offence or falling we haue geuen to our bre∣thren in eating, drinking, going, ap∣parell, speaking, disolute or vncome¦ly laghter, in barganing, or by anye meanes, and with all speede seke to reconcile our selues to them, & to for∣geue vnto other from the bottome of our harts, whatsoeuer they haue of∣fended vs, and to doe none other wise then we wishe and desire in our har∣tes that other should doe to vs, y• so we may fynde thee (o lorde) in forge∣uing vs our trespasses, mylde & mer
cifull, which spedily doe thou shewe thy self vnto vs, for thy deare Chri∣stes sake. Oh lord, thou god of the righteous, we feele the frailtis of our nature to And lead vs not in∣to tenta∣tion. be so peruerse and apte to sinne, that when thou by the giftes of thy holy spirit doest moue vs, and (as it were) cal vs, yea rather draw vs vnto thee then are we drawen away & temp∣ted of our owne cōcupiscence & lust, beside the greate and daungerous as¦saultes of the world and deuill: ther¦fore (faithful father) we thy pore chil¦dren beseche thee to take from vs al those euills and accasions that may drawe vs from thee. Oh deare god, protecte, defend, and strengthen vs against all the suggestions & assaul∣tes of our enemyes, the worlde, the fleshe, and the deuill, that neither in prosperite we were haute or hyghe minded to say vnthankefully what felow is the lord, nor yet in the abon¦daunce of temptations, anguishe, vexation, tribulation, or persequuti∣on, to be oppressed with feare, nor de¦ceiued by flaterie, nor yet to fall in
dispaire and so vtterlye perishe: but in all daungers and perilles of temp¦tacions, and in the myddeste of the stormy tempests of tribulacion (ders father) make vs thy poore children to feels the cōsolacion of the certain¦tie of our eternall election in Chryst Iesus our lorde, and to perceyue thy fatherly succoure ready to helpe vs, least that we beyng ouercome with the wicked sleightes and veceitfull inuasions of the enemyes, should (as without thy grace and merciful pro¦tection we shall) be drawne into an obstinate mind & so shut vp the cun∣dite y• shuld lead thy gracio{us} gifts & benifits vnto vs, to our cōmoditye & comfort, that thou mightest lead vs forth with the euill doers & barden our harts. Therfore (Oh good god) giue vs these thi good giftes, namely strēgth, paciēce & ioyfulnes of hart, to reioyce in temptacyō & assure vs that it is the triall of our faith, that faithe in vs maye haue her perfecte worke, that when we be well appro¦uyd and purged with the fire of tēp∣tations, we may fynishe oure life in
in vyctory, and euer more liue wt thee in thy heauēly kingdome, where no temptacion shal doe vs hurt. Finally (most merciful father) we But deliuer vs from e∣uell. humbly besech thee to deliuer vs frō this present euill world, from all hu¦maine & wordly feare, from al infir∣mities of the fleshe & mind, frō false prophetes and teachers, from false brethren, from traitours & tyrantes &c: and if it be thy good pleasure and may make most to the glorye of thy name, deliuer vs from the handes of our enemies & from all other euylls present and to come both of bodye & soule, that we beyng by the greate mercy defended from al hurtful thin¦ges, may alwaies vse those thinges that be profitable for vs, deuoutiye geuē to serue thee in good workes, that y• yoke of our enemies and the bandes of sinne being shaken of, we may possesse the inheritaunce of thy heauenly kingdome, which thy dere sonne Iesus Chryst hath wyth hys precious bloud purchased for, thyne elect frō the begynning of the world: for thyne is the kyngdome, thou on∣lye
haste the mayestye, thou onelye arte the god aboue all goddes, kyng of all kynges, and lorde of al lords, thou onelye, haste the powre and authorytye to set vp kynges, and to putte them downe, thou liftest the poore once of the duste and ma∣kesste hym to sytte amonge the princes of thy people, thou onelye makeste warres to cease and geuist victory to whom thou wilt. Oh dere god, there is neither maiestie rule nor power, honour nor worshyppe, dignitie nor office, riches nor pouer∣tie, helth nor sicknes, plenty nor scar¦tie, presycritie nor aduersitie, war nor peace, life nor death, nor anye o∣ther thing but it is all thine & thou both hast the power & also wilt geue it to whō it pleaseth thee in thy time and ceason, that all glorye maye be geuen to the alone, for thou arte worthye. O dere father to thee we come ther¦fore for helpe and succour, for wyth∣out thee there is no helpe at al. Oh good father deliuer vs frō al that is
euil in thy sight, for thy owne name sake and for thy deare Christs sake, that we beynge armes with thy ho¦ly armour, and weapened wyth thy blessed worde, and instructed by thy holy spirit, may according to thy ho¦ly promise, serue thee without  are all the dayes of our life, in suche ho∣lynes and righteousnes as is accep∣table in thy sighte. To thed therfore (our deare father) our creatour, fea∣der, protectour, gouernour, and de∣fendour, and thy beloued sonne Ie∣sus christ our only peace, merciseate redemer, iustister, and aduacate, and thy holy spirit our sanctificatō, our wisdome, teacher, instructer, & com∣forter, be all dominion power and glory for euer and euer Amen.
A MEDITATION of the comming of Christ to Iudge∣ment and of the rewarde bothe of the faythefull and vn∣faithfull. OH lorde Iesus Christ the sōne of the euer∣liuing god, by whō al thinges were made, are ruled and gouer∣ned, as of thy loue for our redemption thou diddest not disdaine to be our mediatour and to take vppon thee oure nature in the wombe of a virgyn puerly and with out sinne by the operacion of the ho¦ly spirite, that both thou mightest in thyne owne person wonder∣fullye beutifye and exalte oure na∣ture and worke the same in vs also, first abolishing the giltines of sinne by remissyon, then synne it selfe by death, and last of al death by reising vp againe these our bodies, that they may be like vnto thine owne glori∣ous & immortall body, according to the power wherwith thou art able to subiect all thinges vnto the: As I
say of thy loue for oure redemption thou becamest man, and that moste poore and afflicted vpō earth by the space of xxxiii. yeares at the least, in most humilitie, and paidest the price of our raunsom by thy moste bytter death & passion, for the which I most hartely geue thankes to thee: So of the same thy loue towards vs in thy good time, thou wilte come againe in the cloudes of heauen with power and great glory, with flaming fyer, with thousandes of Sainctes, with Mat. 25. Angells of thy power, wt a mightie crie, shoute of an Archangell, & blast of a trompe, suddenlye as the light∣ning which shineth from the east &c when men thinke leaste, euen as a thefe in y• night, whē mē be a slepe, y• wilt so come (I say) thus suddenlye in the twinkling of an eye, all men that euer haue bene, be and shalbe, with wemen & children, appearinge before thy tribunal Iudgemēt seat, to render an accompte of all things whiche they haue thought spoken  done against thy lawe, openlye and before all Angells, saintes, and de∣uilles,
and so to receiue the Iuste re∣ward of thy vengeaunce, if that they haue not repented and obeyed the gospell, & so to departe from thee to y• deuil & his angells & al the wicked which euer haue bene, be, or shalbe, into holster, which is vnquenchable & of paines intolerable, easeles, end¦les, hopeles, euen frō the face of thy glorious and mightie power: but it they haue repented and beleued thy gospell, if they be found watchynge with their lampes and oyle in their hands, if they be founde ready appa∣reled with the wedding garment of innocencie, if they haue not harde∣ned their hartes, & hourded vp their treasure of thy vengeaūce in y• daye of wrathe to be reueyled, but haue vsed y• time of grace, the acceptable time, the tyme of saluatyon, that is the tyme of this lyfe in the whyche thou stretchest oute thy hande and spreadest thyne armes callinge and cryinge vnto vs to come vnto thee which art meeke in harte and lowe∣ly; for thou wilt ease all that labour and are heauy loden, if they haue vi∣syted
the sycke & prisoners, comfor∣ted y• cōferties, fedde y• hungry, clo∣thed y• naked, lodged y• harbourles, if they haue not loden theyr hartes wt glotteny and surfeting and careful∣nes of this life, yf they haue not dig¦ged & hid their talent in the ground doing no good there with, but haue bene faithfull to occupie thy gyftes to thy glory and heare washen their garments in thy bloude by hartie re¦pentinge them: Then shall thy An∣gells gather them together, not as the wicked which shalbe collected as fagotts and cast into the fier, but as y• good wheat that is gathered into thy barne, then shall they be caught vp to meete thee in the cloudes, then shall their corruptible bodye put on incorruption, then shall they be in∣dued with immortalitie and glory, then shall they be with thee and goe whether thou goest, then shall they heare, come blessed of my father pos∣sesse the kingdome prepared for you frō the beginning &c, then shal they be set on seates of maiesty iudgeing y• whole world, then shal they raign
with the for euer, then shal god be al in al with them and to them, then shal they enter & enherete heauenly Ierusalem and the glorious reastful lād of Canaā, where is alwaies day and neuer night, where is no maner of weping, teares, infirmity, hunger cold, sicknes, enuy, malice, nor sinne, but alwaies ioic wtout sorrow, mirth without measure, pleasure without paine, heauenly harmonie, most plea¦sant melodie, saying & singing holy holye, holye lorde god of hoastes &c: Suma the le hath not sene the eare hath not heard, neither hathe it en∣tered into the hart of man that they shal then enherete & most suerly en∣ioye, although here they be tormen∣ted prisoned, burned, sollicited of Sa¦than, tempted of the fleshe, and en∣tangled with y• world, wherthrough they are enforced to crye, thy king∣dome come: come lord Iesu &c: howe Apoc. 22. amiable are thy tabernacles? Like as y• hart desireth y• water brokes &c: Psa. 42. Now let thy seruāt depart in peace: I desire to be dissolued & to be with Christ: we morne in our selues wai∣ting Rom. 8.
for the deliuerāce of our bodies &c. Oh gracious lorde when shall I find such mercy wt thee, that I maye repente, beleue, hope and looke for this geare, with the full fruition of these heauēly ioyes which thou hast prepared for al them that feare thee, and so rest with thee for euer more. A MEDITATION CONCER∣ning the sober vsage both of the bodye and pleasures in this life. THYS our body which god hath made to be the tabernacle and mansiō of our soule for thys life if we cōsidred accordingly, we coulde not but vse it otherwise then we do, that is we would vse it for the souls sake being the geste therof, and not for the body it self, and so shuld it be serued in things to helpe, but not to hynder the soule. A seruant it is and therfore it ought to obey to serue the soule that ye soule might serue god, not as the body wil neyther as the soule it selfe wyll, but as god wyll, whose wil we shuld learne to know & behaue oure selues therafter. The
which thig to obserue, is hard for vs nowe by reason of sinne which hath gotten a mansyon house in oure bo∣dies, and dwelleth in vs as doth the soule, to y• which (sinne I meane) we ar altogether of our selues inclined, because we naturally are synners & borne in sinne, by reason wherof we are ready as seruantes to synne and to vse oure bodies accordingly, ma∣king the soule to sytte at rewarde, & pampering vp the seruaunt to oure shame. Oh therfore (good lord) that it wold please thee to opē this geare vnto me, and to geue me eyes to con¦sider effectually this my bodie what it is, namely a seruant lent for the soule to soiorne in & serue thee ī this life: yea it is by reasō of sinne y• hath his dwelling there, become nowe to the soule nothing els but a prison & that most straite, vile, stinking, fyl∣thy, and therfore in daunger of mi∣series, to many in al ages, tymes, & places, till deathe hathe turned it to duste whereof it came and whe∣ther it shall returne, that the soule maye returne to thee from whence
it came, vntil the day of Iudgement come, in the whiche yu wilte reise vp that body, that then it may be parta¦ker with the soule & the soule with it inseparably of weale or woe, accor¦ding to that is done in & by the same body here nowe in earth. Oh that I could consyder often and hartely these thinges, then shoulde I not pamper vp thys body to obey it, but brydle it that it might obey y• soule, then should I flye the paine it putteth my soule vnto by reason of synne and prouocation to al euyl, & continually desyre the dissolution of it wt Paul, & y• deliuerance frō it, as Philip. 1. much as euer dyd prisoner his dely∣ueraunce out of prison, for alonelyr by it the deuyl hath a dore to tempt and so to hurte me: in it I am kepte frō thy presence, and thou from be∣ing so conuersant with me as els yu wouldeste be: by it I am restrained from the sense and feeling of all the ioyes and cōfortes (in maner) which are to be taken as ioyes and comfor∣tes in dede. If it were dissolued and I oute of it, then coulde Sathan no
more hurt me, then wouldest thou speake wt me face to face, then the conflicting time were at an end, then sorow would cease and ioye wolden∣crease, and I shuld enter into inesti∣mable reste. Oh that I considered this accordingly AN OTHER mediation to the same effecte THE begynning of al euyl in our kind of ly∣uinge springeth oute of the deprauatyon and corruptnes of our Iudgement, because our wil alwaies foloweth-that whi∣che reason Iudgeth to be folowed. Now that which euery man taketh to be frendly and agreing to his na∣ture, the same doth he Iudge neces∣sarely to be good for him and to be de¦syred. This is meate, drinke, appa∣rell, riches, fauour, dignitye, rule, knowledge, and suche like, because
they are thought good and agreing either to the body or to the minde or to both, for they helpe either to the cōseruatiō or to the pleasure of mā, accompted of euerye one amongest good thinges. How beit suche is the weaknes of our witte on y• one part, & the blind¦nes and to muche rage of our lustes on the other part: that we being left to oure selues, cannot but in the de∣sire of thinges which we iudge good and agreinge to oure nature, by the Iudgement of our senses and reasō, we cannot (I say) but ouer passe the boundes wherby they might be pro∣fitable vnto vs, and so we make thē hurtful to vs, whiche of the themselues are ordained for our health. What is more necessarye then meate and drinke, or more agreing to nature? but yet how fewe be there which de not hurt thēselues by them? In like maner it goeth wt riches, estimatiō, frendes, lerning &c. Yea althoughe we be ī these most. tēperate, yet whē there wanteth y• spirit our regenera¦tour, we are so drouned. in thē,  we vtterly neglect to lift vp our mīds to
the good pleasure of god, to the ends we mighte imitate and folowe god our maker by yelding our selnes oi∣uer dulye to vse his giftes to y• com¦mon & priuate vtility of oure neigh∣bours. But now, gōd only is life & c∣ternity, & cannot but demaund of vs his. handiworke, y• we should render ure selues & al we haue to the ende wherfore we were made, y• is to re∣semble for our portion his goodnes, as those which be nothinge els but witnesses & instrumēts of his my. So y• when we wholly do naturally riue agaīst y• kind of life wherto he hath creat vs, by seking alwaies our¦selues, what other thing ought to en¦sue, but y• he shuld again destroy vs & take away his notable gifts, wher wt be endued vs y• by al kind of wel do∣ing we shuld resemble his image, yea what other this may ensue but that he shuld leaue vs & y• eternally, y• we might fele & by experiēce proue how bitter a thing it is to leaue y• lord  whō is al goodnes. Oh y• therfore I might finde such fauour in thy sight dere father, y• yu woldest worke in e by thy holy spirit a true knowledge
of al good thinges and harty loue to the same through. Christ Iesus our lord and only sauiour Amen. A MEDITATION FOR THE exercyse of true mortifi∣cation. HE that wilbe readye in weightie matters to denie his owne w & to be obedient to the wyl of God, the same had nede to accustome him selfe to deny his desyres in mat∣ters of iesse weyght, and to exercyse mortification of his owne wil in tri¦sles. For if that  affectiōs by this daily custome, be not (as it were) half slaine, surely surely when they lunge shal come, we shal fynd the more to doe, If we cannot watch with christ one howre, as he saieth to Peter, we vndoubtedly can muche lesse goe to death with him. Wherefore that in great temptacions we may be ready to say with Christ, not my wyll but thine be done, in that this commōly commeth not to passe but where the
rotes of our lustes by thy grace (dere father) are almost rotten and rooted out by a daily deniall of that they de¦sire: I humbly besech thee for christs sake to help me herein. First pardon me my cherishing, & (as it were) wa∣tering of mine affections, obeyinge them in theyr deuyses and superflu∣ous desyres: wherthroughe in that they haue taken depe roote, and are to liuely in me, I secondly do besech thee to pul them vp by the rotes out of my hart, and so henceforth to or∣der me, that I may cōtinually accu∣stome my self to weaken the princi∣pal rote, that the byrotes & braun∣thes may lose al their power. Graūt me (I besech thee) y• thy grace maye daily mortifie my cōcupiscēce of plea¦sant things, y• is of wealth, riches, glory, libertie, fauour of mē, meats, drinks apparel, ease, yea & life it self y• the horror and impaciencie of more greuous things, may he weakened, and I made more pacient in aduer∣sytie. Whervnto I further desire & pray thy goodnes (deare father, that thou wilt adde this, namely that I
may for euer become obedient & rea∣dy to thy good wil in al things, har∣tely & willingly to serue thee, & doe whatsoeuer mai please the. For dout¦les, although we accustome oure sel∣ues in y• pleasant things of this life to a mortificatiō & denyal of our sel∣ues, yet we shal find enough to doe when more bitter & weighty crosses come. For if thy sonne oure sauiour (euer wōt to obey thy good wil) prai¦ed so hartely & oftē: not my wil but thy wil be don, whereby he declareth him¦self to be veri mā, how cā it be but we whose nature is corrupt not only in natiuity but in y• rest of oure whole life also, shal find both our hāds ful ī great & greuo{us} tēptations, wholy to resigne our selues vnto thee? Graūt therfore, dere father, for thy Christs sake to me a most miserable wretch, thi grace & holy spirit to be effectual in me, y• daily I maye accustome my self to deny my wil, in more easye & pleasant things of this life, y• when nede shal be I may come wt christ to thee wt a resigned wil, alwaies sted∣fastly expecting thy mercye, & in the
meane season, continually obeyng thee with readines and willingnes, doyng what so euer may most please thee, through christ our lord, whiche liueth with thee &c. A GODLYE MEDITATION and instruction of the prouidence of god towards mankind. THis ought to be vnto vs moste God wor∣keth all in all marue∣lously, iust¦ly & holily certaine, y• nothing is done with¦out thi prouidence (oh lord) that is, that not nothynge is done be it good or bad, swete or sower, but by thy knowledge, that is, by thy wyl, wisedome, and ordināce (for al these knowledge doth comprehend in it) as by thy holy word we are taught in many places, that euē the life of a sparow is not wtout thy wil, nor any Mat. 10. Mat. 8. liberty or power vpon a porket haue all the deuils in hell, but by thy ap∣pointment & wil: wt wil we alwaies muste beleue moste assuredlye to be al iust & good, how soeuer otherwise it seme vnto vs. For yu art meruelo{us} & not comprehensyble in thy wayes and holy in all thy workes.
But herevnto it is necessarie also God wor∣keth by meanes, withoute meanes, & against meanes. for vs to knowe no lesse certainely, that thoughe al thynges be done by thy prouidence, yet the same proui∣dence hath manye & diuers meanes to worke by, which meanes beinge cōtemned thy prouidence is contem∣ned also. As for example, meate is a meane to serue thy prouidence, for y• preseruation of health and life here, so that he which contemneth to eate because thy prouidence is certaine & vnfallible, the same contemneth thy prouidence. In deede if y• it were so y• meate could not be had, then shuld we not tye thy prouidence to thys meane, but make it free as yu art free that is, that withoute meate yu canst help and geue health and life, for it is not of any nede that thou vsest anye instrumente or meane to serue thy prouidence: thy power and wise∣dome is infinite and therfore should we hangon thy prouidence euen when all is cleane agaist vs. But for our erudition and infirmities sake, it hath pleased thee by meanes to worke, and deale with vs here, to ex
exercise vs in obediēce, & because we cannot els (so great is our corrupti∣on) sustaine thy naked and bare pre∣sence. Graunt me therfore deare fa∣ther I humbly besech thee for Chri∣sts sake, y• as I somthing now know these thigs: so I may vse this know ledge to my comfort & commodity in thee: y• is, graūt yt in what state so e∣uer I be, I may not dout but y• same doth come to me by thy most iust or∣dināce, yea by thy merciful ordināce, for as yu art iust so art yu merciful, yea thy mercie is aboue al thy workes. And by this knowledge, graūt me that I may humble my selfe to obey thee and loke for thy helpe in tyme conuenient, not onely when I haue meanes, by which thou maist worke & art so accustomed to doe: but also when I haue no meanes but am des∣titute, ryea when that al meanes be directly & cleane against me: graunt I saye yet that I maye still hange vpon the and thy prouidence, not doubtinge of a fatherly ende in thy good time.
Againe, lest I shuld contempne thy prouidence or presume vpon. it by vncouplinge those thinges, whiche thou hast coupled together, preserue me from negleating thy ordinarye & lawefull meanes in al my nedes, yt so be I may haue them and wt good conscience vse thē, although I know thy prouidence be not tyed to them, further then pleaseth thee: but graūt that I may with diligēce, reuerence and thankfulnes vse them, and ther to my diligence, wisedome and indu¦strie in all thinges lawful, to serue therby thy prouidence, if it so please thee: howbeit so that I hange in no part on y• meanes or on my diligen∣ce, wisdome, & industry, but only on thy prouidence, which more & more perswade me to be altogether father ly and good, how farre so euer other wise it appeare & seme, yea is felt of me. By this I being preserued frō negligence on my behalf and dispair or murmuring towards thee, shal be come diligent and pacient, through thy mere and alone grace: whiche geue and encrease in me, to prayse
thy holy name for euer, through Ie∣sus Christ oure lorde and onelye sa∣uiour, Amen. A MEDITATION of the presence of god. THERE is nothinge that maketh more to trewe godlynes of life then the persuasion of thy presence, deare fa¦ther, & that nothinge is hid from thee, but all to thee is o∣pen & naked, euē y• very thoughtes, which one daie thou wilt reuele and open either to our praise or punishe¦ment in this life: As thou didst Da∣uids faultes which he did secretly. 2 Reg 12. or in yt life to come Mat 25: For nothing is so hid that shall not be reueiled. Therfore doth the pro∣phet saye: woe to them that kepe se∣cret their thoughts to hide their coū¦sell from the lord, & doe their works in darkenes, sayinge who seeth vs? graunt to me therfore (dere god) mer¦cy
for al my sinnes, especially my hid & close sinnes, enter not into iudge∣mēt with me, I humbly besech the, geue me to beleue truly in thy christ that I neuer come into Iudgement for them, that with Dauid I mighte so reueile them and cōfesse them vn∣to thee, that yu woldest couer them: And graunt further, that hence forth I alwaies thinke my self continual∣ly conuersant before thee, so that yf I do wel I passe not of the publishig of it as hipocrites doe, yf I doe or thinke any euell, I maye forth with know that y• same shall not alwaies be hidde from mē. Graunt me that I may alwaies haue in mind that day wherin hid workes of darknes shal∣be illumined, & also y• sentēce of thy sonne, that nothinge is so secrete which shal not be reueiled. So ī trou¦ble and wrong I shal find comfort, and otherwise be kept throughe thy grace from euil, which doe yu worke I humblye beseche thee for Christes sake, Amen.
A MEDITATION OF GODES power, beutie, goodnes &c. BEcause thou lord woldst haue vs to loue thee, not only doest thou will, entice, allure and prouoke vs, but also doest commaunde vs so to do, promising thy self vnto such as loue thee, and threaning vs wt damp nation if we do otherwise: whereby we may se both our great corruptiō & noughtines, & also thine exceding great mercy towards vs. First, concerning oure corruption and noughtines, what a thing is it, that power, riches, authoritie, beu∣tye, goodnes, liberalitie, truth, Iu∣stice, which all thou art good lorde, cannot moue vs to loue thee? what∣soeuer thinges we see faier, good, wise, mighty, are but euē sparkles of that power, beutie, goodnes, wise∣dome, which yu art. For to the end yu mightest declare thy riches, beutye, power, wisdome, goodnes &c: yu hast not only made but stil dost coserue al creatures to be (as Dauid saith of ye beauens) declarers & setters forth of thy glory, and as a booke to teache vs to knowe thee.
How faier thou art the beutie of the sonne, mone, starres, light, flowers, riuers, fieldes, hilles, byrdes, bea∣stes, men & al creatures, yea the good¦ly shape & forme of the whole world doth declare. How mightye yu art, we are taught by the creation of this world euen of nought, by gouerning the same, by punishinge the wicked mightie gy∣aunts therof, by ouerthrowing their deuises, by repressinge the rages of the sea within her boundes, by stor∣mes, by tempests, by fiers: these & such like declare vnto vs thine inui∣sible, almightie and terrible power, wherby thou subduest all things vn∣to thee. Howe riche thou arte thys world, thy great & infinite treasure house, doth wel declare. What plen¦tie is there, not only of things, but also of euery kinde of thinges? Yea how doest thou yearely & daily mul∣tiply these kindes? How many seeds dost thou make of one sede, yea what greate increase doest thou bringe it vnto? These cannot but put vs in remembrance of the exceding riches
that thou haste. For if to thine ene∣mies which loue thee not (as y• most parte in this worlde be) yf to them thou geuest so plentifully thy riches here, what shal we thinke that with thy selfe thou haste laide vp for thy frendes? How good thou art, al crea¦tures generally and perticulerly do teache. What creature is there in y• world which thou hast not made for our commoditie? I will not say how that yu mightest haue made vs crea∣tures without sense or reasō if thou haddest wold. But amongest al thin¦ges none doth teach vs so thy great loue towards vs, as doth the death of thy most derely beloued sōne, who suffered the paines & errours ther∣of, yea & of bell it self, for our sakes. If this thy loue had bene but a smalle loue, it would neuer haue lasted so long nor Christ should neuer haue died.
A MEDITATION OF DEATH and the commodities it bringeth WHat other thing do we daily in this presēt life, then heau sinne to sinne & hourd vp trespasse vpon trespasse? so y• this day is worse alwaies then yesterdaye, by encrea∣sing as dais, so sinnes, & therfore thy indignatiō good lord, agaist vs: but whē we shalbe let go out of the prisē of yt body, & so taken into thy blessed cōpany, then shal we be in most safe tie of immortality & saluation, then shal come vnto vs no sicknes, no nede no paine, no kind of euil to soule or body, but whatsoeuer good we can wishe, y• shall we haue, & what so e∣uer we loth shalbe far frō vs. O dere father, y• we had faith to be hold these things accordingly. Oh y• our harts were persuaded therof, & eure affecti¦ons enflamed wc the desyre of them. Then shuld we lyue in longing for y• which now we most loth. Oh help vs & graunt y• we being ignorant of things to come, & of y• time of oure death, which to thee is certain, may so liue & finishe our iorney here, y• we may be ready and then depart, wht̄
our departīg may make most to thy glory & our cōfort through christ. What is this life but a smoke, a vapour, a shadow, a warfar, a bubble of water, a word, grasse, a flower? Thou shalt die is most certaine, but of the time no man cā tel whē. The longer in this life yu doest remaine, the more yu sinnest, which will turne to thy more paine. By cogitation of death our minds be often in maner oppressed wt darknes, because we do but remēber the night of ye body, for∣getting ye light of the mind, & of the resurrectiō. Therto remēber ye good thīgs that after this life shal ensue, withoute wauering, in certainty of faith, & so shal ye passage of death be more desired. It is like a sailing ouer ye sea to thy home & coūtry: it is like a medicine or purgatiō to ye helth of soule & body: It is ye best phicisiō: It is like to a womās trauaile: for as ye child being deliuered, cometh into a more large place then the wombe wherin it did lie before, so thy soule being deliuered out of the body, com¦meth into a muche more large and faier place, euen into heauen.
A GODLYE MEDITATION vpon the passion of our sauour Iesus Christ. OH lord Iesus Christ, the sonue of the euer∣liuing and almightye god, by whom al thin¦ges were made, and be ruled and gouer∣ned, thou the liuely Image of ye sub∣stance of the father, the eternal wise¦dome of god, the brightnesse of hys glory, god of god, light of light, coe∣quall, coeternall, and consubstantial with the father, thou of y• loue thou haddest to mankinde, that when he was fallen from the felowshippe of god into the societie of Sathan and all euill, didst vouchsalfe for our re∣demption to become a mediatour be¦twene god and man, takinge to the godhead our nature, as concerninge the substaunce of it, and so becamest man, also the heire of all, and moste mercifull Messias, which by the po∣wer of thy godhead, and merites of thy manhode, haste made purgation of oure sinnes, euen by thyne owne
selfe, whilest thou wast here on earth being now set on the right hande of thy father for vs, euen concerning our nature, in maiestie, glory, & po∣wer infinite: I besech and humblye pray thy mercy, to graunt me at this present, to reherse some of thy passi∣ons and sufferinges for me the laste night yu wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit might therby be effecttuall to worke in me faith, as well of the pardone of my sinnes by them, as mortification of mine affec¦tions, comfort in my crosses, and pa¦cience in afflictions, Amen. In the middeste of thy laste supper with thy deare Apostles, these thin∣gs cold not but be before thee, name¦ly that they all wold leaue thee, the most earnest would for swere thee, & one of the xii shuld most traitorously betraye thee, which were noe small crosses vnto thee. Iudas was admo∣nished of thee to beware, but when he toke no heed, but wilfully went out to finishe his worke, contēning thy admonition & counsel, he could not but vere thy most louing hart.
After supper there was contention amongs thy disciples who shuld be greatest after thee, yet dreaming car¦nally of thee and thy kingdome, & ha¦uing this affection of pride & ambiti¦on busy amongs them, notwithstan¦ding thy diligence in reprouing and teaching them. After thy admoniciō to them of the crosse y• wold come, therby to make them more vigilant, so grosse were they, y• they thought they could with their .ii. swerds put away al pertis: which was no litle greife vnto thee. After thy comīg to Gethsemane, he∣uines oppressed thee, & therfore thou woldest thy disciples to pray, yu didst tel to peter and his felows, that thy hart was heauy to death, yu didst wil them to pray, being careful for them also least they shuld fal into tentati¦on. After this yu wentest a stones cast frō them & didst pray thy self, falling flat & grouelīg vpō ye earth, but alas y• feltst no cōfort, & therfore yu camest to thy disciples, whiche of all others wer most swete & dere vnto thee, but lo to thy further discomforte, they
passe nether of thy perils nor of their owne, & therfore slepe a pace. After y• hadst awaked them, yu goest again to pray, but yu foūdest no cōfort at al, & therfore didst returne again for some cōfort at thy derest frēds hāds. But yet again, alas, they are fast a slepe: whervpō yu art inforced to goe again to thy heauēly father for some spar∣cle of cōfort in these thy wonderfull crosses & agonies. Now here yu wast so discouraged & so cōfortlesse, that euē streames of bloud came running frō thine eies & cares & other partes of thy body. But who is able to ex∣presse ye infinitnes of thy crosses euē at thy being in y• garden? al which y• sufferdest for my sake, aswell to sa∣tisfy thi fathers wrath for my sines, as also to sanctifie all my sufferings the more gladelye to bee sustayned of me. After thy bloudye praier, thou ca∣mest, and yet agayne foundeste thy disciples a sleepe, and before yu canst wel awake thē, lo Iudas cometh wt a great band of mē, to apprehēd thee
a these, & so doth, leading thee away bound to the high Bysshopps house Annas, and so frō him to Caiaphas. Here now to augment this thy my∣serie, beholde thy Disciples fle from thee, false witnesses be broughte a∣gainst thee, thou art accused and con¦demned of blasphemie, Peter euē in thy sight forswereth thee, thou arte vniustly stricken for answering law¦fully, thou art blindfelde, stricken & buffeted all the whole nighte in the Bysshoppe Caiaphas house of their cruell seruants. In the morning by times thou art condempned againe of the prestes of blasphemie, and therfore they bring thee before y• secular power to Pi∣late, by whō yu art openly arrayned as other theues and malefauoures were: when he sawe that thou wast accused of malice, yet he did not de∣smysse thee, but dyd sende thee to Herode where thou was derided shamefully in comminge and goe∣inge to and from hym all the waye wonderfully, especially after Herod had apparelled thee as a foole.
Afore pilate againe therfore thou wast brought, and accused falsly, no man did take thy parte or speake a good worde for thee. Pilate caused thee to be whipped & scourged and to be handeled most pi∣tifully, to see if any pitie might ap∣peare with the prelates, but no mā¦at al pitied thee. Barrabas was preferred before thee, al the people head & taile, was against thee & cried hange thee vp, vniustly to death wast thou iudged, yu wast crowned with thornes that pearced thi braines, thou wast made a mocking stocke, thou wast reuiled, reaited, beaten and most miserably handled. Thou wentest through Ierusalem to the place of execution, euen the mount of Caluarie: A great crosse to bange thee on was laid vpon thy backe to beare and drawe, as longe as thou wast able. Thy bodye was racked to be nay∣led to the tree, thy hands were bored thorow, & thy fete also, nailes were put thorow them to fasten thee ther
on, thou wast hanged betwene hea∣uen and earth, as one spewed out of heauen, & vomited oute of the earth vnworthy of any place: y• high priest laughed thee to sckorne, the elders blasphemed thee, and saied god hath no care for thee, the common people laught and cried out vpō thee, thrist oppressed thee, but vinegre onelye and gal was giuē to thee to drinke, heauen shined not on thee, the sonne gaue thee no light, the earth was a∣fraied to beare thee, Sathan temp∣ted thee, and thine owne senses cau¦sed thee to crie out: my god my god, why hast thou forsakē me? Oh won¦derful passions which yu sufferedst. In them yu teachest me, in thē thou comfortest me: for by them god is my father, my sinnes are forgeuen: by thē I shuld learne to feare god, to loue god, to hope ī god, to hate sinne to be patient, to cal vpon god, & ne∣uer to leaue him for any tentatiōs, but with thee stil to crye father in to thy hands I cōmende my spirit.
A CONFESSION OF SINNES, and praier for the mitigation of goddes wrath and punishment for the same. O Almightie god, king of al kings & gouerner of all things, whose power no creature is able to re∣siste, to whom it belongeth iustly to to punishe sinners, and to be merci∣ful vnto them that truly repent: we confesse that thou doest most iustely punishe vs, for we haue greuouslye sinned against thee, and we acknow¦ledge that in punishinge vs yu doest declare thy selfe to be our most mer∣cifull father, aswell because yu doeste not punishe vs in any thinge as we haue deserued, as also because, by pu¦nishing vs thou doest call vs and (as it were) drawe vs to increase in re∣pentance, in faith, in praier, in con∣temning of the world and in hartie desiring for euerlasting life and thy blessed presence. Graunt vs therfore gratious lord thankfully to acknow¦ledge thy great mercye, which haste thus fauorably dealt with vs in pu∣nishing vs, not to our confusion but to our amendment. And seing thou
hast sworne that yu wilt not the death of a sinner but that he turne & lyue, haue mercie vppon vs and turne vs vnto thee for thi derely beloued sōne Iesus christs sake, whō thou woul∣dest should be made a slaine sacrifice for our sinnes, therby declaring thy great and vnspeakable anger agaist sinne, & thine infinite mercy to war∣des vs sinfull wretches. And for as muche as the dulnes of our harts, blindnes, and corruption is such, that we are not able to arise vp vnto thee by faithful & harty prai¦er, acording to our great necessity, without thy singuler grace and assis¦tance: graūt vnto vs gratious lord, thy holye and sanctifinge spirite to worke in vs this good worke, with a pure and cleane mynde, wyth an humble and lowelye harte, wyth grace to waie and consyder the nede and greatnes of that we doe desyre, and wyth an assured fayth and trust that thou wilte graunte vs oure re∣questes, because thou arte good and gracious euen to yonge rauens cat∣ling vppon thee, muche more then,
to vs for whom thou haste made all thinges, yea & hast not spared thyne owne dere sonne: because thou hast commaunded vs to call vpon thee: because thy throne wherevnto we come is a throne of grace & mercye: because thou hast geuen vs a media∣tour Christ to bringe vs vnto thee, being the waye by whom we come, being the dore by whom we enter, and being our head on whō we hang and hope that oure poore petitions shal not be in vaine through and for his names sake. We besech thee therfore of thy rich mercy, wherin thou art plentiful to all them that call vpon thee, to for∣geue vs our synnes, namelye oure vnthankefullnes, vnbeleife, selfe loue, neglect of thy word, securitye, hipocrisie, contempt of thy long suf∣fringe, omissyon of prayer, doub∣ting of thy power, presence, mercy, and good will towardes vs, vnsen∣syblenes of thy grace, impacien∣cye &c: and to thys thy benefytte of corrcaynge vs, adde these thy
gratious gifts, repentāce, faith, the spirit of prayer, y• contempte of thys world and harty desiring for euerla∣stinge lyfe: indue vs wyth thy holie spirit according to thy couenant and mercy, aswell to assure vs of pardon and that thou doest accepte vs into thy fauour, as thy deare children in Christ and for his sake, as to write thy law in our hartes & so to worke in vs, that we maye now begyn and goe forwardes in beleuing, liuing, fearing, obeyng, praying, hoping & seruinge thee as thou doest requyre most fatherly and most iustly of vs, acceptinge vs as perfecte throughe Christ and by imputation. And moreoner when it shal be thy good pleasure & most to thy glorye, deliner vs we (besech thee) out of y• handes of thine aduersaries by such meanes, be it death or life, as maye make to our comfort most in Christ. In the meane season and for euer, saue vs and gouerne vs with thy ho¦ly spiryte and hys eternall consola∣tion. And concerning thine aduersaries
whiche for thy sake are become ours aduersaries, so many of them as are to be conuerted, we beseche thee to shewe thy mercye vpon them and to conuerte thē: but those that are not to be conuerted whiche thou onelye doest knowe (most mightye god and terrible lord) confounde, and get thy name a glory ouer them, abate their pride, aswage their malice, bring to naught their deuelishe deuises, and graunt that we and al thine afflicted children, may be armes with thy de∣fence, weaponed with thy wisdome and gyded with thy grace and holye spirite, to be preserued for euer from all geuing of offences to thy people, and from all perilles, to glorifie thee whiche art the onely geuer of al vic∣torie through the merits of thy one∣lye sonne Iesus Christe oure lorde Amen.
AN OTHER CONFESSION of sinnes. AS Dauid, seing thyne angell with his sword readye drawen (moste righteous lorde) to plague Ierusalē, cried out vnto thee, it is I lord that haue sinned, & I that haue done wickedly, thyne hand lorde be on me and not on thy poore sheepe: wherthrough thou waste moued to mercy, and baddest thine Angel put vp his sword, thou haddest taken pu∣nishment enough: Euen so we gra∣tious lord, seyng thy fearfull sword of vengeaunce readye drawen and presentlye strikynge againste thys common weale and thy Churche in the same, we (I saye) are occasyoned euerye man nowe to caste of oure eyes from beholdinge and narrow∣ly spieng out other mennes faltes, and to set oure owne onely in fight, that with the same Dauide thy ser∣uant, and with Ionas in the shippe
we may crie, it is we (o lord) which haue synned and procured this thy greuous wrath. And this we nowe gathered toge∣ther in Christs name, doe acknow∣ledge, confessing oure selues giltye of horrible ingratitude for our good king, for thy gospell and pure religi¦on, and for the peace of thy church & quietnes of the cōmō weale, besides our negligences & many other oure greuous sinnes, where throughe we haue deserued not onelye these but much more greuous plages, if that euen presentlye thou diddest not as thou art wonte, remember thy mer¦cye. Herevpon (that thou in thine angre remembreste thy mercye before we seeke & sue for it) we take bouldnes as thou commaundeste vs to doe in oure trouble, to come and call vppon thee to be mercyefull vnto vs, and of thy goodnes nowe we humblie in Christes name pray thee to holde thy hande and ceasse thy
wrath, or at y• least so to mitigate it, that this realme may be quietly go∣uerned and the same eftesnes to be a harborowe for thy church and true religion, which do thou restore to vs againe accordinge to thy greate po∣wer and mercye, and we shall prayse thy name for euer throughe Iesus Christ our onely mediatour and sa∣uiour, Amen. A PRAIER FOR THE REMIS∣sion of finnes OH lord god and deare father, what shall I say, that feele al thin∣ges to be in maner with me as in y• wic∣ked, blynde is my minde, croked is my wyll, and per∣uerse concupiscence is in me as a spring or stinking puddle. Oh howe fainte is faithe in me? howe litle is loue to thee or thi people? how great is self loue? how hard is my hart? &c. By the reason whereof I am moued to doubte of thy goodnes towardes
me whether thou arte my father or noe, and whether I be thy childe or noe. In dede worthely might I dout yf that the hauing of these were the causes and not the fruites rather of thy children. The cause why thou art my father is thi mercy, goodnes, grace and trueth in christ Iesus, the which cannot but remayne for euer. In respecte whereof thou hast borne me thys good wil, to accept me into the number of thy children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient, in∣nocent &c. And therfore thou woldst not onely make me a creature after thy Image, enduing me with ryght limmes, shape, forme, memorie, wis∣dome &c, where thou mightest haue made me a beast, a maimed creature, lame, blind, frātike &c: but also thou wouldest that I shoulde be borne of Christen parentes, brought into thy Church by baptisme, and called dy∣uers times by the ministerye of thy worde into thy kingdome, besydes the innumerable other benefites al∣waies hither to powred vpon me. Al whiche thou haste done of thys thy
good wil that yu of thyne owne mer∣cy barest to me in Christ & for Christ before the worlde was made. The which thinge as yu requirest straitly that I shuld beleue wtout doubting, so in all my nedes that I shuld come vnto thee as to a father, & make my mone wtout mistrust of being hard in thy good time, as most shal make to my cōsort. Loe therfore to thee dere father I come through thy sonne our lord, mediatour and aduocate Iesus christ, who sitteth on thy right hand making intercession for me, & praye thee of thy great goodnes & mercye in christ, to be merciful vnto me, that I may feele in dede thy swete mercy as thy childe. The time (oh deare fa∣ther) I appoint not, but I pray thee that I may wt hope stil expect & loke for thy help. I hope that as for a litle while yu hast left me, thou wilt come and visite me, and that in thy great mercie whereof I haue nede by rea¦son of my great miserie. Thou arte wont for a litle season in thine anger to hyde thy face from them whom thou louest, but suerly (o redemer in eternal mercies) yu wilt shewe thy
compassions. For when thou leauest vs oh lord, yu doest not leaue vs very long, neither doest yu leaue vs to our losse, but to our lucre & aduantage: euē that thy holy spirit with bigger porcion of thy power & vertue, maye lighten and cheare vs, that y• want of feeling to our sorow, maye be re∣compenced plentifully with the liue¦ly sense of hauīg thee, to our eternal Ioy: and therfore thou swarest, that in thine euerlastīg mercy thou wilt haue cōpassiō on vs. Of which thīg to thende we might be most assured, thin ohe is to be marked, for yu saist: as I haue sworne y• I will not bring any more the waters to drowne the world: so haue I sworne y• I wil ne∣uer Esai. 54. more be angry with thee nor re∣proue thee. The moūtains shal re∣moue & y• hils shal fal downe, but my louing kindnes shall not moue, & y• bond of my peace shal not faile thee: thus saiest yu y• lord our merciful rede¦mer. Dere father therfor I pray thee remēber, euē for thine owne trueth & mercies sake, this promise & euerla¦sting couenāt, wt in thy good time I
thee to write in my hart, that I may know thee to be the only true god, and Iesus Christe whom thou haste sent: that I maye loue thee with all my harte for euer: yt I may loue thy people for thy sake: that I may be ho¦ly in thi sight through Christ: that I may always not only striue against sinne, but also ouercome the same daily more and more, as thy children doe, aboue all thinges desiringe the sanctification of thy name, the com∣ming of thy kingdome, the doyng of thy will here on earth as it is in hea¦uen &c: through Iesus Christ our re¦demer, mediatour & aduocate, Amen. AN OTHER PRAIER FOR remission of sinnes. O Gracious god, which sekest all meanes pos∣sible how to bring thy children into the fee∣ling and sure sense of thy mercy, & therfore whē prosperitie will not serue, then sendeste thou aduersitie, graciouslye
correcting them here whō y• wilt shal with thee ells where lyue for euer: we poore misers geue humble prai∣ses and thankes vnto thee (deare fa∣ther) that thou hast vouched vs wor¦thy of thy correction at this present, hereby to worke that whiche we in prosperity & liberty did neglect. For the which neglecting and manye o∣ther our greuous sinnes, wherof we nowe accuse oure selues before thee (most mercifull lorde) thou mightest most iustely haue geuen vs ouer and destroied vs bothe in soules and bo∣dies. But suche is thy goodnes to∣wardes vs in Christe, that thou se∣mest to forget all our offences, and as though we were farre otherwise then we be in deed, thou wilte that we shuld suffer this crosse now laied vpon vs for thy trueth and gospelles sake, and so be thy witnesses wyth the prophets, apostles, martyrs and confessours, yea with thy dearly be∣loued sonne Iesus Christe, to whō thou doest now here beginne to fa∣shion vs like, that in his glorye we may be like him also.
Oh good god, what are we on whō thou shouldest she we this great mer¦cy? Oh louing lorde forgiue vs oure vnthankfullnes & sinnes. Oh faith∣full father geue vs thyne holy spirit now to crie in our harts, Abba dere father, to assure vs of our eternal e∣lections in Christ, to reueile more & more thi trueth vnto vs, to cōfirme, strengthen and stablishe vs so in the same, that we may liue and die in it as vessells of thy mercy, to thy glory and to the comoditie of thy churche. Indue vs with the spirit of thy wis∣dome, that with good conscience, we maye alwaies so answere y• enemies in thy cause, as maye turne to their conuersion or confusion and our vn∣speakable consolatiō in Ies{us} christ: for whose sake we besech thee hence forth to kepe vs, to geue vs paciēce, and to will none otherwise for dely∣neraunce or mitigation of our mise∣rye, then maye stande alwaye wyth thy good pleasure and mercyful wil towardes vs. Graunt this deare father not onely to vs in this place, but also to all o∣ther
ells where afflicted for thy na∣mes sake, through the death and me¦rites of Iesus Christ our lord Amē. A PRAIER FOR DELIVERANCE from sinne and to be restored to goddes grace and fauour againé. OH almightie and euer lasting lord god whi∣ch hast made heauen earth &c, oh incōpre∣bensible vnitie, oh al¦waies to be worship∣ped most blessed Trinitie: I humbly beseth thee and pray thee, by the as∣sumption & crucifyed humanitie of our lord Iesus Christe, that thou wouldest enclyne and bowe downe the great depth of thy deitie to the botomeles pitte of my vilitie: driue frō me al kynde of vice, wickednes, and synne, and make in me a newe and cleane harte, and renewe in me a right spirit for thy holy names sake. Oh lord Iesu I besech thy goodnes for y• excedig great loue which drew
thee out of thy fathers bosome, into the wombe of the holye virgin, and for the assumptiō of mānes nature, wherin it pleased thee to saue me & to deliuer me from eternall death, I besech thee (I say) that thou woldest drawe me out of my selfe into thee my lorde god, and graunte this thy loue maye recouer againe to me thy grace, to increase and make perfecte in me that which is wantinge, to raise vp in me that which is fallen, to restore to me that whiche I haue lost, & to quicken in me that whiche is dead & shuld liue, that so I may be come conformable vnto thee in all my life and conuersation, thou dwel¦ling in me and I in thee, my hart be¦ing soupled with thy grace, & settled in thy faith for euer. Oh yu my god, lose & set at libertie my spirit from al inferriour things: gouerne my soule & so worke, that both in soule and body I may be ho∣ly and lyue to thy glory world with out ende Amen.
A PRAIER FOR THE OBTAI∣ning of faith. O Mercifull god and dere father of our lord & sauiour Iesus christ, In whom as thou art wel plea∣sed, so hast thou commaunded vs to heare him, for as muche as he often biddeth vs to aske of thee, and therto promiseth that thou wilt heare vs and graunte vs that whiche in hys name we shall aske of thee: loe gra∣tious father, I am bolde to begge of thy mercy through thy sonne Iesus Christ, one sparcle of true faith and certaine perswasion of thy goodnes and loue towardes me in Christe, wherthrough I being assured of the pardone of all my sinnes by the mer¦cyes of Christe thy sonne, maye be thankfull to thee, loue thee and serue thee in holynes and righteousnes all the daies of my life, Amen.
A PRAIER FOR REPENTANCE MOst gratious god and merciful father of oure sauiour Iesus Christ, because I haue synned and done wickedly, and through thy goodnes haue receiued a desire of re∣pentance, wherto this longe suffer∣ing doth drawe my hard harte: I be∣sech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to worke the same repen∣tance in me, and by thy spirite, po∣wer, and grace, to humble, mortifye and feare my conscience for my sin∣nes to saluation, that in thy good time thou maist comfort and quickē me through Iesus Christ thy derely beloued senne, So be it. A DIALOGE OR COMMVNI∣cation betvvene Sathan and our conscience. Sathan. THOU hast synned agaynst god, therefore thou must dye. Conscience.
Why then died Christ? Sa. For sinners, but how knowst thou he died for thee? Con. Because I am a sinner: and he is bothe able and willinge to forgeue me. Sa. I graunt that he is able to for¦geue thee, but how knoweste thou he will? Con. He wold not surely haue dyed if he wold not forgeue. Sa. But howe knowest thou that he will forgeue thee? Con. Because I wold sayne be for∣geuen. Sa. So would Iudas as wel as y•, and preuayled not. Con. The scriptures wente vppon Iudas facte which must nedes be fulfylled, they neuer went vpon myne. Agayne Iudas bare a fygure of the people of thee Iewes, whiche trybe onelye fell from Christ, when all other eleuen tribes of the world dyd styeke
faste vnto him. I am a poore sinner of the gentils, of whom it is written I wilbe eraited in the gentiles. Sa. If thou be a sinner of the gen∣tiles, yet thou muste consyder thy synne is great. Con. I graunt, but Christes passi∣on is greater. Sa. Oh but y• hast sinned very oftē Con. Tell me not Sathan what I haue done, but what I wil do. Sa. Why what wilt thou doe? Con. By goddes grace my full pur∣pose is here after to take bet∣ter hede and to amend my for∣mer life. Sa. Is that enough thinkst thou? Con. What lacketh? Sa. The fauour of God, whiche hath cleane forsaken thee. Con. So God fauoured & loued the world, that he gaue his owne dere sonne, that whosoeuer se∣eth him as the Israelites did the brasen serpent, they shall not perysh but haue lyfe euer∣lastinge.
A short and pithie defence of the doctrine of the holy e∣lection and predestination of God, gathered out of the first Chapter of S. Paules Epistle to the Ephesians. By I. bradford. THere is neyther ver∣tue nor vice to be con∣sydered All thinges must be e∣stemed af∣ter goddes will. accordinge to any outwarde action, nor accordinge to the will and wisedome of man: but accordynge to the wyll of god. Whatsoeuer is conformable therto, the same is vertue, and the action that springeth thereof is lau∣dable & good, howsoeuer it appaere otherwise to the eyes and reason of man: as was the lifting vp of Abra∣hams hand to haue staine his sonne. genes. 22. Whatsoeuer is not conformable to the will of god, that same is vice, & the action springing thereof is to be disalowed & taken for euell: & that so much the more and greater euell, by howe much it is not consonaunt and agreeing to gods wil, although
it seme faire otherwise to mans wis¦dome, as was Peters wishe of ma∣kinge three tabernacles, and the re∣quest Math. 17. of some which wold haue had fyer to haue come downe from hea∣uen, Luke, 9. vpon a zeale to god &c. Nowe, the wyll of God is not so knowen as in his worde. Therfore Gods will muste be sought for in his worde accordinge to it muste vice and ver∣tue, good and euell, be iudged: and not accordinge to the Iudgemente, wysedome, reason, and collecti∣on of anye man, or of all the whole world, if all the Angelles in heauen shuld take their part. But thys worde of god whiche is writen in the canonicall bookes of gods word is writen in the bi∣ble. In the bi∣ble is pre∣destinatiō published. the byble, dothe playnelye set surth vnto vs that god hath of his owne mercye and good will, and to the prayse  hys grace and glorye, in Chryste elected some and not all, whome he hathe predestinate vnto euerlastyng lyfe in the same Christ, and in hys tyme calleth them, iusti∣fyeth them, and gloryfyeth them, so that they shall neuer perishe and
erre to dampnation finally. Therefore to affyrme, teach, and preache thys doctrine hath in it no No enor∣mitye is therefore in it. hurte, no vice, no euell, muche lesse then hathe it anye enormityes (as some doe affyrme) to the eyes and spyryte of them whiche are guyded and wylbe, by the worde of god. That god the eternall father of The propo¦sition that shevvethe what is ment by e¦lectiō and predestina¦tion. mercyes, before the begynnynge of the worlde, hathe of hys owne mer∣cye and good wyll, and to the praise of hys grace and glorye, elected in Christe some and not all of the pos∣terytye of Adam, whom he hathe predestynate vnto eternall life, and callethe them in hys tyme, ius∣tyfyeth them, and gloryfyeth them, so that they shall neuer peryshe or erre to dampnatiou fynallye: that thys proposytyon is trewe and ac∣cordinge to goddes plaine and mani¦feste worde, by the helpe of hys ho∣lye spyryte (whyche in the name of Iesus Chryst I humbly beseche hys mercy, plenteously to geue to me at this present and for euer, to the sanc
tification of his holye name: by the helpe I say of his holy spirit I trust so euidently to declare, that no man of god shalbe able b the word of god euer to impugne it, muche lesse to confute it. In the first chapter of the epistle to the Ephesians, y• apostle saith thus: Blessed be God the father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, whiche hath blessed vs with all maner of blessinges in heauenlye thinges by Christ, Eph. 8. according as he hath elect or chosen vs in him before the foundation of the worlde was layed, that we shoulde be holye and without blame before him through loue: & hath pre∣destinat vs (or ordeyned vs) thorough Iesus Christ, to be heires vnto him self, accordynge to the good pleasure of hys wyll, to the praise of the glorye of his grace, where with he hathe made vs accepted in the beloued, by whome we haue receyued redemption tho∣roughe his blood, and the forgeuenes of our synnes, accordyng to the ryches of his grace, which grace he hath shed on vs abundauntly in al wysedom & vnderstāding and hath ope∣ned vnto vs the mysterie of his wil according to his good pleasure, whiche he purposed in him selfe, to haue it declared when the tyme
was full come, that he might gather together all thinges by (or in) Christ, as well the things that be in heauen, as the thynges that be in earth. euen in (or by) hym: by (or in) whome we are made heyres, being thereto predesti∣nat according to the purpose of hym whyche worketh al things according to the decree (or counsaile) of his owne wyll, that we whiche hoped before (you) in Christ, shoulde be vnto the prayse of his glorye: in whom ye also ho∣ped after that ye heard the worde of trueth, the gospell of your saluation, wherein ye also beleuing, were sealed with the holy spirite of promise, whiche is the earnest of our inheri∣taunce, vntill the redemption (or full fruition) of the purchased possession vnto the praise of hys glorye. These be y• words of Paull, which I haue faithefully translated accor∣ding to the very texte in the greeke, as by the iudgement of all y• be lear¦ned I desire herein to be tried: oute of the which words of Paul we may well perceyue euery thing affirmed in my proposition, as I will geue occasion plainly to them that will, to see it. First, that y• cause of gods election
is of his good will, the Apostle she∣weth in sayig that it is through his The cause  gods e∣lection is his grace and good will. loue, wherby we are holy and with∣out blame: also, according to y• good pleasure of his wil: according to his good pleasure purposed in him selfe: according to his purpose which wor¦keth all things after the counsell of his owne will. Secondly, that electiō was before The time of gods e∣lectiō was from the begiuning the beginning of the world, the apo∣stle plainly sheweth in saying, that we were chosen before the foundati∣os the worlde was layed: and after∣wards, in calling it the misterye of his will purposed wyth him self, in time to be declared. Thridly, that election is in christ, Election is in Christ. the Apostle dothe so flatly and plain¦ly set it fourth, that I nede not here to repete it. We (sayeth he) are chosen in hym: we are heyres by hym: we are accepted by hym: we are gathered together in him &c. Fourthelye, that electyon is of Election is not of all men.
some of Adams posterytye and not of all, we maye playnelye see it, yf we consyder that he makethe the trewe demonstratyon of it bele∣uinge, hopinge, and hauynge the earneste of the spyryte. In whom yea hoped (sayeth he) after ye hard the worde &c: in whom ye beleued, were sealed vp &c. Agayne in attry∣butynge to the electe, forgeuenesse of synnes, holynesse, blamelesse lyuynge, beinge in Christ &c. That we shoulde bee holye saieth he &c: we haue receyued forgeuenesse of synnes &c. Whoe seeth not that these are not common to all men? All menne haue not saythe, sayeth Paulle elles where. None beleued 2. hess. 3. (sayeth ake) but suche as were Act 13. ordayned to eiernail lyfe. None beleue but suche as be borne of god. . Iohn. 1. None beleue treewlye but suche as haue good heartes, and keepe Math. 13. gooddes seede to brynge forth frutes by patience.
So that it is plaine (faith being a Faith is a demonstra¦tion of e∣lection to suche as be of yeres of discretion. Psa 125. demonstration of goddes election to them that be of yeres of distretion) that all men are not elect because all mē beleue not. For he that beleueth in the lord, shalbe as mounte Sion: that is, he shall neuer be remoued. For if he be remoued, that is finally perishe, suerly he neuer truely bele∣ued. But what goe I about to ligh∣ten a candel in the cleare sōne light, when our sauiour plainly saith y• all be not chosen, but fewe? Many be cal¦led (saith he) but fewe be chosen. And Math. 20. in the second chapter to the eph: the Apostle plainly saith that the great riches of gods mercy through his ex¦ceding greate loue, hath saued them before their parentes & manye other gentils, which were excluded from Christ, and straungers from the pro¦mise, hoples, godles &c. Wherthe∣rough we may be occasioned to crie: Oh the depth of the Iudgements of god, which is iuste in al his doinges Rom. 11. and holy in all his workes, extēding his mercy after his good pleasure & Psal. 144. will, aboue al his workes.
Fyftly, that god hath predeffinate these, thus elect, vnto euerlasting life Election to eternall life. in Christ, the apostle doth also in the words before writen, declare in say∣ing: & hath predestinate vs through Iesus Christ to be heires vnto hym selfe. Againe, by him (saith he) ye are made heires and predestinate to the praise of his glorye. So saith the A∣postle els where: whom he hath pre∣destinate, Rom. 8. them he hath predestinate to be like fashioned vnto the shape of his sonne. And Christe therefore saithe, reioyce in this, y• your names Luke. 10. are writen in heauen. Sirtly, that the ende of election is The ende of election is to the praise and glorye of god. to the prayse of goddes glorye and grace, the Apostle sheweth here, in saing: we are predestinate to be holy and without blame before god &c: in saying, we are predestinate to y• glo∣rye of his grace, and in saying also, vnto the praise of his glorye: so that nothing can be more manifest. Seuenthly, that predestination is Election is not wyth∣out vocati¦on & iusti¦fication in time. not without vocation in gods time, and iustification, the Apostle here doth teach in bringing vs to the con∣sideration
of hearinge the worde of truth, beleuing and receiuing the ho¦ly spirite, remission of sinnes &c. In whom (saith he) ye haue hoped, after that ye heard the word of trueth &c. Againe, by whom ye haue redemy∣tion, that is, remission of sinnes tho¦rough the sheeding of his bloude &c: Also, he hathe in his full time decla¦red the misterie of his will &c. Unto the Rom. the apostle shewth it most manifestly in saying: whom he hath predestinate them he calleth, whom he calleth thē he iustifieth. Wherby we may se that predestination or e∣lection is not vniuersalle of all, for all be not iustified. Eyghtly and laste of al, that elec∣tion is so certaine, that the elect and Election is certain for euer. predestinate to eternall life shall ne¦uer finally perishe or erre to damna∣tion, the apostle doth here also very playnely shewe in saying: that they are predestinate to the praise of god∣des grace: he saith not to the prayse of has Iustice, to the prayse of hys wysedome, to the prayse of his po∣wer (although he might most truely
saye so) but he saith to the praise of his grace: whiche were not grace yf there were any respect at all of wor¦kes on oure behalfe, for then were Rom. 11. grace not grace. If there shoulde be any condemnation of the electe and predestinate to eternall life, it must nedes be because of their sinnes: but where were the praise of gods grace then, which is the ende of gods elec∣tion? Shall we not by this meanes make gods electiō without an ende, and so without a heade, and so no e∣lection at all, as some would haue, further then they elect themselues? Let suche feare they shall not fynde the benyfyte of gods electiō, because they seke it as the Israelites did and not as the elect, whiche not onelye find it but also obtaine it. The other are blinded, as it is writen: god hath Rom. 11. Psal. 69. geuē them the spirit of vnquietnes, eyes that they shoulde not see, and eares that they should not heare, e∣euen to thys daye &c. Agayne, he shewethe the certayntye of saluati∣on to them that be elected, in saying that they be accepted ī the beloued.
once accepted and beloued, in Christ and euer beloued: for whom he lo∣ueth, he loueth to the end. And gods  gifts are such that he cannot repent him of thē. And therfore saith christ I know whom I haue chosen, attri∣buting to election the cause of finall persenerance. By which thinge Iu∣das was sene not to be elected to eter¦nall life, although he was elected to the office of an Apostle, as Saul was elected to the office of a king. Which kind of election is to be discerned in readinge the scriptures, from thys kinde of election ye which I speaks of nowe, that is, frō election to eter¦nal life in christ. Thirdly he sheweth y• certaintye of saluatiō of y• electe, by calling thē heires. For yf we be heires of god, then are we felow hei res with Christe, to be afflfcted and rom, 8. glorified with Christ, and therefore saith he, accordinge to the decree of his owne will. Loe he calleth it a de¦cree or counsel which shall stand, as Csai saith: the counsell of the lorde shall stande. Fourthlye he she weth Esai. 46. this certaintie by sayinge that they
are elect and predestinate to y• praise of gods glory, which we shuld more care for, then for the saluation of al the world. This glory of y• lord is set sorth as wel in them y• perishe & are reprobates, as in the elect, & therfore S. Iohn bringing in y• place of Esai Iohn. ▪ speakig of y• reprobate saith, y• Esai spake that whē he sawe the glory of the lord. This glory of the lord to be set forth by vs, is a great mercy and benefite of god. I am assured that if the very deuyls and reprobates dyd not repyne hereat, but were thank∣full that they might be ministers in any pointe to set fourth goddes glo∣rye: I am assured (I saye) that they shoulde fynde no hell nor tor∣mentes. Theyr hell and tour∣mentes commeth of the loue they haue to them selues and of the ma∣lyce, enuye, and hatred they haue agaynste God and hys glorye. Let them tremble and feare that maye not awaye withe the glorye of the lord in election and reprobation.
Let not their eyes be euell because god is good, and doth good to whom it pleaseth him: wrong he doth to no man, nor can doe, for then he were Rom. 8. not righteous and so no god. He can not condemne the iuste, for thē were be vntrue, because his word is con∣trarie. He cannot condemne the pe∣nitent and beleuer, for that were a∣gainst his promise. Let vs therefore labour, studie, crye and praye for re∣pentance and faith, and then cannot we be damned, because we are y• bles¦sed of the father before all worldes, & therfore we beleue, therfore we re¦pent. And for asmuch as it perteineth Math. 25. to vs whiche be within, to see and to speake of those thinges whiche are . Cor. 2. geuen vnto vs of god in Christe: let vs laboure hereaboutes, and leaue them that be withoute to the lorde, . Cor. 5. which will Iudge them in his tyme. The Apostle praieth for the Ephesi∣ans, for none other wisedome and re Ephe. . uelatiō from god, then wherby they might know god & haue their minds illumined, to see what they shoulde hope for by their vocation, and bow Co. .
rich the glory of his inheretaunce is vpon his saintes. Further then this, I thinke is vnsemly for vs to search, vntill we haue sought out, how rich gods goodnes is and wilbe to vs his children. The whiche we can neuer do, but the more we go theraboutes and the more we taste his goodnes, the more we shall loue him and loth al thinges that displease him. This (I say) let vs do, and not be to busye bodies in searching the maiestie and glory of god, or in norrishing in any wise the doubting of our saluation, wherto we are readye enoughe, and the deuill goeth about nothinge ells so muche as that: for by it we are dulle to doe good to other, we are so carefull for our selues. By it we are more dulle to do good to our selues, because we stande in doute whether it profiteth vs or no. By it we disho∣nour god, either in makinge hym as though he were not true, or elles as thoughe our saluation came not on∣ly and altogether from him, but han¦ged partely on our selues. By it the deuyll will bringe men at length to
dispaire and hatred of god. Doubte once of thy saluation and continue therin, and suerly he then will aske no more. It was the first thing wher¦with be tempted Christe: if thou be the sōne of god &c: It is the first and Math. 4. principalest darte he casteth at gods elet. But as he preuailed not against Christ, no more shall he doe against anye of his members, for they haue y• shield of faith which quencheth his Eph. 6. fiery dartes, they praise god nighte & day, how then shuld they perishe? Luk. 18. The Angells of the lord pitch their tentes round about them, how then Psal. 34. shoulde Sathan preuaile? They are borne in y• hands of the angells least they shoulde hurt their feete at anye stone: God hath geuen commaunde∣ment Psal. 92. to his Angels ouerthem: The Angelles are ministers vnto them: Heb. 1. Their names are writen in y• booke of life, & therfore Christ bad them re¦ioyce: Luk. 10. as paul doth y• philippiās, for nothig shal separate them frō y• loue Ph. 4. wherwt god loueth thē in Christ Ie∣su, who saith that it is impossible for Rom. 8. them to erre finally to damnation: Math. 24.
for he is their light to illumine their Psal. 18. Iohn. 610. darknes: They are geuen to him to kepe, & he is faithful ouer al goddes childrē. He saith he will kepe thē so that they shall neuer perishe. After Hebr. 3. they beleue, they are entred already Iohn. 5. 6. into euerlasting life. Christ hath set thē there already: he hathe comitted Iohn. 17. thē into his fathers hands by praier, which we knowe is sure, & therefore Heb. 5. death, hell, deuilles nor all power, sinnes nor mischefe, shall neuer pul Rom. 8. vs out of our heads hands whose mē¦bres we are, & therfore receiuing of 1. Cor. 6. his spirit as we doe, we cannot but bring forth y• frutes thereof, though 1. Cor. 1. now & then the fleshe fayle vs. But the lord, euē our lord be praised whi∣ch is more strōg in vs then he whi∣ch is in y• world: he alwaies putteth 1. Iohn. vnder his hand y• we lie not still nor Psal. 67. Ose. 6. shal do as y• reprobat, whose pietie is as y• mornig dew, soone come & sone gone: & therfor thei cn̄not cōtinue to y• end. Cānot? no they wil not if thei cold, because thei hate god & his glori & therfore al thē y• seke it or set it for¦th: wheras y• elect loue al mē & seke to do al men good in god, suspendig
their iudgementes of others, y• they maye stande or fall to the lorde and Rom. 14. not to them. Hetherto oute of this one place of Paull to y• Ephesians, if the matter of election and predestination be so fully sette forth, to goddes glory and to the comforte of his Church: howe may we suppose is this matter sette fourth in the whole body and bokes of y• canonicall scripture? whereto I had rather send thee good reader, with this candell light whiche I haue nowe geuen thee then in a matter so ma∣nifest to make more a doe then nee∣deth.
An other treatise of election and freewill by 1. bradford. THat there is and al∣waies hath ben with God, euen before the world was made, an election in christ, of al those yt shalbe saued, many places ī ye scriptures do teach: as to y• Eph. 1. rom. 8. 9. 11. 1. Thes. 1. Math. 20. 22. 24. Mark. 13. Tit. 1. Act. 13. Philip. 11. Luke. 10 18. Apoe 3. 13. 17. 21. 22. Ihon. 6. 8. 10. 13. 17. And almost euery where in the new test a ment. In no case therfore it maye be denied of anye y• is godly, although be cannot attaine to gods wisdome Iustice, and mercye in it, For that Erod. 33. were to see goddes fore partes. We must graunt it therefore because the word of god doth not onely teach it, but also it standeth with the very na¦ture of god, that to him not onelye men, but all thinges also that haue ben or shalbe for euer, ī al creatures are not onelye certaine, but so cer∣taine,
that they cannot but be accor∣dingly, & serue his prouidēce: for els god were not god, if any thing were, hath ben, or could be withoute his knowledge, yea certain knowledge: which knowledge in god maye not be separated of anye man from hys wisedome, & so not from his wil, ex∣cept we wold make two gods, as did the manichees, one the authour of al good, and another the authour of all euel, both which (say they) were eter¦nall & without beginninge. Which their opinion is deuelishe & against y• word of god most manifestly, whi∣che affirmeth in many places that there is no mo gods but one, or any other that haue power to do good or euill absolutly, or of thēselues. But lest some men which are to curious should hereout gather, that then all thinges come by fatall necessitie, as the Stoikes thought, or by compul∣sion and coaction, as other thinke, and therefore saye they, all goddes preceptes requiring that whiche we cannot doe, are in vaine: I thynke
it good to speake some thing hereof. Fyrste the Stoikes opynion is to be condemned as concerninge fatall Against the Stoikes fa∣tall nece∣ssitie. necessitie, for that it tyeth and byn∣deth god to the seconde causes, and maketh hym, which is a most free a∣gente, bounde and tyed, so that he cannot worke but as the seconde cause mouethe hym. For they did Imagyne a perpetuall connexion and knyttinge together of causses by a perpetuall order whiche is con∣tayned in nature, where as we shoulde certaynelye knowe that it is God whyche is the ruler and ar∣byter of all thynges, whyche of hys wysedome hathe foresene and determyned all thynges that he wyll doe, and nowe of hys po∣wer doeth in hys tyme putte the same in executyon, accordinge as he hathe decreed wyth hym selfe. Herein to tarye anye longer I nede not, for that I thinke there be none nowe whiche bee of this opynyon, to attrybute thinges to fortune, a word vnsemly for Christians.
Secondly, that al things are done by coaction or compulsion, is false and oute of goddes prouidence and predestination cannot be gathered or maintained, for there muste be a differēce put betwen necessity and cōstreint. All things that haue bene done, be or shalbe, in consideration of gods prouidence, as it is with god, are of necessitie, but yet not of com∣pulsion or cōstraint: As for example you shall see that necessitye is one thinge and constrainte is an other thing. God is good of necessitie, but who now will say then that he is so by coaction or enforced therto? The deuil is naught of necessitie, but not by coaction. Good men do wel of ne¦cessitie, but not by cōpulsion. Wic∣ked men do euyll of necessitye, but not of constraint. A thinge y• is done willīgly, is not to be said to be done by constraint. God is good willing∣ly, but not by compulsiō. The deuil is naught willinglye, but not of in∣forcing. Good men do good willing¦ly, but not cōstrainedly. Wicked mē doe transgresse willinglye, but not
compelled. So yt it is playne, though al thīgs be done of necessitie, yet are they not of compulsion and enforce∣ment. By reason wherof, a mā that wilbe diligent in lookinge hereon, may se matter enough to purge god from being the authour of all euyll or of any euyll: although he be the authour of all thinges and of al ac∣tions, whiche are to be construed accordinge to the will of the doers: and so maye we see one Action to be both good & euill in respecte of gods will and Sathans will. For in as∣much as a thing is done accordinge to gods wil, the same is good, for his wil is good. And in asmuch as a thīg is done according to Sathans wil, it is euil because his wil is euil. But now to the third thing, that is, whether gods precepts requiring that which is not in our powers, be frustrate or no, although al thinges are done of necessitie and by goddes prouidence. To the vnderstandinge hereof .ii. things are to be cōsidered. First yt we must thinke of god, not as he is in hym selfe, but as by hys
word he teacheth vs. Secondly, the state of man before his fall is to be compared with the state of man pre∣sently, as he is nowe broughte into this world. For the firste, although it be most true that to god al things are so certaine as before is spoken: yet in that god hath opened to vs by his worde so much of his will as we shuld wt diligence serch and obserue, we maye not thinke otherwise, but that whatsoeuer is done agaist that worde, y• same is sinne & euell in him whosoeuer he be y• doth ther against: although the same transgressiō god doth & can vse to serue his prouidēce accordingly. Of which prouidēce we may not otherwise iudge, then hys word geueth vs leaue, y• is, we must doe nothinge to serue it, but as hys word teacheth. If Adam had ben ru∣led hereby, then he had not eaten y• aple: for in that he obeyed not the word of god, which he knewe, ease∣ly we may perceane, that he dyd not eate the aple to obey gods prouidēce whiche he knewe not. So that eui∣dent it is, Adams fal to be sinne and
euill, and he him selfe with the ser∣pent to be ye authour therof, god not allowyng or approuinge the euell. which is to be construed accordinge to the will of the doer, which will in Adam was naught, although the ac∣tion god turned to serue his prouy∣dence, therby setting forth his won∣derful wisdome, power, & goodnes: whereat we ought rather wt reuer∣ence to wonder, then by wandering further then besemeth vs, to cal into question, why god did so. Whiche why, no man is able to vnderstand, & therfore we shuld bidde our busye braine syt downe, and not to couet a¦gaine to be like to god as Adam did, and therfore he fel so foule as he did. For ye second mans state, I meane before his fal, & his state nowe, thus let vs think, namely yt god made mā after his Image, yt is, endewed man wt a soule immortal, wise, rightuo{us}, & holy: for y• Image of god is not cō∣cerning the body, which man hathe cōmen with the beastes of the earth, but it is from abone and of goddes brething. So yt Adam transgressing
gods precept, did not according as he should and might haue done, but ac∣cording as he should not haue done, and mighte haue auoided, if that he had not receiued the persuasion and counsel of the Serpente. Which god permitted him to doe, thereby to de∣clare, that perfect Iustice, wisedome and holines, is not nor cannot be in any creature, which is not god also, and therefore Christ being god was made man, that in man there might be this perfection and iustice, which is in Christ oure lord, and in Adam we could neuer haue had. Which wisedome of god we shall Ioyefully one day behold, yf we will nowe re∣straine our busye braine and curio∣sitie, from serching further then we should doe. But to returne ageine, Adam (I say) being made after gods Image, which he receiued for vs al, to haue deriued the same vnto vs all by naturall propagation, by trans∣gressing the commaundements, lost and mangled so the same Image of god in himself and in vs all, that for mortalitie came death, for wysdome
came folishenes, for rightuousnes came vnrightuousnes, for holynes came corruption, concerning goddes Iudgement and in goddes sight: al∣though there remained in him, con∣cerninge mans Iudgement and the sight of the worlde, life, wisedome, rightuousnes and holynes, yt which all we by propagation doe from our mothers wombe receiue: so that we may well see our state now to be far from the state, we had before Adams fal, and therfore gods law requireth nothinge of vs but that which was in our nature before the fall, whiche we se is impossible for vs to paye ac∣cordingly, and yet god not vniust, in that he asketh of vs nothing therby but the selfe same thinge whiche he gaue vs in our creation. The lawe then and the preceptes of god were geuen after the fal of man, not that man should thereby get life, and the thinge whiche was loste by synne (for the blessed Seede was promised for the recouerig hereof, and to him that partained) but that man by it might know sinne, and what he had
lost, therby to desire more deeply the promised seede, by whome as we be receaued, so our euills be not impu∣ted; and that we being renued by his holy spirit and newe seede, shuld as newe borne babes desire, and by will beginne to do the lawe of god, which after our deliuerance fourth of thys corrupte bodie and man of synne by death, we shall without all let fully accomplishe, & at the length receiue the bodye, to be spirituall (as Paull saieth) and holye, ready to obey and serue the spirit, as an helper rather then an hynderer. Oh happye daye when wilt thou appeare? By this whyche I haue alreadye spoken, I thinke the diligent reader may se, how that there is election of gods children, & how that gods pro∣uidence stretcheth it selfe to al thin∣ges, so that al things in respect ther of come of necessitie, but yet nothing therby to be done by constraint and enforcement: wherthroughe god is sene to be the authour of al things & yet of no euil or sinne. The state of man before his fall &
after, with the cause of gods lawe & precepts geuen to man, I haue brei∣fly touched. Nowe it resteth that I should speake some thing of frewil, what it is, and howe farre we maye graunte that man hath free wyll. That this may be vnderstand: as I would haue the ende wherefore god gaue his law to be cōsidered, name∣ly not for mā to get therby eternall life which apperteined to y• promised sede, but to shewe mā what sinne is & what by syn he lost, that he might by his vnhabilitie be driuen to de∣sier of very necessity, y• promised Me∣sias, and so by him to receyue the spi¦rit, wherethrough being regenerate he might learne to loue the lawe, to take it as a directorie & rule to liue by, and to hedge in his old man frō controlinge: this geare (I saye) as I would haue it considered, yf we wil vnderstand mans frewill, so would I haue this marked, namely the dif∣ference betwixte the life whiche we loste & had in our first creation, and now haue by byrth before regenera∣tion. In our firste creation we had a
life, not only wt the creatures, but al¦so with god, whiche life vtterly Adā lost, as he declareth by the runnyng awaye to hyde him selfe from god. And this he lost for vs also, aswel as for him selfe: in respect whereof the scripture calleth vs deade. Concer∣ning this life therefore that is with god, we haue no wil at al, much lesse any frewil. For how can a dead man haue any wil? The will therfore we haue, is onely for this life and with men, that is, it is not good and free but in respect of men: and in this life in respecte of god and life with him, all our will is as we are, euen dead: yea and the wil we haue for this pre¦sente life, if a man will consider the god of this world, and howe we are his slaues by birth and continually tyll we be regenerate, and how rea∣dy our affections are to serue his pur¦pose, I thinke none will saye other∣wise but that mans will vnregene∣rate is none otherwise fre, then plea¦seth his maister, who muste needes serue spite of his head, our god: and therefore all to be done by gods pro∣uidence,
as I saied before, withoute any imputation of euill to our good and most holy father. Yea but (saith one) what frewill hath man that is regenerat? This wil I briefly shew when that I haue spoken of Iustifi∣cation, y• which precedeth regenera∣tion: from whom we may discerne it, but not deuide it, no more then heat from the fyre. Iustification in scripture is taken for the forgeuenes of oure sinnes, & consisteth in the forgeuenes of oure sinnes. This is onely gods worke & we nothing els but patientes & not agentes. After this worke, in respect of vs and our sense, commeth regene¦ration, which altogether is goddes worke also. For as to our first byrth we bring nothinge (bring quoth I? yes we bring to let it, many things but to further it nothing at al) so do we bring nothing that can helpe to our iustificatiō: as S. Austen ful wel saithe: he that made thee withoute thee, shall he not iustifie thee wyth∣oute thee? whiche the papistes haue peruerted, reading it affirmatiuely,
without interregation, as though we brought some thing to our iusti∣fying: The papi∣stes reade thus with out intero¦gation. quifecit te ine &c, non Iustificabit &c sine &c. He that made thee without thee shall not iustifie thee with∣out thee. That is, withoute thy helpe, thy works, thy worthi¦nes. where as it (I meane iustify∣cation) is a muche more excellente worke then y• worke of our creatiō, and therefore to arrogant are they, whiche will not geue al to god in it, as they doe in their creation. Good men slie from that pride, and are con¦tent to geue no lesse to god iustify∣ing & regenerating them, then they do to their parentes for their first ge∣neration. Afore we be Iustifyed and regenerated of god, we are altoge∣ther dead to god and to al goodnes in his sighte, & therfore we are altoge∣ther patients til god haue wrought this his only worke, iustification & regeneration. Whiche worke in re∣spect of vs and our imperfection and falles, in that it is not so ful and per¦fect but it may be more & more, ther∣fore by the spirit of santifycation, whiche we receiue in regeneration as the seede of god, we are quickened to laboure with the lorde, and to be more iustified, that is, by faith & the fruites of faith, to our selues and o∣thers
to declare the same, and so to encrease from vertue to vertue, from glory to glory, hauin alwaies nede to haue oure feete washed, although we be cleane not withstanding. Now to the question. A man rege∣nerate (which we ought to beleue o oure selues, I meane that we are s by our baptisme, the sacrament ther of requiring no lesse faith) a man I say regenerate, that is, borne of god, hath the spirite of god. And as a mā borne of fleshe & bloud hath the spirit therof, wherby as he cā stirre vp him selfe to doe more and more the dedes of the fleshe: so the other can by the spirit of god in hym, styrre vp in him selfe the giftes and graces of god, to glorifie god accordinglye. Howbeit heare let vs marke, that as the olde man is a perpetuall enemye to the newe borne man: so accordinglye to his strength, the workes of the new man are letted and made vneffectu∣all. Therefore god hath taught vs to pray, and promised his help, which he commonly in maner geueth by y• crosse: wherby y• old man is wekened
and the new receiueth strength more and more, dring a dissolution and an vtter destruction of the olde man by death, that it might go to god frō whence it came, and to his home euē hauen, where in the last day it shall receiue the olde Adam, now so scho∣ed, that it will neuer more be but a moste faithfull frende to serue and praise the lord for euer more. Thus haue you nowe, what free∣wyll the regenerate children of god haue, for whose sakes the gospel and sweete free promises are geuen, and to the regenerate new mā they pro∣perly do pertaine: As doth the law, with al comminations, and the con∣dicionall promises (I meane promi∣ses hanging vpon condition on oure worthines) pertaine properly to the olde and vngenerate man, so that when he kicketh, he must by them be bridled and kepte downe: when the inwarde man woulde be comforted, be must haue, not the law nor her cō∣minations and cōdicional promises, but the gospell and her moste sweete free promises. So shal we walke nei∣ther
on y• right nor on the left hand, but kepe the righte waye to heauen ward, euen Christ our lord and cap∣taine, as his souldiours, seruantes, and liuely members, neither dispa¦ring nor carnally liuing, but fearin and reioysinge as is appertaining which God graunt for his mercyes sake, Amen. And thus my dearely beloued, I haue sent to you brefly my mind here in according to your desire. Because I haue had little time and manye o∣ther lettes, I shall hertely pray you to take this in good part, & with the more indifferencie and attention to read it, for my desire was to writ ful¦ly and spedely, therfore it perchance hath the more obscuritie and desi∣reth a frendely reader, constru∣inge all to the best, and bro∣therlye admonyshynge where cause maye appeare.
A BREIFE SVMME OF THE doctrine of electon and predestina∣tion. GOds fore sight is not y• cause of synne or excu∣sable necessitie, to him that sinneth. The dam¦ned therefore haue not nor shall haue any ex∣cuse because god foreseing their con∣demnatiō through their own sinne, did not drawe them as he doth his e∣lecte, vnto Christe. But as the electe haue cause to thanke god for euer for his greate mercies in Christ: so the other haue cause to lamente their owne wilfulnes, sinne and contem∣ning of christ, whiche is the cause of their reprobatiō, & wherin we shuld loke vpon reprobation: as the onely goodnes of god in Christ is the cause of our election and saluatiō, wherin we shuld loke vpon gods election. He that will loke vpon god or any thing in god▪ simplie and barely as it is in god, the same shalbe starke blynde. Who can see godes goodnes as it is in god? Who can see his Iustice as it
is in him? If therfore thou wilt loke vpon his goodnes, not only loke vp∣on hys workes, but also vpon hys word: euen so if thou wilt loke vpon his iustice do the like. Then shalte y• see that election is not to be loked on but in christ, nor reprobation but in sinne. When the second cause is suf∣ficient, shuld not we think that they are to curious y• wil runne to search the first cause, further then god doth geue them leaue by his worde? The which first cause, because they cānot comprehēd, therfore do they deny it. God be mercyfull vnto vs for hys names sake, & geue vs to loue & lyue his truth, to seeke peace & pursue it. Because god of his goodnes, for the comfort of his childrē, and certaintie of their saluation, doth open vnto them some thinge the fyrste cause of their saluation, that is, his goodnes before the beginning of the world, to be loked vpon in Christ, a man maie not therfore be so bold as to wade so marke this well and be not to curious. in condempnation further then god reueileth it. And for as muche as he hathe not reueiled it but in synne,
therfore let vs not loke on it other∣wise. Seke to be deliuered frō synne and feare not reprobation: but yf thou wilte not, thou shalte fynde no excuse in the last daye. Say not but thou art warned. To the former meditations and praiers, for your further comforte and godly exercise, you maye ioyne those moste godlye and comfortable meditations whiche are an∣nexed to his boke lately imprinted agaist the feare of death. Printed at London by Rouland Hall, dwelling in gutter lane at the sygne of the halfe Egle and Key. 1562.
Faultes escaped in the printing. In A. the 7 leafe second side. 19. line, for thou louest, read thou louedst. C. 3 leafe, seconde syde. 13 lyne, for is reade are. C. 6 leafe second side. 10 line, for thy rede they. And in the 15 line, for ma¦licousnes reade maliciousnes. D. 3 leafe, seconde side. 4. line, for daube reade dresse. D. 6 leafe seconde syde. 25 lyne, for swing reade swynge. E. 2 leafe first side. 8 line, for afflecti∣on reade affliction, and in the. 15. line, for was, reade wast. E. 3 leafe second side. 12 line, for dis∣praier, reade despair. F. 3 leafe, second side. 6 line, for hel∣pes, read helples. F. 4 leafe second side. 14 line, for thy wilt, reade the will. G. 6 leafe first side. 12. line for diddest geue, read hast geuen. G. 7 leafe fyrst side. 9 line, for faith∣ful, read fatherly. I. 7 leafe firste side. 6 line, for profes∣sion read perfection. I. 8 leafe seconde syde. 26 line, for me, reade my.
A PRAIER FOR THE faithfull afflicted in Fraunce for the gospell. O Mercifull father, who neuer doest sorsake suche as put their trust in thee: stretch forth thy mighty arme to the defence of our brethrē and neigh∣bours in Fraūce, who in their extreme necessitye crye for comforte vnto thee: preuent the cruel deuise of Aman, staye the rage of Holophernes, breake of the counsel of Achitophel, Let not the wic∣ked say, where is nowe their god? Let thy afflicted flocke feele present ayde & releife frō thee (oh lord): loke downe vp on them with thy pitifull eye from thy holy habitation: send terrour and trem¦blyng amonge their enemies: make an ende of their outragious tiranny: beat backe their boldnes in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true seruātes, in defacing thy glory, and in setting vp Antichrist. Let them not thus proudly aduaunce themselues against thee and against thy Christ, but let them vnder∣stand and feele that against thee they fight. Preserue & defende the vine whi∣che thy right hande hath planted, and let all nations see the glorye of thyne anointed, Amen.
