3578 99840396 4897
THE Poets VVillovv: OR, The Passionate Shepheard: With sundry delightfull, and no lesse Passionate Sonnets: describing the passions of a discontented and perplexed LOVER. Diuers compositions of verses concording as well with the Lyricke, as the Anacreon∣ticke measures; neuer before published: Being reduced into an exact and distinct order of Metricall extractions. Artem qui tractant Musicam, haec legant, & Poe∣sem ament. Author: Impresse. Nec mori timeo, nec opto. Imprinted at London by IOHN BEALE, for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his shop at Holborne bridge. 1614.
TO THE RIGHT VVORTHIE GEN∣TLEMAN MASTER WILLIAM ASCHAM REPLENISHED WITH THE BOVNTIES OF Art and Nature. Molli discumba▪ via. Scu Haec via illi summa. IF those be patrons fittest for our labours, Whose vertuous actions merit our respect, Who fitter then your selfe for to protect, Our infant Poems with your mature fauor? Whose fragrant bosome euer had that sauor, And perfect relish, that the pure effect Of your sincerest loue would thinke no shame, To take in worth what from Pernassus came. Beleeue me Sir, those manie well tuned straines Of your concording vertues haue produced These harsher poems: let me be excused Sith what I write concernes poore homely swaines.
That vsed to frolicke in the spacious plaines, My muse with no Cadmean drops infus'd Shelters her humble selfe vnder your wing, Which if you grant, she may securely sing. Call but to mind the seedplot of your youth, Stagyras well-spring, Britons Hesperie, Which at one time receau'd both you and me, You to grow vp, me to admire your growth, Hoping to see that which might glad vs both. Your inward graces, graced outwardly. For now my Poems rellish when they finde So great a fortune in so great a minde. If I should speake but what I doe conceaue, I should make stale those merits of your owne, In shewing them which be already showne, Yet if I were but able to engraue, In monumentall tablets, you should haue The highest place because the highest growen In ripe and pregnant iudgement which approue, Both art and nature beare you speciall loue. Long may you flourish in the grouth of time, To be a refuge to the muses nine, Diuinest shades should shadow powers diuine, That when poore Celsus writes in ragged rime, He may receiue protection by your shrine, Whose beauteous raies with more perfection shine,
Then the malignant censures of the worst Shall ere raze out, if that their gall should burst. More could I write (for subiect had I still, Of writing more and more,) but modesty Tells me your vertues would not praised be, For vertues praise doth from her selfe distill, Wherefore I curbd th'intention of my will, Ioying to see these honors which I see, So well portraid in you, that your worth, Makes the earth glory in so great a birth. Your vertues admiror humblie deuoted, RICHARD BRATHVVAYT.
Hinc mea musa gemit, quae seria non sera currit, Non matura satis carmina: causa nimis. Vpon the illustrate Prince Henrie, the Authors long meditated teares: Draigned from a fresh renewing spring euer distilling: Some whereof the passionate Elegiake offers to His neuer dying monument. DOst weepe to see him dead? or thou dost come To view him liuing in his dying tombe? Liuing (said I) and dying? yes: his death Seems to infuse in him a liuing breath, That being dead to earth, earth might transpose, His earthy corps vnto eternall ioies. Deadiyes, and aliue too; this seems strange: For single death he gets a double change: Of life and death: death to shut vp his eies, Life to enthrone him in heauens paradice. ere heire vnto a king, but there he sings A glorious pean to the king of kings. A good exchange: what better? none to thee, Translated prince: yet no change worse to me, And to the state: O enuy that our will Should so depraued be, to wish him ill, For our owne priuate good: Great good indeed, And to be wisht for: O where shall we reade So many vertues charactred in youth, So rare a mirror in the Court of truth. So pure intentions seconded by same. So hopefull diuinations in his name.
So generall affection as nere any, In one heart, kept the hearts of halfe so many. Ist then impiety to weepe, or show Our zeale to him? whom there was none did know That by relation wept not; O I see, In euery face the face of Niobe, Sencelesse and speechlesse: yet in sense and speech Thus much entire affection seems to teach Posterity hereafter: as't appeares Both sence and speech supplied are by teares. Teares inundation, so as we might feare, And not without iust cause some deluge nere, But that we see a rainebow which portends Heauen has imposd vnto our sorrowes ends And limits, which ore past can hardly be, So soone slip griefes out of our memory. So soone? indeede too soone: poems in blacke Resemble the blacks we weare vpon our backe. Which whilst we follow the sad mournfull beere, Some more for fashion then compassion weare. Vnworthy mourners, do your griefes extend No further? must your teares with his blest end Expire together? why then I pray reire Let our sole notes sith that our notes be higher And far more shrill, supply your place: ile find Motiues of griefe vnto th'immotiu'sts mind. You are blind with teares, I but of late began, One eye may see more then another can▪ Why should men thinke th'inuention halfe so rare, Or worth record: to bring a stream: from Ware, Of pure spring water? for without lesse charge I could haue dreind a riuer full as large Without ere pumping for't: and with a sluse As artificiall: which could no way chuse
(Such is the force of an obsequious pitty) But conuey water to most parts o'th city. And this without a Iacobs staffe, or ought Saue the dimensions of an aierie thought; Which measures each poportion, onely griefe Excepted, which the measure of reliefe Could neuer compasse: yet there would be fault In my conueiance, for my spring is salt And mixt with briny vapors which distill▪ Like pond or marish waters from a hill. But theirs more sweet, so could I mine allay, If I had been at so much cost as they. Next wonder that we haue obserud this yeere, Is that the winter did like spring appeare, Garnisht with varied flowers, and euery sweet Checkerd with borders for the Syluans meet To frolicke on: and why? they are of that nature, That when they'r merry, they presage some creature Of worth or admiration must commend, Their bones to rest by some approaching end. Ill natur'd bugbeares, why should you delight, To see that sunne lodge in eternall night That gaue a lustre with his sparkling eie To euery plant within his Monarchy Each humble spray or flower that grew i'th field Of honor, would he honor with his shield Of eminent respect▪ respect lesse you, That neuer giue to merit whats her due. But I must cease, that I may weepe the more, For ceaselesse though I weepe, I haue teares in store Two buckets to one well, both of them goes, The one for my teares, the other for my woes, That teares and woes contracted both in one, May pierce in time this monumentall stone.
THE ARGV∣ment of this Treatise. BERILLVS an Arcadian shepheard, who frequented the flowrie plaines of Ida; and indeed no lesse musicall, then pastorall: For his learning famous, for his measure in all compositions curi∣ous, for his censure in moderne presentments, no lesse affected, then by his fellow-inhabitants admired; fell in loue with a Nimph of the adioyning mountaine, hight Eliza: of parentage honorable, of beautie in∣comparable, and endowed with all graces internall; which made her no lesse beloued, then desired, euen of the greatest: for her demerits were such, as Arcadia resounded with her praises, Long had shee (euen of  naturall loue vnto retirednes) sequestred her selfe from the publique concourse of the world, professing as it seemed a vesall life: when now (being of great expectancie, as the onely daughter to her father) she
was moued by her friends to addresse her selfe for proceedings both more answerable to her Fortunes, more correspondent to the generall intentions of her friends, and more aequiualent to her yeeres, being now in the flower of her Time, and increase of estate. After a modest, yet halfe-assenting repugnance, shee condiscended to their request: leauing Vesta and her retired habitations, and now consecrating her laies and hymnes to Hymen, wishing no doubt, his furthe∣rance to her otherwise affected disposition. It chan∣ced that (on a solemne festiuall day) when all shep∣heards leauing their pastures, and making recourse to a Temple erected neere to the foresaid mountaine, they offered sacrifice to Pan (the shepheards God) that he would preserue their flockes, & giue encrease vnto their heards, according to the custom of Rome, where the Lupercalia be solemnised by the mountaine Pala∣tine: the Parilia were kept in honour of Pales, for the preseruation of cattell: such were the feasts of these Arcadian shepherds. Now in the performance of their vowes to Pan, ere their solemnities were half finished, came in Eliza with other amiable maids, to see the order (as it seemed) of the shepheards in the celebra∣tion of their festiuals. The passionate shepheard Beril∣lus, who before had conceaued no little affection of the demure carriage, modest gate, and well-respected, & reputed conuersation of Eliza, had no sooner fixed his eyes on her, then his sacrifice was ended, his deuotion cooled, and those many orisons which he made to Pan,
conuerted to the honour of his Saint & shrine Eliza. Much loue he professed by his eye: for though Pan had his knees, yet that honour was but externall, Eliza had his heart, no lesse reuerencing her presence, then he did Pan with outward appearance. Eliza at last obserued (as what woman, if faire, knowes not her Beautie?) that irreuerberate fixing of his eyes, by the transparent characters of his lookes, measuring his loue, shee (not to dant the poore shepheard) gaue him a modest smile, which gaue no lesse content to Berillus, then if Pan had descended and confirmed their vowes with his presence. The sacrifice ended: yet the flame which appeared at the sacrifice not extinguished in the loue sicke shep∣heards brest, continued his passions, not hopelesse, because resolued such Beauteous colors could not bee soiled with the blemish of a remorcelesse heart: but as the Syreus neuer portend more raine, then when their voice is most delightfull, nor the Crocodyle more per∣nicious, then when feigned semblances shew her teares most remorcefull, so this bitter sweet, seemed to enter∣taine pittie, and to accept of the poore shepheards sa∣crifice, registring his sobbes, sighs, and vnfained pas∣sions in the Tablet of her heart: vowing acceptance if her parents assent confirmed her election. But see that generall vice (innate to her sex,) leuity of minde, estraunged her intentions, and made the forlorne shep∣heard more wretched, in that his former hopes had made him blessed: shee contemnes his giftes, scornes his
suite, plaies vpon his simplicitie: so as the shepheard surprised with a sympathie of passions, in that his hopes and great expectances are made abortments: proined of their expected growth, and blasted in the prime of his affections, sits descanting of his discontents: ma∣king his pipe the surdon of his sorrow: to expresse his languishments more fully, in an abrupt straine of dis∣cords (as that harmonie best suites with his present fortunes) lying deiected on the ground (best repose for his declining hopes) thus intimates his owne miserie: shadowing (though couertly) womans inconstancie: shutting vp his ode with this conclusion: They are hap∣pie, who haue seene (and by seeing) haue bene cautio∣ned of a louers miserie, and womans obduracie, hating where they propound most euident and infallible Te∣stimonies of their sincerest loue.
THE PASTORALL. IN Arcadie, a place of great renowne Famous for flowry pastures, there remaind A youthfull shepherd, who vpō the down, Hight Idas plaine, such honour had obtaind Amongst all shepheards by his trophies gaind, And worthie feates in euerie May game showen That his atchieuements were so glorious growen, As he the flower of shepheards still was nam'd Nor of that honour might he be asham'd, For many shepheards thē there were▪ whose grace In actiue fears put Heroes out of place. Tmolus was one of such a noble spirit▪ Adornd with beautie and perfection too. That in all actions he the  did merit Decking with laurell his victorious brow. Was praisd of all, yet neuer would he heare it, Nor of vaine glorie least appearance show: Such store of graces from his minde did flow; Of able bodie, and of pregnant wi, That euen these times haue much admired it: For manie laies would Tmolus ofttimes make In diuine measures for Amyclas sake.
Next him was Thyrsus of a comely hew A pure complexion, and a pleasant grace, Who to his friends prou'd faithfull still and true, With painted smile nere would he soile his face: For he descended from a noble race, As his admired vertues still did shew: For fame and honour euer did reuew, The spacious mansions of this shepheards place Walking with honour in his parents trace, Such was this Thyrsus (Thyrsus was his name) Nor of that title might he thinke't a shame. Pelorus was the third, a lustie swaine That vs'd to graise his cattell by the riuer Euenus hight: where oft he would complaine, Of his hardhearted loue: nor would he euer, Those pensiue odes (in silent woes) containe But chaunts his passions ore and ore againe: Such brinie streames could be exempted neuer, For light (which lightsome seems) his ioies disseuer Making his comforts barraine: O how faine VVould he haue glad himselfe with harmonie, But what he sought could not effected be. O my Laerte (would this shepheard say) VVhy doest exile me from thy presence deere? Why shouldst thou with thy loure benight my day, And racke my intrals with perpetuall feare? I pray thee (loue) more cheerefully appeare,
Feede not my passions with a long delay, But let the night at last my griefes allay, That I some pleasant harmonie may heare, Sounding a concord in my dolefull eare, O be so kinde, that if no day, yet night May yeelde me comfort and renew delight. Thus would Pelorus iterate his woe And make the pastures eccho with his voice, For to what caue so ere this swaine did goe He made it answer with an horrid noise, For where he was, no creature could reioyce, Sith what he did, his cattell would doe so, Both foode and water willing to forgoe, And frame their routing to their Maisters choice A discord well concording with his voice, His flockes were thankefull to deplore his fall Mourning to heare their Maisters mournfull call. Manie fine bowers this shepheard vsd to frame Of mirtle braunches, and of poplar greene, Wherein he vsd to endorse his louers name, Whose curious workes to this day may be seene, Which cannot chuse but aeternise his fame And that renowmed house from whence he came, For few such swaines on earth haue euer beene Of such respect, such vertue, such esteeme: But he is gone, and hath depriu'd the earth Of her chiefe beautie, portraied in his birth.
Tymallus was the next, who for his strength Antaeus like, regaind the highest prise Amongst all shepheards, but the fates at length Seem'd to oppose his worthie enterprise, Shutting the glorious splendor of his eies, (Themselues contented in our discontents) Changing the nature of those elements, Which in Tymalius did so sympathise, That I haue heard, though this same shepheard dies, Yet euerie yeere the inhabitants receaue, Where hees interd sweete odors from his graue. O thou perfumed vrne that doest containe Within thy shrine and sble monument, The famous reliques of a noble swaine, Mansion of honour, vertues continent, Shine euer bright to grace that ornament Which thou possessest: let no priuat slaine Blemish that poore remainder, whos pure name Makes earth, no earth, but as an element Drawen from the earth, to raise her excrement, Rest thee Tymallus in thy house of clay, Whilest we relate thy actions euerie day. But now must I leaue these, and come to him, Whose sacred muse pearceth the aerie clouds, And with Berillus excellence begin Some higher straine; leauing the silent wods, The silent shades, the pastures and the floods▪
Which cherished the swaines: now must I trimme With varied colours euerie braunch and limme Of my discourse: that such as vnderstood Of this Berillus, may wish him some good, And adde some proper actions of their owne To those of his, and make them better knowne It chaunced on a time, the swaines agreed To celebrate the festiual of Pan, Pan was the God, by which their flocks did feede, And their encrease on Ida first began, Therefore each swaine with all the speed he can, Came with sweete incense from his flourie mede, To sacrifice to Pan of all their breed, One with a kid, another with a lambe, Or some young suckling wained from the damme, Mongst whom Berillus came, willing to offer, To Pales incense, and to Pan an heifer. Vnto the Temple which erected was, Nre to the foote of Idas sacred moun, From whence a Nectar riuolet did passe, Which was enstled Cytheraeas fount, Came all these shepheards, who with great account, And solemne honour offred in that place, The firstlings of their flocks were wont to grase Vpon the neighbour plaines, or which were wont To brouse the flourie vale, or feede vpon't, Each offred what they had, fruits of their border, The best the first, the residue in order.
Amidst these solemne feasts, obsequious vowes, Came in Eliza, one of beautie rare, With other virgins, for what end heauen knowes, Saue to perplex such as religious were: Such tempting creatures wanton women are, Seducing vs with smiles and seeming showes, farre worse then the furie of externall blowes: For those shed blood, these doe torment with care And vex vs with new sorrowes, till despaire Surprise our mindes, our solace dispossesse, Making vs obiects of times pensiuenesse. Noe sooner had he spied (aye me too soone) The Syren countenance of this seeming sect, Then incense, Censor, coales, & all throwne downe, fixing his eyes on her, showd his intent, Hauing our heart there where our eyes be bent, To such a passion he in fine was growne, That he could scarcely vouch himselfe his owne, But pitching there his campe, his fort, his tent, Confin'd himselfe within her element, For he transported was (poore harmelesse man,) To Elizas Altar from the shrine of Pan. Shall I adore (quoth he) a rurall God, A pasture Saint, a sheepish deitie, When a more heauenly creature makes abode, Cheering my comforts in varietie, Promising pleasures in sacietie?
No, no, her presence farre more comforts bode Then Pan ere had: too long my feete haue stoode, Too long my knees haue bow'd (poore Pan) to thee I see a Saint that better pleaseth me. This said (his incense from his shrine berest) Vnto his goddesse goes, the Altar left. Like to a forward wooer trained long In louers vowes, and solemne protestations, He takes her by the hand: and softlie wrong Her tender pulse, augmenting sundrie passions Of an vnfained loue (Heauens inuocations) Making his heart the subiect of his tongue, His tongue the Herald of euents to come, Calling the Gods to record his intentions, And all those acry powers whose blest conuentions Confirme each action both in heauen and earth, The fatall end drawne from a fatall birth. If that I loue not (honourd queene) quoth he, Mirror of beautie, diamond of fame, If that I euer haue not honourd thee, And registred the annals of thy name, And with my deerest blood confirmd the same, Neuer respect these teares distild from me, Nor of thy worth let me accepted be. But if I haue beene faithfull, thinke't no shame To fix thy loue on me that faithfull am, For sooner shall the sunne surcease to shine, Then I surcease to reuerence thy shrine.
See in what diuine rites, what sacred hests, I was distracted, to enioy your loue, For sincere loue, delaies in loue detests, Enforc'd the fruites (which he desires) to prooue, O let me prooue them, so shall griefes remooue, Their pensiue stations, and afford sweete rest Vnto my restlesse soule, by thee made blest: I was brought vp (dere sweete) in Idas groue, Hatchd in an Aerie, sprung from bowers aboue, Those owrs, those flowrs, those showrs wc did de∣scend Frō Ioues pure throne, thy beauty shal de∣fend. Those bowers which louely Adon did frequent, Those flowers to which Narcissus was transformd Those liquid showers where Dande reapt content, All in one symptome with one wreath adornd, To louers vnitie sweete straine conformd, (For purer straines nere had earths continent, Then such as descant louers complement) Where limpe-halt Vulcan too▪ too long soiornd, With loues contempt portride, displaied & hornd, But louers cannot put abuse, nor wrong Those faithfull vowes which they professed long. See but this incense how it lost her smell, See but this censor how it lost her fire, Which intimates, nought can expresse so well The feruent passions of our mindes desire, As beautie presence, which doth still aspire,
To aerie mansions from the vault to shell, For perfect loue all vapors can expell, And giue the louer due reward, due hire, Scorning with coward pace to make retire, Loue is a captaine which obtaines the prise, Scorning the worst and basest enterprise. But like victorious cheiftaines which enclose The strongest bull warks with continued labour, Despising rest, minds quiet, nights repose, By their renoumed acts to purchase fauour, (Whose resolutions know not how to wauer Nor the pale harbour of distracted woes, Know how to feare) euen so affection goes, Till memorie (of Heroes acts engrauer) Enobled by worths monuments shall haue her, Registring her pure vertures in their shrine, For diuine acts deserue a throne diuine. Noe steepie mount can be too peering high, Noe craggie cliffe for loue too intricate, For such is loue and louers maiestie, As its secure in euery dismall state, Passing the iudgement of impartiall state, Neerer the title of a deitie, Being the same which she doth seeme to be, Hating the cause of times producing hate, Ope be her eyes (wide ope) early and late, Discoursing where or how her comforts be, Taking no rest to gaine eternitie.
O be not selfe conceited (dearest loue) See but thy image, how it doth desire Another image: ayming euer higher, Till it enioy what it intends to prooue, Much like the Turtle with the Turtle-doue Or like the Phenix, who in her owne fire, Portraies her selfe both mother, seede and sire: Her ashie vrne her tombe, her flame the groue, To life infusd by some effects aboue. Be then the Phenix, as in beautie rare, So be thy actions farre aboue compare. What better sutes which beautie then delight? What better with delight then loues content? What better with content then cheerefull light? What better sutes with light then th'element, That best concords with her? whats that? th'extent Of pure affection: which expels the night, And makes vs pleasant in our louers sight, For honest louers shew their mindes intent, By outward signes; an Incense redolent, In sincere loue, composd of sundrie links, Thinkes what she speakes, and speaketh what she thinkes. Then speake (deere loue) let this same sacred place, Where we be present, consecrate our loue: Let Pan himselfe confirme our Nuptiall grace, And all the powerfull Queristers aboue Sing cheerefull layes: while our affections moue
Their true Idaeas: that illustrate race, From whence you were deriud, quickens my chace And bids me hope: you cannot chuse but loue, Their worth cannot be base whose births aboue, Then as thou art erected, let me tast, The fruites of loue, when discontents be past. For if a faithfull shepheard can deserue, Meede for his faith: my faith deserues as much. How oft haue I thy name desir'd to carue In euerie tree? and when I sought to touch The tender barke, or rinde, it nere thought much, But willingly endurd my sculpture: thus plāts serue Thy blest attendance: that they may obserue, A module in thy fancie: that is such, That if they should doe all, yet not too much can be done to thy shrine: if plants doe this, (If I should not doe more) I did amisse. Since time I knew thee (fairest of all faires,) I could not goe, as I was wont to doe Vnto my pastures: for such heapes of cares Possest my crasie braines, surprised so With thy affections, that whereso ere I goe, Sit, or lie downe, nought of sweete ioye appeares, But multitudes of my renewing feares, Which make me sleeping wake, thinking of woe, And then of ioy: thus interposd twixt two, A double forme my single forme partakes, Now waking sleepes, & sleeping straight awakes.
For that sweete sleep which cōfort yeelds to others, Yeeldes a distaft to me: what can be sweete Where hope is dead? hope is a louing mother, Banishing sorrow with a silent sleepe, That feedes the shepheard, and reuiues his sheepe, Reducing them into one fould together, But sheepe nor shepherd there's no health to either, If thou my shephardesse refuse to gather My disperst Flocks: and shall denie to keepe My watching eyes that doe desire to sleepe, But cannot sleepe, to double paines they are put, Ope by thy presence, by thy absence shut. No day nor night can solace yeelde to me, Both be vnwelcome guests: and whats the cause? To tell the truth: that day I see not thee Seemes farre more darke then night: loue hath no clause, No limit, nor no bond: loue cannot be Confinde in bonds, it hates captiuitie: Meriting honour by diuinest lawes, As for her action it deserues applause, O then (deere sweete) be not so soft to show, So hard to loue: receiue these vowes I owe. Oft haue I walkd within the Idalian groue, Calling each plant, each blossome to record The spotlesse vowes of my refined loue: And euerie plant did seemingly accord Vnto my vowes: springs did their teares afford,
And euery sencelesse rocke did passions moue: Crying I loue, the eccho cried I loue, For euery accent, accented my word, A louely concord in a loues discord. If plants, rocks, riuers so remorsefull be, Farre more remorse I doe expect from thee. Thy substance is more heauenly, then disdaine Should soile a mansion of so pure delight: Thou seest me loue, and thou wilt loue againe: I know thou wilt, those vowes which I haue plight Cannot but haue respect in louers sight: Which if thou doe, (beleeue me) ile remaine As I haue beene a poore well willing swaine, And with my pipe on euery winter night Play laies of loue, to further thy delight. Beleeue me sweete, and you may thinke it true, My Flocks vnfollowed are to follow you. The wanton lambkins frolicke on the plaine, Skipping and leaping in their floure of youth, While in a secret caue, I scarce containe My selfe from teares, and so Melampus doth, Poore harmelesse curre, for he is very loth To see me so deiected: howling amaine, Prickeard, bleare eyed, yeelds me a dolefull straine▪ Of doggrell musique: thus perplexed both. Repine to see each creature in their grouth, And we dismaid, with woes immured so, As others ioyes seeme to augment our woe.
Last day but one Amicla came to me, And askd the reason why I was so sad: Thou vsd, quoth she, so full of mirth to be, That with thy pipe thou made the pastures glad, And was accounted still the cheerefulst lad In all our plaine: how coms it then quoth shee, Such sullen suds haue so perplexed thee? Come, come away and leaue this pensiue shade, For piping, not for pining thou was made, Come, come I say, and quickly follow me. And ore this downe lets dance it nimbly. Alas Amicla, thus I answerd her, How can I pipe, my rede is out of tune, How can I dance, that can but hardly stirre My crasie ioints: O no, that time is done, Nor wil't hereafter (much I doubt it) come To ioy my dolefull life, or ere appeare, To end my griefes that eccho euery where, For griefes speake loudest when the speech is dūbe Engrosing daily still a greater summe. Leaue me Amicla, how can I recite, My wonted measures that has broke my pipe▪ Broken thy pipe? Ile mend it (sweete) quoth she, And make it tune with more delightfull measure Then ere it did: lend but thy pipe to me: I lent it her, that I in part might please her, But it plaid tunelesse still: nor could it ease her,
Descanting discords: sadder harmonie Nere did I heare of sage Melpomene: It knew his Maisters straine, not all the treasure Of Tagus golden oare, no time, no leasure, Had either I or my poore pipe to play, For thoughts of loue had tane all ioyes away. Amicla when she saw it would not be, Threw downe my pipe, for it was soone thowne downe, And with quicke pace away departed she, VVhile I despised, of my selfe lay downe Vnder a shadie beech well ouer growne, With broad▪spred braūches which did shadow me, But not obscure the loue I bare to thee; Calling the heauens to witnesse, and mine owne, Mine own poore bleting flocks! my loue was shown thee. Not in assemblance, but so really, That nought seem'd sweete which did not tast of Thy breath a perfume, and thy voice a tone, Of perfect concords: thy bright eye a starre, Thy mouth an Hyblemount, thine armes a throne, Thy teeth a pearly cordon, thy pure haire Tramels of purest gould, where lodged are Those three admired graces, all in one, As if they ment there to reside alone: Thy browes like Beacons, where we see afarre Adioyning places, mannagements of warre, Breefely, noe part thou hast from top to toe, But may be askt why nature made it so?
And straight it answers: Nature made me thus, To be a mirrour past all imitation, Sith choicest colours my proportion chufe, A beauteous frame formd of the best creation, That after times might make more full relation, What they haue seene proportioned in vs And leaue records of it: that euery muse, If pregnant, may discourse to euery Nation, A perfect module made for recreation, But for no humane creature; such as loue vs, Must come frō heauē, & plāt their throne aboue vs O tell me then (deere loue) if so it be, Humane affections cannot worthie seeme, By their intentiue minds to honour thee, And therefore iustly haue condemned beene, To gase out that which should be rarely seene, For such as thou art, oft reserued be, Not for Earths frame, but for aeternitie: Tell me but this (and by this kisse) I meane Nere to repaire vnto thy shrine againe, Or ere make sute (as here I doe professe) To be thy shepherd, thou my shepherdesse. When poore Berillus finisht had his sute, Looking for answer at Elizas hand, Pans Priest came in, and put Berillus out, Onely thus much well might he vnderstand, That he was lou'd of her, but th'Priests command
(Ill fll such shauelings) euer went about, Hearing their amorous stories to roote out Their pure affections: mouing with his wand, Or sacra virga, that they should descend, And leaue oes passions to another place, For in Pans Temple loue can haue no grace. The forelorne Shepheard went same way he came, Sad and deiected, yet with hope releeued, Thinking by absence to quench out the flame, Which daily made encrease: being depriued Of those blest meanes, by which we are reuiued, Hope the best Anchor which supports our flame, Made this poore shepherd to pursue his game, Hoping by such effects as he contriued, To haue his ioyes renewd: but was deceaued, For where he thought to finde contētment most In that same place he was the greatliest crost. For from that time nere could he see his dere, Kept as it seem'd for Pan, or for his Priest, For this same shaueling euer would be there, Desiring (lustfull prelate) there to feast, Where she remaind: for he has oft confest, That he has wisht himselfe transformed were Into some slender creature, to appeare At all times to Eliza: who thought least Of such a wanton votarie: heauens detest, Such vow in fringing masse priests whose professiō Collects a reason out of each suspition.
Farewell Eliza, if thou liue so long, As to repent thee of thy breach of faith, I doe not doubt but thou'l confesse the wrong Which thou hast done me, and abiure that breath, Which thou exhal'd, adiudging me to death, By that remorselesse heart, that Syren tongue, Which (if thou liu'st) will sing another song: Take heede, the sword's drawne frō the irefull sheath, And inbred horror creepeth vnderneath. Whom thou affectest most, affects thee least, Hating thy Swaine to take thee to thy Priest. But if god Pan knew how his swaines were vsd, By such as offer to him sacrifice, I know full well he would redresse th'abuse, And saue our honour from such Priests as these, Who fill his Temple with impieties, Wronging the sincere thoughts of each of vs, Which cannot merit in the heauens excuse: Small faults with Saints be great enormities, Shrines that are pure become pure deities, But ile surcase, griefes make my muse surcease: Encrease of lines giue to my woes encrease.
To Eliza. A sonnet. IF faire Eliza thou that I haue lou'd, And vowd more sacred hests vnto thy shrine Then any loue that ere profest him thine, Haue but my poems by thy selfe approu'd, O to what blessed, vnexpected clime Am I transported by this muse of mine? But if thou frowne, contract thy brow and loure, Ile neuer handle this rude pencile more. I haue not Zeuxes hand to paint thy shape, But I could wish to graue within thy mound Some quaint deuise, where if I once were found, I know no feature of his liuely grape Could me exceede: for I haue learnd the ground Of that deepe art, albeit most profound. Be thou the module of that curious frame, That my impression may adorne the same. Adorne? deforme thou saiest: poore poesie, Cannot content Elizas Nuptials,
Shee's of a lighter straine, her festiuals Sound and resound with purer harmonie: She cannot brooke the sullen Saturnals That mixe our inyes with gladnesse: Iuuenals, Best like Eliza: and they would like me, If I were Iuuenall to sing to thee. Thy affectionate swaine Pans poorest herdsman. In Arui pascua distichon. Pastor eram gelidis discumbeus montibus Arui, In me tanguet amor mont is, amore tui. To Dorinda. Elegie. 1. THe soaring Eagle stouping to allure, Too base a lure (god wot) for such a bird, Was soone depriu'd of that he thought most sure, At which strange hap the Eagle much admird, To be debard of that he least desird, Wherefore opprest with furie there he swore, Descend he would to such base lures no more. Art thou not borne (quoth he) of royall race, Hatching thy Aerie in the wildernesse? And wilt thou then that auncient house disgrace, Soiling thy glory with such filthinesse,
Which would ecclipse thy pristine worthinesse? O fie for shame let such vnworthies be, Whose worthles parts will shame thine house and thee. Thy Father was a Prince, thou art his sonne, For with thy pearcing eyes canst thou behold The glorious lustre of the cheerefull sun, Fruitfull as springtime, not to bondage sould, Building thy neast in clymates far from cold, Flie to the Cedar; let this mushrome be, For higher plants will better nourish thee. Those sparkling eies of thine which shine so bright, Clad with the flames of Phaebus regiment, Cannot immantled be in pitchie night, But aime at some more gracious element, Sunne seldome shines on such base excrement, Then as thou soar'd by nature, so let art In thine aspiring thoughts sustaine a part. Nomine pastor is mllita poemata fundit Aquila—vt infra sequitur. What plesant poems haue come from my bill, Whose sweete resounding made the eccoes ring, In fields and shades where siluer streames distill, Where Philomell her selfe was wont to sing,
Downe by the current of Sabinas spring, Shall then my brest which tund so plesantly, Be matchd with such a tunelesse Harmonie? In poesem Encomion. Should Hybles sacred art of poesie, Leese her horizon in the throne of heauen, Since it hath beene profest by deitie, Vnto the muses in Pernassus giuen, A place frequented on each Satyres euen, Where Satyres danc't & Syluanos in their order, With all the rites that Hymen could afford her. Then thou thrice blest profession, which remaines A solace to the minde, the earths content, That doubles our night tasks with reble gaines, Affording vse of louers complement, The load-starre which directs our regiment, Neither shall pleasure profit or delight, Depriue me the fruition of thy sight. To Dorinda. The bird Erodius for her louely broode, Sends out a shower of teares perpetually,
And she by natures prescript is allowed To mourne for her deiected progenie, Parents with children make one sympathie. Why should not I doe this for her and more, Whose hallowed shrine my thoughts did ere a∣dore? Thou fairest Queene that sits on Idas mount, Vouchsafe to take this poaem I present, And this my muse shall be deuoted still, Vnto thine heauenly statue which was sent From Ioe aboue vnto this continent, Protect my silly labour and receiue Vnto thy cell, this little that I haue. Alas what fortune crost my birth day first, When fates themselues denied me better meanes, To gratifie my loue? whose quenchlesse thirst, In midst of streames, for liquid streames complains, That her poore trauaile can produce no gaines, Vnto thy diuine Altar; which shall smell, With mirrhe & hymns the Nimphs thēselues shal tell. Amor vt odor. —redolentia semina mittit-quisquis amat. Bring me some odors for my louely queene, And fragrant posies for my shepherdesse: A fairer spring-time neuer shall be seene
For worth becomes Dorindas worthinesse, Pipe will I still for I can doe no lesse, And when my pipe is broken I will take A shriller pipe for my Dorindas sake. Pastor pasce boues, mea fistula cantet amores, &c. Take out that reed, it doth not please my loue, It is too slow a straine for her swift course, She loues not that which will not quickly moue, And cut the aire like to a foaming horse, That runs his station with a vehement course, Such steeds would well beseeme my lady queene That runs her courser with an easie reine. Sic mea laxatis currit habenis Hyppodame equis: quorum spumantia freuis colla torquet. —et tu tibi Myrtile fatae digna refers.—ibid. To Dorinda. Elegie. 2. Disdainefull girle that hates thy louer most, Playing the tyrant with thy beauteous face, Seeming as wonne, when thou art neerest lost, Clouding thy beautie with a foule disgrace, Since blacke disdaine enioyes the cheefest place, Conceiue remorse, lest thou remorselesse die Thine acts the authors of thy miserie.
How manie times and oft haue I profesd Vnto thy beautie ceremoniall loue? What vowes, what hests haue beene by me expresd Farre more then Adon in Idalias groue, More then the solemne hests of Turtle doue? The verie Pellicane is not more true Vnto her brood, then I would be to you. Yet thou contemns my loue, and in despite Of me and of my loue, fleeres in my face: O will not heauen this crueltie requite, And dispossesse thee of an Angels place? Grac'd with more beauty then with beauties grace, Expect reuenge for heauens reueng'd will be Of such vow-breaking miscreants as thee. Wast not enough to scorne me for my want, But thou must cherish me with fained loue; And then triumph, and ore my ruins taunt? In constant minion that doest change and moue The ball of thy affection, to approue, Some goulden Asse perchance that will admire Not halfe so much thy selfe, as thy attire. Some goulden calfe of Horeb will appeare, First of his house: decended from a bagg Of rustie gould, and he will call thee dere Respectiue Ladie: then his head hee'l wagge, And sweare by cow pin of his summer-ng He loues thee derely, thou must be his bride, Since store of angels guard him on each side.
Thou must haue waxen tapers wrought in gould, Thy beads of purest Amber earth can yeeld, Thou must not tread vpon polluted mould, Nor walke abroad into the open field, Without thine estridge taile to be thy shield, Thy drinke must Nectar be, and thou must eate Such meate, as for thy diuine powers is meete. Thy rusticke groome that talks of saluing sheepe, Of wether-gals, and of the next yeeres dearth, Will thee Dorinda like a Ladie keepe, And feede thee with the dainties of the earth, Replenished with pastures yeelding mirth: For euery shepherd with his shepherds crooke, Will striue who may most on thy beautie looke Heere will be Mopsus with his waineskot face, There Damon with his trull will thee attend, Then will old Acmon come with wearie pace, And Melibeus hee's thy husbands friend, Leaning vpon his staffe, will homeward send For some meane gift, some cheese cake to diuide Amongst the bride-maid & their courtly bride. Among the rest thy Vulcane will be there, Smeered with seacole, comely or his color, And will begin to tie thy glittering aire In tresses of pure gould: which are made fowler
By his irreuerend hands: where some controler Will curbe his bouldnesse: am I bould (quoth he) To touch those haires that doe belong to me? No minion, no, you must not now partake The gaudie fashions of a giddie braine, But you must leaue them for your husbands sake, And vse those tender parts to rurall paine, To yeeld vnto your spouse a double gaine, For rest assur'd Dorinda there be some, Doe marrie you for after hopes to come. And be resolu'd though such protest they loue, Calling the heauens to record: they will be Such as perfidious Tereus: and will proue The verie ruine of your progenie, And bring your state in time to miserie: Then will you wish (but wishes come too late) You had but wist the end of your estate. But why Dorinda should I mention thee? Why should I name Dorinda, that's vntrue, A faith infringer, who affected me And then forsooke me; how should I renew, the sad memoriall which I had of you? But with a pensiue heart, a sigh, a grone, To intimate how I am left alone.
Come all ye wood-gods and adorne my brow, With a poore willow garland, to expresse The liuely colors of a tragicke show, The true proportion of my pensiuenesse, Remote from comfort, frought with heauinesse, Where we will sing, though singing be vnfit, And euery wood-nimph shall shed teares to it. Come to my cell, and we will goe together, Vnto Dorindas Nuptials, where will be Great store of rurall swaines com'd flocking thither A perfect relish of sweete hamonie: Where we may well Dorindas beautie see: And see her dance laualto in that measure, As needes must yeelde to all contented pleasure. And I haue Friends there that will helpe to place Vs, in a roome contented, to sruiew, The polishd colors of her curious face, Which though they doe my pensiue woes renew Yet am I blest in that transparent shew Of glorie and renowme, which ioind together Enforce all shepherds to come flocking thether. Thus will we talke and prattle of her beautie, VVith Epithetes well fitting her deserts, And I will tender to her shrine my duetie,
With offer of my loue and of my heart, Of which she doth possesse the cheifest part: That she would daine for to accept that prise, We consecrate to her transpercing eies. In laudem Dorindae: per Antiphrasen. She is the mirror and the type of fame, If that a blemish did not daze her light, But that one blot doth much empaire the same, And hath obscur'd the splendor of her sight: The scope she aimes at is not aimd aright, If that one soile did not ecclips the rest, She might be well reputed, worldes best. —Te Roma aligine caecam efficit insequitur fugientem Roma Dorindam. vid. Mant & Luc. in Fragment. O what content haue I conceau'd in thee My sweete Dorinda? what a sugred smile, A lippe of comfort relish'd pleasantly, An eie that would the prudent'st thoughts beguile? O with what character, or in what stile Shall I describe thy feature glorious Saint, Made of the most refined element? Thē iudge what wound it was surpris'd mine hart. When thou proscribd me from thy cherefull court,
And with contracted brow bad me depart, From that repose where comforts make resort: The birds themselues that heard can make report: For manie time since I tooke leaue of thee, The birds themselues sung dirges ouer me. Recall to minde the time, the place, the words, For I haue cause for to remember them, And then conceaue what sorrow they afford, What cause I haue for to surrender them Into thy hands, that first did tender them, O be not so hard-hearted, well I wot, Thou canst not answer that thou knowest thē not. O that so weake defectiue elements, Vessels of frailtie should insult ore strength, That gould should be prest downe by excrements, Or womans power extended to that length, That men (as clergie men) haue but the tenth Of their affections in you, and receiue Lesse comfort in your bed, then in your graue. O what vnhappie planet did attend, The first arriuall of mine haplesse foote, Or what discomforts did the furies send To make me runne a course so farre about, With no more thanks then if I ran it not? O fruitlesse labour, for what labour lighter Thē wash the Aethyope that is nere made whiter?
Much haue I read of beautie, more of guile, Which like a snake lies in the tender grasse, The baine whereof her glorie doth defile, And lies interd, as that, which neuer was, Or like a gliding streame whose course doth passe, And passing, cuts both hill and flowrie plaine, Scorning by nature to returne againe. But thou condemn'st me for some carelesse words, In that I was respectlesse of thy loue: O doe not forge vnkindenesse, that affords More sorrow to my heart, then heauens aboue, Or fatall Eris in her stigian groue, What I haue spoke I pray thee speake no more, And Ile rent what I haue said before. Inioyne me penance, I will vndertake, Alcydes labours to obtaine your loue, Climing the Alps for my beloued sake, So you distrust from your hard▪heart remoue, And of my faith inuiolate approue: For be assur'd I nere my loue did shew To your estate, but loue I bore to you, But why runne I astray so farre remote From that celestiall scope I aimed at: I loue my loue, and yet she knoweth not, Or will not know my minds perplex'd estate, Those great distractions I conceiu'd of late,
She will not loue, she cannot like a swaine, Who once repuls'd can make no sute againe, VVell then surcease, and let this dolefull Ode Abridge the web of thy extracted griefe, Take vp thy shepheards crooke, make no abode, This barraine pasture yeelds thee no reliefe, But riuolets of teres whereof it's chiefe: Then bid farewell to this disaster groue, To Cupids arrowes, and the queene of loue. Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo. Yet when I talke of Cupid and his bow. The queene of loue that from mount Ida came, Some more affecting passions I must show, And paraphrase vpon Dorindas name: Where though I blush, for I am full of shame, Yet in my blush, I seeme to represent, The beautie of my loues faire continent. And when I looke me in the dismall glasse, Where face redarts a face, me thinks I see, The splendor of Dorindas comely face, Where with her smile she doth encounter me, And driues my sences to that extasie: That I in Lethe droun'd, as all forgotten, Lets the glasse fall, and so my glasse is broken.
Then am I eas'd, depriu'd of that I lou'd, Opprest with sleepe yet cannot sleepe at all, Till the remainders of my glasse remou'd, VVhich were disperst by their vntimely fall. For they (an ecco like) doe seeme to call And rouse me from my rest, surpris'd which care, And rest of rest, declining to despaire. It may be (my Dorinda) if you wed, Some splay-foot'd Vulcan you must make recourse, Too too vnwilling, to a loathed bed, Whereas distastefull pleasure hath no force. But mixt with sorrow and with deepe remore: Heare me (Dorinda) these few hymns shall tell That though you loath me, yet I wish you well. Diue to the verie bottome of your heart, And see the idiome of your louer there, An indigested lumpe compos'd of art, Where natures gifts did neuer yet appeare, Where folly first her banner seem'd to reare, An harsh distempred humour shown in him, A Brillus wit, and a Thersytes limme. But hee's religious: he can dirges say, And has our ladies psalter all by heart: He is modest, rich, and will each morning pray, As if he had his prayers composd by art, What you sustaine he euer beares a part:
Nay more, to purchase your respectiue fauour, Hee'l take himselfe to any cotqueanes labour. Indeede Alcydes for his Omphale, Past many perils much degenerate From former glorie, pristine dignitie, Which euer made attendance on his state, Too much obscur'd by infamie of hate, For he to win a queene did then begin, To tease his wooll, to card and eke to spinne, —Et qui reges vicit, grandes labores egit. victus amore cecidit: Qui clauum, lanam exercet: ibid: Nec nouit mentem comprimere, qui tanta fecit. vid Senec. Each morne would he his taske imposed haue, Which in a womans habit he perform'd, And all to purchase her whom he did craue, With curious roabes & precious gemmes adorn'd, With whom in this disguise he long soiorn'd, Till his long absence had his ruine wrought, By Nessus blood, long time by Nessus sought.
—Nessus hos struxit dolos: cruore tincta est pallia semiferi (pater) Nessusque nunc has exigit paenas sibi. —Et Oetaeum Nemus suscipiat, ignis, Herculem accipiat rogus. Senec: in Oetae: Hercul. Beleeue me (faire Dorinda) if that loue Consist in orisons, I must confesse, Reason you haue your fancie to remoue, Since heauens forgiue, frequent I nothing lesse, Nor can I loue by solemne praiers expresse. Hymns, pastorals, and pleasant laies beseeme, Rather then orisons so faire a Queene. If Hero had Leanders forme affected, For rites or ceremonies consecrate Vnto the powers aboue: she had respected The Temple more to Iuno dedicate, And had distempred lust in greater hate, But she deuoted was vnto his shrine, For carnall pleasures, not for hests diuine. What comfort can a beauteous maide conceaue In contemplation, since the practike part Better accords with her, and she doth craue A soueraigne salue to cure her wounded heart, Which cannot be perform'd by men of art, For learned Sophisters may reason well, But what will please your sexe they cannot tell.
Thus therefore praise I, and yet discommend, This harsh, yet sober kinde of speculation, That frames her engine to a fruitlesse end, About heauens motion and Sphaeres eleuation, Yet cannot make her vse of recreation: VVherefore it's fruitlesse, and a barraine seede That loues to grow alone, and hates to breede. Renoumed ladie, least I wrong your eares VVith the distastfull temper of my pen, My muse her selfe from further course forbeares, To shadow out your vertues to such men, As liue obscured in obliuions den. This therefore I haue writ to blase your name, And not through hate for to ecclips the same. Sooner shall Phaebus leaue his iuorie carre, And giue his regiment to Phaeton: Sooner shall Mars that powerfull god of warre Retire in peace, and loue to lie alone: Sooner shall Sysiphus to rowle his stone Surcease, then I surcease to empall your daies VVith poets wreaths, the laurell and the baies.
To Dorinda, successiue Nuptials. Et quis me retulit laurea dignum, Qui nequeo digna laude Dorindam euehere ad astra? &c. in eleg. lib. 3. Purest Nimph that Hyble bred, With Ambrosia nourished, Beauties glorie, natures mirror, Heauens blest Trophie, worldes terror, Nature made thee and thy feature As it seemes to put downe nature, Most admit'd, when most deiected, Humble most, when most erected. Ladie Flora with her beautie, Tenders thee her vigin duetie: Hymen too, doth chaplets carrie To adorne him thou doest marrie: Gods of all sorts haue descended, And their bounties haue extended, Some with roses mix'd full sweetely, Some with spikenard came to greete thee.
Nere was marriage day so graced, Since by Hymen all are placed, As sweete flowers set in a border, Gods and goddesses in order, There sits Ioue with Iuno Queene, Here Diana clad in greene, Here god Mars that heroe stour, Here crabd▪ Vulcanes limping foote. Here sat Venus smouth as doune In a purple veluet goune: There Minerua whose deseruing Had a laurell for her learning: Here aboue their heads did flie, With winged speed God Mercurie: Aeolus at last did come, But for winde there was no roome. Neptune from his liquid cell, Bad the seas and stormes farwell: Nereus no more would swimme In his streames, but follow'd him▪ Thus all meeting, ioy appeared, Well with wine their hearts were cheered, Till their wine to sleepe resolued, Made these Nuptials be dissolued. Helicons poore inhabitant
Astraeas farewell to Dorinda. Farewell Dorinda, we must now no more Talke of our maiden pleasures we haue had, Nor sit along vpon the siluer shore, Sighing and puling, calling on that lad, That purblinde Cupid, that did wound vs sore: Which made vs pensiue, so perplext and sad, That we with solemne protestations swore To be reueng'd: that he himselfe might know, Though he could shoote, yet we could breake his bow▪ How oft and many times haue we two walk'd In that same flourie Mede, which doth adioine Thy fathers house, and haue securely talk'd? Where hauing nought to doe, we vs'd to proine The poppie braunches, which did then exalt, Their tops too high: where we would straight com∣bine Those blossoms we had cropt laying together, Our heapes in one which had bene lopt by either. But now that vernant spring is past and gon, Ad dismall winter with his hoarie brow Sits on my cheeke, that thus am left alone: That Stem shows withred leaues, that rst did show, Fruites that deserued to be look'd vpon, Which barrennes was first procur'd by you, But ile not blame you: you haue lost your mate, But you haue changed for a better state.
Haue me commended vnto Hymens bower, Tell him I wish he would come visit me, And if I doe resist his sacred power Let me of after ioyes excluded be: Too long I feare I keepe a mellow flower, Which once thou had'st, but now is gone frō thee, Beleeue me sweete Dorinda, I diuine, Ere many daies my state must answer thine. Which if it doe, our former thoughts of loue, So well repressed in so equall bounds, VVe once shall make repaire vnto that groue Where pensiue passions first receiu'd their groūds, And make a foole of that same Ape of loue By whom we once endured manie wounds: But now preseru'd, redeem'd, enioying either, Admire our equall states, enuied of neither. To Eliza, a pastorall Hymne. —Et ortum referre iuuat: Inclitae domus alta trophaea petit▪ Non minus genere preripiens decus, quam forma nitida laudes dispergens suas. ibid. Mounseur de Tygres, man of great estate, Had but one daughter, whom he did esteeme:
Whose front confronting beautie, Vesus sate, And all those graces which we gracious deeme, Then which a rarer sight was neuer seene, Since beautie lost her beautie and decaied n Idas mount: as I haue heard it said. Her haire like Phebus raies disparcling gould, Sent such a lustre where she passed by, That some haue thought as I haue heard it told, Faire Cytheraeas traine approched nie: Such was the vertue of her piercing ie, And some that dwelt neere to Elysa saie, The nights she walk'd on seem'd as light as day. Many poore swaines would nosegaies sweet cōpose Of eglantine, the dasie, and the dill, Which they did consecrate: and she would choose Some flower among the rest which she kept still In her ambrosian bosome, where an hill Of sweeter flowers and branches seem'd to be, Then any mount or groue in Hesperie. Yet of this beautie nature had bestow'd, She was not proud, but of that humble straine, As by her modest blush more faire she show'd, Then to be courted by a countrie swaine, Of arre more worth then pastures could containe: For she was faire, so faire and full of fauour, As Pan the shephard-god made sute to haue her.
But Pans tann'd skinne paued not with her smoth downe▪ She better seem'd to be Apolloes Queene, The seedes of vertue were so fully growen Vertue her selfe might take her for her theame: Deriued sure from some celestiall streame: For such a streame distreamd frō her pure minde Of gracious gifts, that like it's hard to finde. This beauties mirror grac'd with such a feature, Had a more lustre, then that countrie swaine, Or any rurall bogge or homebred creature, Could hope by their deserts ere to attaine, Such precious Iewels must be got by paine, Where euery tripping Satyre can supplie A decent measure in loues symmetrie. This gracious Queene fram'd for a higher court, VVas by a poet suted: but his pen Seem'd too too rude for her, whose spread report Had driuen an admiration in all men, And sacred wood-gods that suruiued then, VVherefore (as coy) this poet she did scorne, And eke the wreath which did his head adorne. Shall I (quoth she) a rithmer entertaine, A comicke iester to my Nuptiall bed, The harsh-discordant tunes of euery swaine, To be with ends of poems nourished, Or with a vaine phantastique humor fed?
O no, I cannot brooke the laurell wreath, Or marrie such as loue to sell their breath. I am not borne of that deiected stemme, Nor haue I my beginning from that roote, That I should match my selfe with worthlesse men, Or in a bed of poems set my foote, VVhere loue enuiron'd is with feare and doubt, Prophets and poets they can write and sing, But women they affect another thing. It is not laies sung in Dianas groue, Nor of Astraeas beautie can procure, The height of our affection or our loue: No can our sweete respect with them endure, VVho liue as if they were of loue secure. Maids are not pleas'd with fruitlesse contemplatiō But leaues the knowledge, loues their recreation. Ths my position is, nor will I yeelde Vnto the ickle iudgement of the vaine, Who seeke to winne me, yet must lose the field: That labour's lost which doth produce no gaine: Nere can I loue a poets wanton straine, For this I finde, they that of loue write best, In actions of true loue can doe the least. Mounseur de Tygres hearing what she said, VVs well content, for he no poet lou'd:
And therefore (as it seem'd full of delaied Th'effecting of their loues at first approu'd, VVhich by some accident at last remou'd: And therefore in all hast tooke hold of time, Belike for to extract his daughters line. This thus resolu'd (for she was well resolu'd) Mounseur de Tygres did a contract make With young Gastylio: who inners inuolu'd Part for himselfe, and partly for her sake, In weale and woe his mistris state partakes: As it was fit, for fitting it should be, That man and wife haue one communitie. Both did adore one Idole, both repair'd Vnto one Saint▪ set in a gorgeous shrine, Which Romane pompe lest it should be impair'd, Talking of rites, they cal'd them most diuine: Whose columns framed loosing wise did shine With burning Tapers on their Altars hung: Vnder the staires whereof the Flamines sung▪ And least I should defraud you of that state Which so transparently appear'd to all In those solemnis'd rites, Ile explicate, How, when, and where, these mariage hests befell: Which thus in briefe I doe intend to tell: That you may show in after-times to come, No rites more solemne then the rites of Rome.
Si nec amare licet, licuit cantare Poteae: Si non authorem diligis, acta legas. Elizaes mariage day with all Romane celebritie solemnised: with the Muses salutes, and Graces seuerall gifts. Sic mea Romano cecinisse camaena cothurno Gaudeat, et Veneris pignora chara sisae. ELizaes nuptialls so long expected, Now were approaching, where in solemne sort Each thing was plast, as if th'aethereall court Whose diamantine walls the Gods protected Had been there present: for all was effected With such respect, as same would come far short In her relation: yet I meane to shew Th'Epitome of this great worke to yow▪ A curious Table made of citre wood, Spred ore with tissue, well imbrodered, With store of dainty cates replenished, Where on a row the sacred Muses stood Singing a song of Hebe deifide, Was there drawen forth. Next that there seemd a flood, Of faire Sea-nimphs, for Nimphs they seemd to be Bathing their milke white skins deliciously.
They sung a song of Neptune to the shore, The shore resounding with a sweet consent: The like whereof was sildome heard before, That Nimphs, whose glory is most eminent, Should deigne to grace with their diuiner power The feasts of mortall men: base continent For such blest feet to walke on: yet they came From sea to earth to spread Elizaes name. Next those, admired graces tooke their place, Richly enthroned as their worth deserued: With ies reflected on Elizaes face, As if loue sicke, for so the most obserued: Wishing (vaine wish) she were their fellow grace For now she was no fellow: for they serued In all subiection to her, and would take Tasks ill befitting graces for her sake. Ile giue thee (quoth Thalia) vtterance A hony dropping tongue which shall dissolue The marble hearts of men: sweet eloquence Whose powerfull vertue shall each doubt resolue And match thy beauty with the excellence Of diuine beauty: what thou shalt reuolue In thy close brest shall be performd by thee, Making thee honord for a deity. Ile giue thee (quoth Aglaeia) pure inuention To passe the spheres with apprehensiue wings
Crowning the issue of thy best intention With wreaths more glorious then victorious kings Or Heroes ere receau'd, quicke apprehension Shall blesse thy memory with the happiest things Th'auspicious hand of Fortune can procure: For whom the graces grace, must needs be sure. And I will giue (said graue Euphrosine) The poise of nature iudgement to approue Or disaproue as it best liketh thee, To iudge twixt hate and mind attractiue loue: The sagest braine deriues her wit from me, Rapt with the infusion of the powers aboue: Thus shalt thou be adornd with graces feature, To make thee heauenly of an earthly creature, Thus made a goddesse by the sacred powers, Whose glorious scepters sway the ocean, And this same massie frame this earth of yours, With all the beauty of your little man: Wherein at first vertues pure springs began With pearly drops of soule-bedewing showers: To rinse our Errors: so distained now As he that made her, hardly can her know. Thus, thus, eternisd (for eternity Waits on the Graces) she with modest smile, And shamefast blush, framed this short reply As sweet as short couch'd in a comely stile;
Much doth Eliza thanke your deity That you would deigne times minutes to beguile In such an homely cell: a cell indeed, For such as you that spring from heauenly seed. O you diuine and glorious Quiristers, That sing sweet Hymns in heau'ns high Hierarchy, You who are made the Angells ministers, Filling their hearts with gladsome harmony. Of happy tidings blessed messengers, Infused by the power of sacred Deity. You sweet Organs that are consecrate To heauens blest Nuptialls, blesse my nuptiall state. You are the nectar riuers that diffuse Their well distreaming currents ore the earth So as no mount nor humble vale can chuse But to be fruitfull. Your thrice glorious birth Inspir'd pure knowledge in the Cadmian Mse, Making her fill the earth and Sea with mirth. Thrice blessed ofspring of so blest a sire Whom plants, springs, groues, & all the gods desire. If to the sea I turne, loe you are there, Mouing the Syrens with your warbling voice, If to the mountaines, likewise you appeare, Making the rocks re-eccho with your noise: If to the fertile plaines, I likewise heare You prety musicke in the shepheards voice.
Thus Sea, rock, mountaine, and each flowry plaine If you begin will answer you againe. I Philomela with her wofull note Weauing a pricking bramble to her brest, Retire in secret to deplore her lot, Crying on Progue whom she loued best With trickling teares, not hauing yet forgot Who gaue reuenge to that incestuous beast, Adulterate Tereus: if that you come by Will leaue sad odes and chirpe more cheerfully▪ And reason good your heauenly influence Giues a sweet tutch vnto th' Amyclean lyte, Makes her stay riuers by her eminence, Diuert the nature of aspiring fie, Moue shady woods to change their residence, Mountaines declining, vales ascending higher. Shewing far more then mortall powers could shew Drawing beginning and their end from you. Then gratious Graces, shower such streams of grace Vpon th'ensuing progresse of my time, That by the glorious lustre of your face Such raies of vertue and respect may shine I me, my issue, and succeeding race, That all may blesse this happy state of mine. Who to aduance the honor of our house Brought from one stem so many vertuous.
It is not eloquence, Eliza craues, That smels of gaine, and gaine is stale to shame, Such mellow gifts the better sort depraues, Loosing for corrupt breath a glorious name: Fie on attractiue breaths that still receiue Yet by receiuing doe augment their shame: No, no, let vertue make me eloquent, Vnstained vertue is most eminent. Nor ist inention doth Eliza please, I laue Archia that: our thoughts be pure, To make our Fame renowmed, when the least Of our expired lifes shall loose their power, Getting that statue, after our decease Which all deuouring time can nere deuoure, The glorious name of vertue, which faire tombe Shall mention vs in after times to come. Ye graces three, how well would this white stole, This precious Albe adorne Elizaes shrine? Which no detraction nor reproch could soile, But made eternall by the powers diuine, An happy end of times laborious toile, A blessed period to these daies of mine: When for exchange of times mortality Heauens were my due and heauens eternity. Nor doe I care for iudgement, so I haue So much as may discerne twixt carths delight
And those high ioies which ripest iudgement craue Twixt Titans torch, and Thetis ptchie night: So much as may my name from darknes saue, To make her heire of that supernall light Which the iudicious wish: that iudgements best Where she directs her scope at sacred rest. O (quoth Aglaia) nuptialls ill befit Such vertuous spirit: we must haue you dance, And leaue discourse of vertue, which will get Pensiue distractions, though you talke perchance Of vertue now, yet youl'e relinquish it: Hymen who doth your fortunes thus aduance, Will seem much grieued, if you should seem to be Vertues defender in this Iubile. VVhat colours best befit a mariage day? Not sable, hat pertends too blacke euent: But brighter colours such as flowry May Vsde to put on when Boreas seasons spent And all the fields put on their rich aray, Each odorous flower and blossome redolent. VVhen the green mantle of the checkred earth Seems to reuiew her fresh and cheerfull birth. Such should thy vestments be (fairespotlesse queen) And as the birds which pratle on each spray, Telling their tales vnto the medowes green Their loues, their likings by the breake of day,
Discouring nought which might vnpleasant seem But as true makes impatient of delay: They wish (poor birds) each moment to approue The happy fruits of their conceiued loue. Now by the flowry pastures they send out Their warbling voices: where their louely mates With broad extended wing in hot pursuit For their admired loues together waite, Till by long search at last they find them out Where they begin to enioy that happy state, Happy to them (good birds) which long before They did expect, but now expect no more. Thus, thus, Eliza, shouldst thou solemnize This glad arriuall of thy nuptiall state, Since powers diuine become to eternise With happy presence thy succeeding fate That all the glorious powers may memorise, These festiue triumphs they haue seen of late. Come, come, forbeare, put on Elizaes brow, Aske but the Muses, they will tell thee how. Euen as we see when cloudes are quite disperst, And glitrig beams send out their splendor bright Or as when storms be past, whose fragor perst The tender branches with their thunder light, Or as the earth once pining now reuerst Bringing her long concealed ioies to light
So did Eliza change her sable hue, As if the graces formd her all anew. Shee's for no straine of vertue, but delight Plaies on her prety bosome: pensiue thoughts As Hymens enemies be put to flight, Fruits of more pleasure by this day are wrought In the faire Tablet of her beauteous sight, Then Ioue to Swan-like Leda euer brought, For that was stolne curbd by a iealous eie, But this was such as claimd free liberty. No dirges now she sings, but hymns of ioy, Mou'd with a priuate motiue of content: No sorrow now, no anguish, nor annoy Haue any power in her blest continent: She talks of Venus, and the waggish boy, And blames Adonis asking what he meant He did not honor Venus beauty more, But leese a mine of treasure for a Bore? t borish lad (quoth she) pitty it is, Such a good face should haue so ill a wi, That when th'art blest, dost not conceiue thy blisse But seest a gem and yet respectst not it. Children are pleasd with flowers: a fruitlesse kisse, A smile, or so, such babies best befit: Wherfore lest thou such flowrs shold seem to stain, In fruitlesse grouth a flower thou dost remaine.
Thus was Eliza turnd: all on the flant, Like Mirrhas daughter or Hermione, Hauing in hope what really she wants, Presaging comfort to posterity, Concluding thus: mansions where Graces hant Cannot deiected or surprised be By times mutation: for no fatall hower Can rase that fort, that's kept by diuine power. And as we oft times see in summer time, A shower of candide hailestones ratling downe, Which makes the tops of touring okes decline, The siluer banks of riuers ouerflowen, Proining the tendrells of the lofty Pine, With branchy cedars that are highest growen: Where suddenly the sun sends out his beames, VVhich quite dissolues the haile & stills the streams So this faire beame of Titan thus diffus'd, Into the amber border of her heart, Which was before (poore wench) by her refus'd, Now yeelds reliefe vnto her former smart, Resuming sweet delights too long abus'd: Each proper vertue flowes to euery part. The tempest now is past, the sun appeares, Which stops the source of all ensuing feares. Then fi it were since that Elizas mind, I robed with nuptiall thoughts: the solemn night,
Should be portraid, her tuest ioies assignd, To helpe her former hope with hopes delight: Descend a little lower: you shall find The modell of chast loue decolord right: Not sensuall affects which relish lust, For lust's not loue: since loue is pure and iust. The gloomy night, when labor takes his rest, Birds take their pearch and sauage beasts their den, The night when hoary cares cease to infest With hote assault the silent sleeps of men: That blessed night, these nuptialls made it blest Confirmd her hopes by her approaching then. For she addrest for pleasure doth vndresse, Her selfe to reape more perfect happinesse. Now euery muse had sung their last good night, And had ascended vp Parnassus mount, Wishing her as much ioy and sweet delight, As ere they ioied, while bathing in the fount Hight pure Castalia in Dianaes sight And her attendants: Delia would accompt Them far more happy then the princely Ioue, For they were free but he was tost in loue. The azure curtaines of the siluer heauen Crauing their absence: now the ioifull bride Had of her bride cake to the Muses giuen, To the three Graces and the Nimphs beside,
All which attended her: but now the euen Made them though willing longer to abide, Dissolue their ranks Eliza left behind, To find the intention of her husbands mind. Annotations vpon the last Canto. WE reade in the Romane Festiuals: when any marriage was to be solemnised, the parents of the parties, or their friends were accustomed to bring forth a faire Table of ci∣tre, curiously engrauen: Vbi fercula optimis delicijs assluentia ocare assucrunt. — A song of Hebe deified. Hebe (as the Poets faine) was Iuoes daughter, and made Iupiters cuppebearer▪ before he fell in loue with Gannimedes: shee is called most properly by the Poets— dea Iuuentutis the Goddesse of youth — Vide Ouid: in Metamorp. Woere on a row the sacred Muses sate. Clyo, Callype, Melpomene, Euterpe, Polybymnia, Erato, Vrania.— of are Soanimphs. Nereides a Nereo appellatae. As the Naiades be deriued from Nais — a Nimph of the Fountaines. Which bee distingui∣shed into 3 sorts by the ancient Poets — in Nereides—Naia∣des —Et Pieries. Nereids circa maritimos locos, Naades cir∣a riuos & amaeniores sontes, Pierides circa montium sublimiores vertices et spiracula versatur. And so Gerson (in his descripti∣on of beasts) diuides the seueral and distinct kindes of Satires into three sorts: Satyres, waich frequent woods, of a rude. sauage and inractable Nature, which sometimes (more pro∣perly in my opinion) are called Syluanes, quia i syluis & soli∣udinibus asperioribus vitam colenes. Faes, all which tooke their name from Faimus, sonne to Picus, and father to Lati∣nus: agrestem viam agunt, rapinis & violentia corum necessi∣tai
subuenientes. And Dryades a Dryade Hyppolochi filio du∣cta. But of these you may reade more amply in the frag∣ments of Lucilius▪ and others, whose exacter wits haue beene craploied about affaires too impertinent: bringing in the clowdes speaking with Aristophanes, planting their inuentions vpon aerie foundations. They sang a song of Neptune to the shore. —resonantia littera reddunt carmina carminibus.— Vid: fabulam Hlis vnius de Herculis socijs, qui in Ascanium Flumen missus, vt aquam ab eo hauriret, deflexo capite precepitius procidisse fertur, &c. — Next those admired Graces tooke their place. Aglaia, Thalia & Euphrosyne who had the power to bestow 3. seuerall gits: loquence, inuention, and sound iudgement, vpon whom they pleased. —In heauens high Hierarchie. Caeleste imperium in altissimum dignitatis cumulum prouectum; quo nihil sublimius (ait orator) vt altius extendatur, aut clex gautius, vt maiorem in se splendorem amplectatur &c. —You are the nectar riers. —Nectar vt ingenium. Nectar and Ambrosia the food of the Gods. —The Cadmian muse. Cadmus was sonne to Agenor, King of Phaenicia, who sent by his father to seeke Europa his sister whom Iupiter had stolne away, and no finding her, durst not returne, but planted himselfe in Baeoia, where he erected that most famous Citie Tebes: he was excellent in the composition of all measures, but most addicted to prose: wherein he so exceeded, that his filed and elegant stle was made as a president to after ages; he was thought to bee the first who euer writ in prose, but I can hardly assent to that opinion: but rather I could admit of their assertion, who affirme him to be the first that reduced the Phenicians from their barbarous and impolished kinde of
discourse, instructing them in a more exquisite forme of speaking. — Mouing the Syrens with the warbling voice. Syrenum voces et Cyrcis poula nosti etc. Horatius lib: 1o Epist: ad Coll: The three daughters of A helous nd Calliope. — If Phylomel wh her wofull note. Phylomela King Pandions daughter, whom Tereus raui∣shed: deploring her owne calamitie vnto her sister Progne, who was wife to Tereus. — Vnto the Amyclean lyre. Aryon — being born in Amycle a Citie of Laconia, takes his name of the place of his birth by a Tropical clocutiō, Metonim. Brought from one stem so many vertuous The vertuous progessie of Elza, which is paralleld if not superior to the best reputed families Septentrional. — Aske but the muses they will tell yee how? Musa — Quas varijs cecinisse modis —iuuat. Nor if inuention oth Eliza please; Inuention which is the producer of things true, or such things as haue a resemblance of truth: giuing a probable reason of whatsoeuer is spoken or produced; —When the young men of Fonia had haled out that goldē Tpode, which was to be giuen to the wiest man of all Greece▪ it was brought first vnto Thles, then to Slon, & so cursiuely vnto all the wise Sages of Greece: by which was imploied the moderation of their desires, rather disesteeming their owne iudgements, as vnworthy of such an inestimable treasure, then attributing any thing to themselues, to be thought wise in the eye of the world. This by an Analogie is inferred by the modest and continent affections of Eliza, who rather disparageth her own worth, that she may auoide the censure of presumpion, then by the passe of titularie praises, to vendicate the least honour, as a dependance of her merits. Vnde Senec: in Oedipod:
— Nec pressae graui spiritu antennae preman: tuta me media vehat vita decurrens via. — Twixt Tytans torch and Thetis pitchy night Tytan is vsed for the Sunne: he was son to Caelum and Vesta. Ths daughter to Nereus God of the Sea, she is taken for the night. —Mare pro cubili noctis. Allegor: Vertues defendor in this Iubile. This Iubile was continued in auncnt time, and celebrated euerie 50. yeere but this word signifis a priuate solemnitie, (in this place) consecrating their vowes to Hymen the God of marriage, o paean: &c. Aglai seemes to reprehend Eliza for her too much mo∣destie, mouing her to sute her thoughts to the present time, wich Seneca shadowes out in describing the habites of both the conquerour and conquered in these wordes. —Noscere hoc primum decet quid facere victor debet, victus pati. Eh odorous flower, and blossom redolent. Salutaria quaedam, citra tactum gustumne Odore proficiunt. A briefe epitomising of the cheerefull springtime: illustra∣ting the season by her habit. But as true makes impatient of delay. Vid: Horac: 1o lib: epist: epist: ia. — Vid: Catull: 1o. lib. Eleg. Eleg. 30. Et Ouid: in Epist. ad Hippolit. Whose fragor pierst the tender branches — Horat; Carm lib. 2o. oda xa. Or as the earth once pining now reuerst — Mutat terra vices & decrescentia ripa Flumina proteret. —Then Ioue to Swanlike Lda. Ioue who fell in loue with Leda, wife to King Tindarus: she ws transformed into a Swan, bringing footh two egges.
of the one whereof came Pollx and Hellen, of the other Castor and Clytemnestra. — Iealousie. Iealous of Tindarus her husband, who was prone enough to apprehend each occasion of suspect. No dirges now. —&c. These verses haue reference to Elizes profession-making dirges, Trentalls, and Romane Anthems no lesse pernitious to her owne purity (which if not blasted with this soile, were most eminent) then commodious to her carnall or Ghostly father. In fruitlesse growth a slower thou dost remaine. At eruor in store mutabitur x. lib. Metamor. Like Mirrahs daughter or Hermione. Venus was daughter to Myrrha: there were two Hermiones the one daughter to Mars and Venus; The other daughter to Menelaus and Helena, who being betrothed to Orestes, but married to Pirrhus, Oresies to reuenge his wrong, slew Pirrhus and tooke Hermione to wife. — For no fatall ower, Can raze that fort thats kept by diuine power. Here she intimates the cause of her transmutation not sub∣iected to any perill, nor opposed by any power either exter∣nall or internall. The Rheians thought them secure, because the tombe of Alx was erected in their region. Octa by the dispersed ashes of Hercules conceaued no small pleasure: being perswaded the encrease of their commerce with forraine countries pro∣ceeded from the happy possession of his monument. The like we read of the vaine conceipts of the Romanes after the transportance of their Palladium into Italie, re∣fering the whole state, welfare and preseruation of their City, publike and priuate affaires vnto that poore helplesse monument; which is pretily shadowed by S Augustine in 1, de Ciuitate Dei: where he vehemently seeks to demolish
and recalcinate the whole Fabrique of the Gentile Idolatry and that by humane and morall reasons▪ expostulating the caue why they should repose such affiance in them, whom hey haue found so impotent euen in their owne affaires? For (saith he) if they could haue performed any things▪ t is likely they would haue done their endeuour, when those in∣habitants which adored them, that people which with such reuerence admired them, was not onely quite extinguished, but their Temples polluted, their ancient monuments defa∣ced, and themselues contemptuously expulsed. But this was the blindnes of that age which could not dis∣cerne of that inward beauty and splendor of the mind bued with a precipitat iudgement made them their gouernours. their Tutelares Dij, their protectors, that needed supporters to staine themselues. But I haue made my digression too am∣pe: especially in a tract which rather concernes pastorall E∣legio, then such heathen Prodigies. For lust's not loue since loue is pure andiust. A maine opposition betwixt loue and lust: the one sensuall, euer enclined to that which yeelds temporary delight: th other plants her affections vpon a moe firme groundworke, a sincere and a spotlesse intention. To read of those chost and honorable matrons of Rome, who haue excelled in all purity and integrity (as far as was possible for the pagans to attaine vnto in perfection): as Coeli the mother of Gracchus, Portia wife to Brutus, Cleobu daughter to that wise and prudent lage Cliobalus: Sulitiae wife to Calepus, and that memorable Paula wife to Seneca▪ These knew the perfect forme of loue, and were well read in the precepts of chast imbracements, but far from the last conceipt or apprehension of lightnesse: but who shall con∣trariwise read of the insatiable disposition of Messalina, the licentious affections of Oristilla, the incestuous desire of Phe∣dra, and the impetuous fury of Medrea, shall presently cōceiue a maine repugnance (or contrariety rather) betwixt loue and
lust: sith by the one, be commonweales in all vnity and con∣iunction of minds established, wholesome and beneficiall lawes enacted, the bounds of kingdomes dilated, and aswell priuate as publique affaires with due order and administra∣tion managed. For loues definition according to the opinion of Aristotle (of all Philosophers most profound) and Plutarch (of all moralls most elaborate) is this: Loue is impartiall, yet of reason forgetfull, she grounds her affection vpon vertue, deeming that which is impious, vnworthy of a mind gene∣rous. But lust the bane of flourishing Empires: the distastfull and vnsauory fruits whereof Troy▪ long since hath experience of by a Helen, Spartae by a Scedesa, my be thus defined: she is respectlesse of the meanes, so she may attaine the end: her aime is to satisfie her owne exorbitant affection, which to gaine she is secure of her owne ruine, countries desolation. The present discourse which I haue taken in hand puts me in mind of that prety and pithy induction of Lucian, bringing in Venus, demanding of Cupid for what cause he vseth to wound with his virulent dart of loue Iupiter, Neptune, Apollo Iuno, but exempteth Pallas, Diana, and all the Muses from the chaines of his seruile affection: and he answers her: when I come neere Pallas she threatens me, and opposeth my plea∣sures which I am wont to instill into the minds of men: the Muses they are imploied insacred labors, continual exercises to the end they may attaine to the perfection of their ende∣uors: Diana she frequents the woods, and retired solitudes, neither caring for loue nor the instructions of loue: she ob∣serues a restraint in her selfe and in her followers: she is too skilfull in shooting to be shot by Cupid. The inuention of Lucian is pleasant: prosecuting his whole discourse with such apt and accommodate words, that I could not chuse but take a modest digression, to describe the powerfull effects of labour, the soueraigne remedies of good and vertuous studies against the obiections of such, who
rather repose in security to inuert the violent assalts of car∣nall and inordinate desires: whose opinions resemble those of Aristo, Pyrrho, and Herillus, whose mature censures, haue been thought vnworthy of all phylosophicall conuents. We r the least secure, when in our owne iudgement most se∣cure: and no malady more incurable then that which is in∣sensible: the whole progresse of this subiect▪ as it may cōfirme it selfe, by infallible reasons, grounded on the fortresse of diuine and prophane traditions: so the Poet seems (as one who had no little experience in the schoole of vanity) to con∣clude the generall assertions of all with this Epiphonema: uting his institution vp with a caution, his caution with a medicine. Otia si ollas periere Cupidini arcus. Contemplae{que} iacent & sue luce faces. Take away sloth, and Cupid cannot shoot. Thou maist contemne him for his fire's put out. Brds take their perch and sauage beasts their den. Nature hath ordained that euery creature she hath made, should be refreshed with some moderate rest. Labor is sweet after rest and rest is a confirmer of labor, the one without the other would make vs dissolute, the one without the other would make vs effeminate. Sleep is but an Image of death ath the Poet: Vergill calls sleep a neer kinsman to death: hauing such consanguinity with sleep, that some of the an∣cient Philosophers (haue tearmed it in plaine tearmes a fle: this moned (without all question) Theodorus that mirror of magnanimity, a philosopher of excellent discipline, to be so respectlesse of death, as to despise the menaces of a cruell tyant and when he thought to adde this as a greater punish∣mnt vnto him, that none should bury him: what answerd Theodorus? quod ad sepulturm pertinet o te inptum si putas in∣tenesse supra terram an infra putrescam; here was resolcion in an Ethnicke, making his expectance the gole, at which he aimed, his threats (tyrants ensignes) in which he gloried to
vanquish an implacable tigre at his owne weapons▪ — And had ascended vp Parnassus top. Parnassus a mount whereto the muss vsed to resort▪ we haue three mountaines renowmed for Musicall celebrities: being called by the Poets Musaea solennia dutum. The solemne or Sacred recluses or habitations of the gods: for thereto they v∣sed to descend to heare the alternate compositions (for such please ther best) of the muses. Moderne examples may be produced of most exquisite lyricks, who enstiled themselues inhabitants in the Flowry mountaine Pernassus, as Theano daughter to Metaponus; Zenobia the Queen of Palmyra: Argentaria Pollia wife to Lucane who is said to haue been a fellow helper in all his compositions: euen in the heroickst measures which he euer compiled. Edesia of Alexandria Corimathea who is reported to haue excelled Pindarus that famous Poet in apt and consonant cade ces▪ yea contending with him fiue seuerall times for the coronet or galand, which by the censure of the most approued Judicials was giuen (as of desert) vnto imathea. Theodosia daughter to Theodosius the yonger, meited great commendation for her laborious dimensions, no lesse excel∣ling in her owne inuentions, then in extractions from others: reducing the fragments of Homer into centons, with many other works of no lesse memory bearing yet her title in their Frontispice. &c. —Hight pure Castalius in Dianaes sight. Castalius a fountaine issuing from Parnassus, the streames whereof tropically be taken for the influence of poesie. The Muses be called Castalides per Sycedochen. Et vos Castalis fonte sorows &c. —Delia would accompt. Delia or Diana, so called of Delos an Ile of the Cyclades, boss∣ded in with the Aegean sea, here the Poets saigne Apollo and Diana to be borne.
—Now the ioyfull Bride Had of her Bridecke to the Muses giuen. Pliny relates of these solemne vses, obserued in ancient time: as the Cakes or Wafers consecrate to Hyme, with many ce∣remonies, as the aspersion of salt, to signifie vnto vs, Nuptialls should be seasoned with a relish of sobriety. The bride to be caried into the house (after her mariage rites were solemni∣sed) to intimate how vnwilling she is to leese the inestimable gem of her virginity, with many other obseruations which be more fully recorded in Ludouic. Viues, in his instruction of a christian woman. The like we read, in the Antiquities of Ae∣gypt, whose Pagan customes deserue no lesse memory then admiration for their exactnes in all moral celebrities tempe∣red with incredible modesy. These Annotations may be no lesse fruitfull to the vnipe Poetaster, then ocrates glasse was to his Scholers, or Cleanthes Table to conuey the proper & peculiar inuentions of poesie (by a plaine method) to euery docile and apprehensiue wit. Let such as read these few collections approue of my ende∣uours, who haue euer bended my intentions, to waine this age from her infancy, and with the Elephant to induce them to wade into the depths of profounder mysteries, alwaies making this my impressa. Stare est obstare caeptis. But since the brookes of Helicon were troubled with euery obscene foote; This admired Art hath beene much obscured, not because her profession is ill, but for her pro∣fessnts, which re either ignorant, (which sort is more par∣deable) or peulant of all sorts must detestable, in ma∣king Pernassus a stew, and the Muses harlots: arrogating to themselues the names of Pandars, by the scurrility of their owne inuentions: but such pregnant wits are ill bestowed on such petulant braines, whose imaginations neither pro∣duce profit to themselues, nor to their country to be esteemed aboue themselues▪ but depraue many blooming wits (who the sooner budded the sooner blasted) conceiue more de∣light
in their lasciuious subiects then in tracts of greater con¦sequence. Which Iuuenall handles more fully in his foure and wentith Satyre, accommodating his discourse wholly to the instruction of youth. Three kinds of these there be which deserue reprehension: The first, time-obseruing Poe  sooth vice, and bolster their patrons errors. Such was Aristobulus, whose works when Alexander heard to be far aboue truth, though Annalls of his owne memorable Acts, yet he threw the booke ouer into the riuer Hydaspis, saying, he was almost mooued to send Ari∣stobulus after: a good caueat for clawing parasites. The second sort I propound as opposite to the first, inuectiue Satyrists sharptoothd Epigrammatists: Eupolus was such whom Alciby∣des threw into the Sea Aegeum, for representing him (and that with intollerable bitternesse) vpon the publique Thea∣tre: adding this to Eupolus throwing him ouerboord. Thou hast often drowned me vpon the Stage, Eupolu, I will once drowne thee in the Se. The third venereall lyricks, who descant on their mistresse proportion, aptly epitherising her symmetrie, with such im∣modesty, that if Ouid was exiled for his licentious writing & that by a Heathen, Epicharmus for composing one vnseem∣ly song, and presenting the same to the Queen of Sparta, was doomed to no lesse punishment: much more deserue they to be excluded all flourishing commonweales, writing that which confers no lesse detriment to a well gouerned state, then effecy to such whose minds should be exercised in more viril actions. Wherfore when Plato vnderstood that the manners and dispositions of men were much corrupted by the Theatrall profession (or rather prostitution) of Poets, he explfe them all foorth of his common weale, leauing it to be gouerned by phylosophers, the grauity of whose iudge∣ments discerning right from wrong, might diiudicate accor∣ding to their knowledge. But the licentiousnes of the Poets in Patoes time may be
a reason, that his censure was so vniuersall; more modesty becommeth these times: nothing (of what subiect soeuer) is commendable in prose, but may retaine her lustre in verse: yea more exactnesse of measures draw attention, alwaies shutting vp our labors with a modest accent: non expectamus hea tri applausum. Plaut. But I haue extended my bounds further then I purposed: supposing no discourse more suting either with argument of instruction or poesie then that which is succinctly contracted. I will therefore proceed. A description of the Morne. AVrora sending out his tresses faire, Garnishd the earth with his resumed light, Bedewed moist with her impearled haire, Deposed horned Luna queen of night, And all the twinckling stars which did appeare By Phaebus iuory coach are put to flight, Thus doth the Sun dethrone the watry Moone As high estates the lower do put downe. Downe to the water doth the Moone descend, There to repose till Sol had run his course, Vp from the sea to earth doth Sol ascend Seeming anew to renouate his force: The Suns beginning giues the moone an end, This leaueth worse for good, that good for worse. This sends her lustre to th'Adriatique Seas, That takes her place among th'Antipodes. The pitchy vale of silent night thus drawen,
When labor rubs his eies and shakes of sloth, Being vnto the lower regions gone, Aurora represents these louers both, To a faire tree, broad branchd that fruit brings none Yet makes a shew of fruit as others doth. Which he awaking sees, applies the ends Vnto himselfe, whom thus he reprehends. The pensiue thoughts of Gasti∣lio, in Sapphycks. ROuze vp thy spirit, (creature most inhumane) Fix thy contentment on Elizaes beauty, To which the wood gods tied are in duety. Shame fall a coward. How many Hero'es haue adored her Image, Passing a torrent of approaching danger? More then Alcides for a Deyanyra Ere made aduenture. Let Hymenaeus who was euer present, At thy solemnizd risons be graced, With an eternall monument of glory, Leaue to be shame fast. Shame may confound the shame to after ages, To let a cheerfull virgin lie beside thee, And yet do nothing: worst of ills betide thee: Learne to be wanton. Natue hath made the to her owne dishonor,
To loath that subiect which she first created, To yeeld thee comfort shall her worke be hated, By thee reiected? Art thou composed of an humane substance, Flesh, blood and sinewes, to refuse a pleasure, Which far exceedeth store of earthly treasure. Foole be more hardie. See but the fishes, how one loue another, Male with the female generates together, What pure affection doth appeare in either, Wonder of ages. See the small Iuie, with her Iuy branches, How she the poplar flowrishing imbraceth, And as a spouse his spousall honors graceth, So is she graced. The sauage tygre, who frequents the mountaines, Loues to be loued, is by loue subdued, And with his louers presence is renewed. Loue is a loadstone. For as the loadstone doth attract his iron, And with embraces shews his loue vnto it, This faire resemblance shews as if he woed it. Stones far exceed thee. The liquid regions ioine their power together, And those foure diuine elements adhering, Seem as if all together were conspiring. Equally mouing. The crauling serpents in their kind coiting, Viper to viper in their generation,
Shewes how dame nature in their propagation Bred them for breeding The birds that houer in the skie aboue vs, Will (if thou marke them) to affection moue vs, Males loue their females, so our femal loue vs. Mates would be mated. Obseruations vpon two precedent verses, deduced out of Magyrus in his Physickes. —For as the load stone doth attract his iron: Magyrus in his physickes calls Iton, Pabulum magnetis, the fewell of the Magnete. Ferri attractio impeditur presentia adamantis. Occulta quadam antipathia: ibid. Viper to viper. Alcyatus in his Emblems: Pliny in his naturall history: pre∣morso capite maris semen concipiens vipera: dum parit (proprio partu) vita priuatur. Officiosa alijs exitiosa suis▪ Alcyat. Quicquid parit, curam habet eorum, quae parit. Philos. axiom. A Threnode occasioned vpon the Authors discontent: in that he loues yet cannot be respected: with a continued Hymne or Acrosticke sonnet best sorting with his amorous passion. ETernall anquish torment to my brest, Languishing horror, euer scalding hote,
Imperious Queen that seeks thy loues vnrest, Shaken with tempest in a crasie boate. Anchor of comfort let me leane on thee, So shall it well goe with my barke and me. Beauties faire dasie, honor to thy maker, Endu'd with natures faire admired treasure, Throne of a goddesse, chastities partaker, Helme to my ship, the onely port of pleasure. Bles'd for thy feature and admired euer, Alwaies abiding fresh, defaced neuer. Sapphicke. Rest to the vnrest, shadow of reposure, To shade the weary from the parching sun shine, O faire Eliza, blest is that enclosure, Nature hath lent thee. O deere remember but what solemne vowes, What vowes, what protestations in that groue, That groue, that graue which yeelds more pensiue shows Vnto my teare swoln eies, then euer loue Can make amends for: O remember me And what pure hests I dedicate to thee. Euen in that garden clad with bitter sweets, For what soere was sweet seem'd sowre to me, With what faire words, what promises, entreates Proceeded from my mouth to purchase thee. Yet thou vnkind: (vnkindnesse is a sinne) To loue that star-dazd Nimph, that loues not hm
Perhaps some words (as vndiscreetly spoken, As god ot simple soules do meane no harme) Made your first bonds of fancy to be broken, So as my folly might your wit forewarne, Not to respect fond vowes which do proceed, As idle talke from some phantasticke head. O let me call your selfe to record here, Whether such semblance of my feigned loue, From time to time did euer yet appeare, That you should your affection thus remoue? O answer me deare loue, O be so kind Whom you'l not loue to satisfie his mind. O thou wilt say I neuer fancied thee, I cared not for the place where thou abode, I tooke no pleasure, no felicity In thy discourse: loue where it is is shewd: O argue not so roughly, for you know, Of loue I neuer made externall show. But if your image be not in my brest, Which I will carry still in spite of fate: Then let me neuer reape that sacred rest, That mansion of delight, that glorious slate. O be more kind let that same loue I beare, Vnto your selfe, more ioifull tidings heare. Alasse how many weary toilesome nights,
aue I tost to and fro, withouten rest? Affrighted with such sad disaster sights, As these short lines can no way make exprest: And what's the cause I cannot rest, nor sleep? Because thy beauty doth mine eie-lids keepe. For when they would be shut thou keeps them ope, Making them looke vpon thy image faire: As if amazd to see that glorious cope With which the Spheres of heauen may wel cōpare And therefore puts mine eies to double paine, In opening them, and shutting them againe. Oft haue I dreamd, I did possesse my loue, Rapt with a passion of a fond conceipt, Close were my fences: none of all could moue Their sencelesse numnes: but like seruants waite In all obedience both with tooth and hand, To heare what thou their mistres would cōmand This golden slumber, slumber of delight, Fo more content such slumbers yeelded me, Thn any food I tasted: or the sight Of my obiect, saue the sight of thee: Which slumber past and looking all about me I was perplexd to lie alone without thee. And yet no wanton or lusciuious thought, Did euer moue me for to wantonise,
For though that shrine of thine was long time sought It was that I thy shrine might eternise, That so our loues eternisd both together, What chanc'd vnto the one might chāce to either But I am lauish in confounded loues, And weaues a web for chast Penelope, But two for Lais: Venus milke white doues, Transport my erring sences; and agree So to obscure the pallace of my soule, That what was pure should now be passing foule. Doe not beleeue such vipers as infest With poisoned breath the glory of my name, I vow to God that I haue lou'd thee best, And haue been ere respectiue of my shame. Let heauen and earth my mansion both remoue, When I do soile thy bed with forraine loue. O what vnfruitfull members were those spraies, That nourishd Serpents in their flowry shade, And fed our rooted loues with long delaies, Vndoing that which nature first had made: For this I thinke (if prophecies be true) Nature ordained me to marry you. Not nature but the diuine powers aboue, Which manage our affections as they please, Extracting out of hate the constant loue
Their minds contracted in the bonds of peace. Euen that same power (I thinke) doth so ordaine, That though you hate, you once will loue againe. The plants, the birds, the beasts, the fishes small, Are made to loue: see how the Iuy twines Vpon the ruines of a skaled wall, Or twist's about the wasts of fruitfull vines: Embracing them with branches spreading broad, Supporting them when grapes their science load▪ The louing Turtle loues her faithfull make, Whom if she misse, she pines away and dies, Abiuring mirth and pleasure for his sake Filling the crispling aire with dolefull cries: The stork, the Starling, and the sweer tun'd thrush Wil seek their makes through euery brake & bush The libbard, Tigre, Panther, beasts most wild, Can be subdu'd by loues sweet harmony, Transformd from sauage beasts to creatures mild, Oppres'd (as seems) with loues extremity. The cliuy mountaines, and the vales below, By ecchoes shrill, their loues pursuit doe show. The skalie fishes in their watry clime, Tast of the fruit of loue, each in their kind, Obseruing season, nature, course and time, Such relish pleasures in loues passions find▪
That languishing they fall away and die, When they'r depriu'd of loues society. If euery creature thus ordained be, For to obserue the solemne rites of loue: Dost thou suppose she hath exempted thee, No pensiue passions ere thy mind to moue? O be not so deluded: deare you know, You had a father, let your sonne say so. What is a iewell worth, if euer kept, Closely confind within the chest of earth? No more is beauty, when occasion's slipt, Gracing her Image with no second birth: O let this after age thine Image find, By some record which thou shalt leaue behind. And what record? a specious issue left, (Thy second image) to adorne the stage Of this terrestriall frame of worth, bereft If thou should die, surprs'd in blooming age: O then since beauty is both green and tender, It needs some for rosse, to be her defender. Let me that fortresse be, and ile support Those freeborne blossomes of thy tender prime, With thousand sugred kisses, and resort With mirh, and spikenard, daily to thy shrine, This will I doe, more would I gladly doe,
If thou my loue would for pure loue allow. Take these few lines and keepe them still with thee And reading them thinke now and then of me. The poets legacie to his admired Eliza: deuoted and bequested to her chastest thoughts. THy once deer friend but now despis'd of thee, Bequeaths vnto thy shrine, what ere is his: His wreath and lawrell, which for poesie, Was giuen by Clio: for that muse did wish, Much good vnto thy louer: euen like blisse Fall on thy sacred temples, beauteous queen, In far more plenty then to fore was seen. Next I bequeath, that little wit I had, Smal though it be, I haue entitled thine, That in thy waiward dumps perplext and sad, Some sparkling beames in thy conceipt may shine, Which thou wilt laugh at: and will call them mine: But I enounce them, writ they were by me, But for no end saue this: to pleasure thee. Then doe I giue, and in my gift bequeath, All those externall Trophees which I had: The motiue aier of my perswasiue breath And that small pipe which vs'd to make swains glad, And suage Tigres in their fury mad.
This straine of musicke Orpheus far surpast, For mine by all the sisters nine was grac't. This I bequeath vnto thy gentle ttch, Tutch it sweet queen, and it will answer thee, With far more musicke, yea with full asmuch As old Arion with his harmony, By mine, sweet Nimph, Dolphins shall carry thee Sirens themselues, and Satires at command, Shall bring thee safe vnto th'Elizin sand. Some little gifts, as cheese cakes, chesnuts sweet, With some oblations which I vow'd to Ioue, Shall be deuoted to thy tripping feet, That vsed to walke within the shady groue Of Helicon and Ida mount of loue. These little gifts did Mopsus offer mee, And with like will I offer them to thee. Two prety fragrant nosegaies did I send, Made of sweet flowers, which twisted vp together, Were giuen thee (as I wisht) from me thy friend, That thought of one might make thee think of either But thou too marble hearted mindng neither. Despis'd me and my gifts: which though but small Yet they were great to me; for I gaue all. Next I bequeath that earring which I had, But now I haue not, for I vow its thine,
And those short poems which my first age made, That I may say something thou hast of mine, For which though furies seeming to repine, At such a blessing as my works possest, Let them repine I care not I am blest. I had the shrine of Venus in my chamber, Which I resolud for to bequeath to thee, With rosie locks and haire as pure as amber, But there were some obiections hindred me, Which was the cause I did not send it thee. For though it was well colourd, yet it had, For some parts good so many parts as bad. The tincture of her face congeald in blood, Seemd too too vgly, for thy gracious eie, Her lips too great: her face too shamelesse showd: All which foule crimes, thy iudgement would descry (Thy piercing eies can priuat'st errors spie.) For Venus seems no Venus but a swaine, Some fub fac'd trull borne in the Thuscan plain. Next I bequeath a picture vnto thee, Which though lasciuious, yet beleeue me deere, It is not halfe so wanton as was she, Whose forme this sencelesse forme presented here, As by her liuely actions may appeare. It is that Myrrha beauties sacred mother, Who being dead for beauty left another.
Here may you see within your entire thoughts, The maze of loue, and labyrinth of lust, With what affecting meanes poore Mirrha sought To voide incestuous pleasure, which she must She must perforce sustaine: where she doth trust Her mellow youth; which thus incircled, rather Then she will keepe shee'll giue it to her father. He spouse and father, she both child and wife, He nipt with age, she with an iie pleasure, Thus he triumphs in his incestuous life Louing to gaze vpon forbidden treasure, Locking her vp least he perchance should leese her. Glad would she take a time for liberty, But shee's kept in by fathers iealousie. Thus in a spatious groue, an ample field, May you (deere queen) cull flowers of euery kind, First how a Nimph enforcd god wot to yeeld (A willing force) th'affection of her mind, Leauing the robe of chastity behind. This picture I will send you, you may take, This beauties statue for your beauties sake. For had not Mirrha been, nor Mirrhaes youth Youth had not flourisht in a Venus brow, Nor had her beauty come to perfect growth, Nor that sweet modest blush appeares in you, Could represent so eminent a shew.
Venus from Mirrha tooke her first beginning Mirrha from Cinyras incestuous sinning. Thus haue I made my finall legacie, And consecrated to your radiant beauty, Though not consorting with your puriry, Yet am I so deuoted in all duety That I could wish my poems so should suit thee. That with such passiōs they in fine might moue thee As reading these, these might enforce thee loue me. Annotations vpon the last Elegie. This straine of musicke Orpheus far surpast. Orpheus sonne to Apollo and Calliope was esteemed the skil∣fullest vpon the Harpe of all others: he moued (as Poets re∣cord) mountaines, tamed sauage beasts, infused life into sence∣lesse stones, trees, and forrests, by his admirable skill he brought his wife Euridyce out of hell, rauishing the infernall fures with his musicke: vpon whom our moderne Epigram∣masts (wherein we may no lesse glory, then Rome of her Martiall, Mantua of her Maro, Corduba o her Seeca, writeth thus: Orpheus vxorem raptam repetiuit ab orco: Duxit ab inferno femina nulla virum. Englished. Orphus his wofull wife brought backe from ell, Few wiues will vse their husbands halfe so well. Annexion. They'll bring them backe from heauen, and which is more, Bring them to hell, they neuer knew before. Thus far of Orpheus▪ some haue supposed, he was the first who found our plurality of Gods. which opinion was so generally embraced after by the Thracians, entituling him in their owne
Temples  but I refer that to the reading of the iudicious who perchance may distinguish of Orpheus: there being diuerse of that name, of which the most illustrious he seemed to be, of whom we now make mention, both for an harmonious touch vpon the lyre, and those solemne celebrities yeerely obserued by the Thracians in his memory. —As old Arion with his harmony. Arion a famous harper of Greece, hauing got great store of gold and siluer among the latines, and desirous to resalute his natiue country, embarked himselfe secretly in a Pirats ship: of whom and of whose wealth being made acquainted, they conspired together to throw him of shipboord: to be partakers of so infinite a masse of treasure, which they accordingly effe∣cted: where Arion by the force of his melody, stilling the surges of the sea, drew by his attractiue power, a Dolphin to carry him on his backe to his long expected harbor Laconia. He was also memorable for his skill in composing lyricke verses, or songs aptly made for his Hatpe. Some flub fac'd trull borne in the Thuscane plaine. Et solent campi Thurijs puell Solis aestiui radijs referre Ora▪ quae primò specie decora. Sol cremantur. Inhabiting vnder the Torrid zone. —With what affecting meanes poore Mirrha sought. Mirrha daughter to Cinrus King of Cypres▪ who vnnaturally was inflamed with lust towards her father: by whom she had Adonis. Whose end well sorted with such an incestuous birth. Of her the Poet speakes thus. Annit & renuit, modo vult, modo caepta parents Repulit, aud licuit, dixit, at illa facit. He spouse and father, she both child and wife. Ouid in Metamorph.Tune eris & matris pellex & adultera patris? Tune sorror nati, genitrixque vocaere fratris?
Forsitan aetatis quoque nomine filia, dixit, Dixit & illa pater sceleri ne nomina desint. In Elizam Tetrastychon. —Mirtus amat Venerem, Laurus Elizam. Lenta salix tumulum succingat, tempora laurus, Mirtus amat Venerem, Laurus & ipsa meam. In Elizam ob aquam corporis temperiem incredi∣bilem fragrantiam mittentem. Miti Eliza  & odoribus omnia fragrent, Omnia quae manibus tractat Eliza suis. In Elizam vt huius vitae initia vitae longè melioris auspicijs augeantur. Viuat & Elysios post vltima funera campos Aspiciat, laeta est tempore, laeta fine. No nuptialls now, no laies, no Hymens, pall But  poore shrowde I craue, and that is all. CANDIDAE ET EXIMIAE HERAE ET HE∣ROI NOBILI STEMMATE ORTAE, NON MINORI ANIMI QVAM CORPORIS PRAESTANTIA ORNATAE Do, dico, dedico, —Opera omina, omnia. FINIS. Errata. In the argument pag 3. lin 18. for Syreus r. Syrens. ibid. for raine r. ruine. p 16. lin. 16. for out r. on. p▪ 20. lin 4, r. ioyes with sadnesse. p. 29. l. 13. for aligine r. Caligine. p. 33. l. 7. for rest r. rest. ibid. lin. 12. for remore r. remorse. p. 41. l. 1. for Vesus r. Vesta. pag. 42. l. 1. for paued r. p and. p. 44. l. 15. for which r. with.
