4187 S114222 99849448 14596
THE FIRST PART OF Youths Errors. Written by THOMAS BVSHEL, the Superlatiue Prodigall. Luke 15.18. I will arise and goe to my Father, and say vnto him, Father, I haue sinned against heauen and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne, &c. Imprinted at London. 1628.
To the Honourable and right vertuous, THOMAS, Lord Windsor, my very good Lord. Excellent Peere, LIttle did I ima∣gine, or your Lorship ex∣pect, to see my name come vnder the Presse;
which as yet is to me a won∣der, so likewise it must needs bee to your Honour a mira∣cle, that knowes both my life and breeding, to haue nei∣ther language, Latine tongue, nor, vpon my salua∣tion, the helpe of any co-ad∣iutor; but as it is written those things which appear vnpossible to mans appre∣hension, Mar 10.27. are nothing to God vnsearchable wisedome. O∣therwise your Lordshi might suspect the Authour for I mistrusted my selfe, vn∣till
I had reade the saying, that God is able to make the dumbe to speake, Luk. 7.22. the blind to see, and the lame to goe; wherein he hath shewed the splendor of his diuine proui∣dence on me base and vn∣worthy creature, to see more clearely through my match∣lesse offences; for that now I constantly beleeue, there is no forgiuenesse without true repentance, nor no true re∣pentance without confessi∣on, contrition, satisfaction, and amendment; which
made me presume to patro∣nize the first fruits of my re∣tirednesse vnder your Lord∣ships name; as a legasie of my loyall dutie to your ho∣nour, preuention of others, and in my obedience to that good God, . 5.16. who requires an open confession, for a pub∣lique transgression. VVhere∣in if I shall verifie our Saui∣ours words to giue Caesar his due, at. 22.21. I must acknowledge vnder God your noble rela∣tion of a monasticke life, was the greatest inducement I re∣ceiued
from mortalist to∣wards my regeneration. So that if I haue mounted too high in sheltring my weake aboures vnder your Lord∣ships vertues; let me beg a fauourable censure, and attri∣bute rather forgetfulnesse to ngratitude, than my for∣wardnesse to presumption: for beleeue me (honoured Lord) had I not fortunately ist your faire hand before departure, my zealous fide∣itie was so mixt with the regs of mortalitie; that cer∣tainly
vpon my companion reuolt, Pro. 26.11. I had fallen like a do to his vomit and ruinated my owne soule. But thanks b to the diuine prouidence, by a shorter cut I haue met with contentment, ended my tra∣uels, discarded my pleasures and circled the earth. Fo Christ knowes my ambitio was neuer higher then  poore remote Caue or de∣sert Cell, where if these illit∣terate-deiected lines should reflect a likeing in you Lordships iudicious rea∣ding;
I am confident by Gods assistance, future en∣eauours might edifie o∣ers: especially when my eregrination shall vnder∣tand of your religious ap∣robation, whose honoura∣le opinion I esteeme more en mortall creature; not for at your noble apprehensi∣n exceedes all men; but by eason your internall fidelitie quals the best of men; which ccording to my simple udgement carries a greater enediction and clearer re∣uelation
of Gods fauou then all other vertues: how soeuer if the tributary praie of a sinfull Beadsman ca encrease your Lordships im∣mortall glory. I am confi∣dent God multiplies you honours daily. Your obliged and de∣uoted seruant THO. BVSHEL
To my Christian Brethren. GEntle Reader som∣what I would glad∣ly say in way of ad∣monition as alto∣gether example, for that the holy postle assures me I was not borne  my selfe, but for others; though u may perceiue I haue confin'de my rson from societie of man; yet be∣ue that I barre not the visitation of  man, but willing to edifie all men, farre as God shall enable my weke
abilitie, and their patience; hum intreating that the spectacle of y sinfull brothers miserie, may mort your fleshly desires, and take so m compassion of your selues, as to p∣uent future perils. I haue my rewa you your glory: otherwise the d∣ger's desperate, as mine is damna without Gods vnspeakable mer which my fairest hopes cannot as  beleeue he will so much remember  to forget his iustice. O then ge Sirs, if your owne consciences acc you, resolue to follow the one, and  the other; for assure your selues,  president of my fatall afflictions  be an occasion to condemne you at  day of iudgement, if you obstinat neglect the same. But why shou expect you will either read or m
e of them knowing the writings of r Sauiour, the laboures of Apostles, d whole liues of ancient Fathers, e cast aside as superfluous garments; hen a play booke is admitted to sse away the time: which, with in∣ard griefe I confesse, were my libra∣es; and, I feare, continue too much ur studies: yet for that my inuisible rments liuing vpon earth as Diues  hell, and can at any time resolue ose which doubts in the same, may  an occasion to extenuate your licen∣ous appetites, that Gods name may  glorified, your soules saued, and I nsatisfied. THO. BVSHEL.
The Contents of this Booke be∣ing the first part. THe Prodigall Sinners Confession The Prodigalls Petition The Prodigalls Affliction The Prodigalls Contemplation The Prodigalls Prayer The occasion of the Prodigalls reuolt from  world The difference of a publique and priuate liui together with his resolution The conference he had with a graue Diu before his departure to a monasticke life. His wofull experience of insinuating fl∣terers. The confession of his disobedience, with a tr relation of his Lord and Master. The Prodi∣galls aduer∣tisement concerning The hopefull branches of Vni∣sities The rights and profits belong the Church The contents of Mariage The crying sinne of murther The crying sinne of Pride The crying sinne of adulterie
To his louing Brother Edward Bushel Esquire. lomon sayth, He that couereth his sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall haue mercy. Prou. 28.13. IT is not vnknowne to your selfe nor the world, that I conti∣nued a prentiship the superlatiue Prodigal, either I am ashamed to diuulge, hen God himself commands vpon enalty of eternall damnation, Iam. 5.16. yet it
griues my very soule that euer I ga occasion to be recorded. But I ho this my irrecouerable follie will p∣uent future ages for falling into fearefull a danger; otherwise as th birth was miserable, so their dea will be lamentable: which to me w rather aggrauate my sorow, then  tenuate my torment, though in te∣porall affayres many bearers less the weight, and ease the surcharg sufferer, but in spirituall none ref∣sheth the oppressed; especially yo dissolute brother, who hath in a m∣ner searched the records of heaue for a President to make his title  hell vnquestionable: Exod 20. as you may t more perspicuously perceiue by the dreadfull following lines. O  dearest Microcosme in nature, wi
what vnwillingnes do I lay open my disobedience against the first Com∣mandement, knowing my own con∣science pleads guilty in the highest manner, for debasing his name, Essence, and Glory, below the de∣gree of a temporall Lord, a mecha∣nicke Magistrate, or pesant Iustice, in honouring them more with cap and knee, then his omnipotent per∣son that created me. But when I cast my eye vpon the second, there finde I a distraction of madnesse, though I haue not worshipped the molten calfe of brasse, iron, stone & the like; yet haue I done sacrifice to the image of liuing clay, with that adoration as I made the female sexe my godesses on earth, and left the re∣fuse of my time for the seruice of
him that made me: howsoeuer touch∣ing the third I so much prophaned the Deitie of his name, that I made it my familiar discourse, for which in iustice I am culpable of death. But as for the fourth I continually mixt my weake douotions with so many er∣ronious pleasures, that to my know∣ledge, I kept not one whole Sabbath for his gory: wherby I am debarred of claiming either loue, fauour, or mercy: but the course of perdition, which for surer violating the first, I was so sparing in shewing either re∣uerence or dutie to my parents, that I seldome payed any tribute as I ought, whereby I haue deserued not onely the shortnesse of dayes, but the losse of their fatherly blessings. As for the first thanks be to God, I haue not
ctually shed the bloud of any man, nd whether it were not more for eare of punishment by the decree of nan, then the law of God, I neither an say nor iustifie my selfe; but to ny remembrance am free from that rying sinne: howsoeuer for the sea∣enth, if I should deny the acknow∣edgment of that deadly sinne, the ynt actors in my lustfull recreation will cry out vengance on my con∣emnation: for we euer held it as a port of pleasure brought into the world by nature, and at the most va∣ued in the ranke of veniall sinnes: ut now it speakes death vnto mee, nd I feare, no comfort vnto them, which for the eight you know in my hildhood was guilty: so that I can eit her acquite nor accuse my selfe of
any mortall fact: and as for th ninth, I canot plead ignorance, but t my knowledge was neuer brough to the test before a seat of impartia iustice. Yet as I was, it is ten to on that I should haue proued more fles than spirit, more false than honest but certainly for the tenth I mu confesse my self guilty to all, either b thought, or act, with delectation  affection. Thus you see the ma∣row and sinnewes of the whole la haue I broken, which makes m liable to eternall torture, death, an damnation; God forgiue them tha were the occasion. Yet if the mult∣tude of these crying sinnes were ∣period of my transgressions, I migh haue hope by the death and passio of my Sauiour. But when I pond
on the barbarous and inhumane rriage vsed towards his mercies; it tinguisheth the light of comfort, our, or pardon, for God knowes am more worthy of death by his ath, then for violating he whole w of Moses, in that I haue cōmitted ortall sinnes against him that died r my sinnes; Heb. 12.25. by making the oanes and sorrowes in his passion e robe of shelter to my base wicked d detestable pleasures: for that I ar'd not prosecuting the life of my rsed offences vpon presumption of s mercies, not searing his iustice; or pittying his sufferings: whereby haue exceeded the fact of Iudas or e Senate of Iewes, for the one be∣ayed him but once, I a thousand es: the other crucified him out of
ignorance, I a million out of wilfulnesse What assurement (deare brother) ca be expected by me that am worse th those whom I haue named, but th dreadfull ruine of permanent perdit∣on. zek. 18. ccle 5. Yet you will say God is mercifu vpon repentance at the last gasp which cannot be denyed: so likewi my conscience tels me hee is iu which will not be contradicted. Mat. 5.17.18. Fo certainly without my repentance ∣quall my transgressions, the Churc may absolue me, eue. 18. but not assure m And I should vainly expect remissio by any ghotly fathers absolution,  I continue in any one sinne whi lieth in my power to preuent: Ioh. 3..6.  the greatest comfort of continuan in all my calamitie was the swe saying of our Sauiour, that himsel
d his Angels ioyed more at the nuersion of one sinner which ely repents then ninty nine righ∣ous. O with what an vnspeake∣ble happinesse was this cordiall erse to my afflicted soule; wherein ministred the application daily to fresh my sad heart and wearisome nses; but at last it proued bitter as all in operation and digesting. For hen I searched into the mistery of id sense, there I found it was ninety ine to one, that a wilfull sinner ne∣er truly repented; otherwise you ould make God ioy more in a sin∣ll wicked mans life then a religious godly liuer: which brought me into o fearfull a danger of desperation, hat had you or any other beene n eye-witnesse in the agony of
my perditious soule, it would hau made the flintiest heart soone choose to wrestle with a Lion then commit a mortall sinne a∣gainst the immortall God which created him. Yet after a long debat betwixt hope and despaire, the presi∣dent of Saul otherwise called Paul, d∣stilled into me the happines of hope by reason his palpable crimes refle∣cted some equality to my offences  but at last his patterne left mee in  darke Ecclips, for that they were er∣rors executed out of ignorance, Tim. 1.. no wilfully, and therefore obtayned re∣mission vpon his contrition. I the ministred to my deiected soule th mercies conferred on Mary Magda∣lene: uke 7.. yet notwithstanding small wa my reliefe, for that her conflict o
pentance did in a manner exceed others, and her transgressions but e of the seuen deadly sinnes. hereupon I applied the thiefe on e Crosse as my last refuge: but ere I saw apparant lesse shelter: for  the raysing of Lazarus from the aue was onely a miracle to shew at he was Christ the Messias; Luk. 23. Ioh. 11. euen  my conscience telles me, that the n paralleld mercy vpon the theefe, Mat. 26.38.  as preordained only for that houre  be as a witnesse of his wrongfull nominious suffering, and not any ssurement of safety for vs to build n. Thus being depriued (as you ay perceiue) from all hope in the ue of God by my disobedience, rom all mercy by my matchlesse resumption, and from all comforts
in malefactours by my superlati transgressions, together with inwa griefes of the ioyes I had lost: a the wofull exchange of heauen f hell, brought me into that despera extasie, as I fell suddenly on th ground in a trance, where diue iudgements of God reiterated to  memory, that were executed alrea vpon his dearest seruants for lesse fences: which closed all the facu∣ties of my body and soule into an o scure darkenesse: but thankes be  the diuine prouidence, that restore me soone after to my former tra∣quility: and hauing recouered a se∣sible feeling, my oppressed heart d∣sired to know whether his iudge∣ments were so seuere as my appre∣hension led mee. I suddenly ma
to my poore caue, God knowes th troubled thoughts; for my co∣tions were eyther drowning or cuting my selfe: yet those assalts asily repulsed by Gods assisting mission, with the president of Iu∣ and the like: but then opening  booke of the old and new Testa∣ent, there I found our first parent am, whom God gaue dominion the whole world, Gen. 3.17. yet for eating e apple forbidden though it was the intisement of another, hee and s posteritie were extinguished for er. Num. 20.27.33. Likewise Moses and Aaron notwithstanding they could obtaine y thing at Gods hands; yet for that ey somewhat doubted of the mira∣e promised by God, they were de∣tred for euer going into the land
of promise. 1. Sam. 15.17.18.23. Againe Saul whom  chose to be the first King of his p∣ple, was degraded of his dignitie,  giuen ouer to the hands of an e∣spirit, for that he did but reserue so certaine spoiles of warre, being co∣manded to the contrary. Leuit. 10.2. Besides suddaine killing of Nadah and Ab sonnes of Aaron for once offering ther fire then was appointed th The striking deade of Ananias  Sapphira for onely retaining so part of their owne goods by dece from the Apostles, Acts. 5.10. Likewise the iection of Cain and his linage fo∣uer straight vpon his murther. Gen. 7.10. ∣sides Beniamin the onely sonne of ∣cob whom God loued so dearely, Gen. 4.2. Iudg. 20.  for one sinne that was committed Gibeah vpon the wife of a Leu
od destroyed almost the whole be of men, women, and children; ith many other examples, which aring to claime any alliance of Iu∣es I surceased with repentance that I ad them. O my deare brother, that  presumptuous sinners had felt the ck of my torture at the same instant ey would haue confessed in their earts, that God is seuere and iust as e is infinitly mercifull: yet my con∣ience alwaies assured me hee neuer ft a sinner that desired truly to re∣ent, without a sinner forsooke him, hich was some ease to my surchar∣ed sufferings. But the arch-enemy f man continued his Rhetorickes nd applications of despaire, reuea∣ng alwaies to my memory these nd the like herse-like sounding pre∣sidents
of holy writ: if the righteo shall scarcely be saued, where shall  vngodly and sinner appeare? 1. Pet. 4.17.18. and iudgement begin at the house of Go what shall the expectation or end wicked men be? howsoeuer I dou∣ted not in the mercy of my Sauio but in my owne base and vnworth demerits; for that hee is certaine faithfull: Heb. 10.23. if I hold fast the professio of my faith according to the measu which he hath giuen me; yet wh with Satans assaulting, my sinn afflicting, and feare of not obta¦ning Gods fauour, it transformed  from what I was, to the portraiu of an Anatomy; as the Inhab¦tants neere adioyning to the say Isle can witnesse. For those tha came to visit me, out of charity pit¦tied
me, and I in Christianity grie∣ed as much for their ignorance, which being by his sacred plea∣sure brought to deaths doore, and readie to yeeld vp the ghost in a amentable spectacle betweene hope and despaire; at last there appeared spirituall-wise an appa∣rition of my own picture, the pro∣digall sonne, Luk. 15. without intermission to my soule and sences, which did reflect so much internall comfort, as a woman in the agonie of her paines, ioies to see a manchilde borne into the world, Iohn 16.21. and forgets her past sufferings; euen so the dailie contemplation of this cor∣diall parable restored mee to that height of happinesse, as it did more auert the dolour of griefe, sorrow,
and despaire, then all the felicity I receiued by presidents in the ol and new Testament: but when my conscience assured me the first part of his life I had acted to my eternall destruction, and that of necessity I must follow the second to obtaine my redemption, other∣wise it would prooue infortunate and fatall, which hauing ponde∣red vpon the imbecillitie of my owne nature, the allurements of the world, and continuall assaults of Sathan, I feard it would prooue too strict a captiuitie for mee to passe thorow: whereupon I plea∣ded, our Sauiour died for all sin∣ners, yet my conscience answered, it was for none but those which truelie beleeued him in their liues,
and vnfainedlie repented in their hearts, which made mee remem∣er the dreadfull saying of Christ himselfe, Rom. 9.27. Few are the number that should be saued. O affectionated Brother, that all my prodigall ex∣pences had beene transformed in∣to pious charities, my former plea∣sures into penitent praiers, and my vaine discourses into true confessions: then had I not liued a diligent slaue to Sathan, Iam. 5.16. but a dutifull seruant to my Sauiour: which, God knowes, now the neg∣lect of either so much sounds re∣probate as makes me descend with a dolefull heart and alleadge my birthright by baptisme. But like a soft aire it answered not elected by adoption; reiterating to my per∣plexed
thoughts the president  infortunate Esau, who found n place of repentance, Heb. 12.17. though he sought it carefullie with teares But when at last I read the feare full saying of our Sauiour, Mani were called, Mat. 20.10. but few were chosen O what an immortall wound  gaue me; for my decrepit hop enforced me to curse conception birth, & life, wishing the plague of Egypt had beene my copart∣ners, rather than those deceitful pleasures my companions, which made mee so incapable of creati∣on, redemption, and election. I thus continued in this wofull spe∣ctacle for the space of two daies, not caring to minister either rest, or nourishment to my wearisome
body, but did wholly contem∣plate on my forlornd estate, say∣ng to my selfe, How should I know whether I bee elected or not? The spirit answered, either by a good life or true repentance, which vpon examination was small comfort to me, hauing nei∣ther performed the one, nor ende∣uoured the other. Whereupon finding my selfe by the allure∣ments of Sathan, vanities of the world, and frailties of nature, brought into so desperate, wretch∣ed, and dangerous case, that if I did not forsake my selfe, there was no saluation, but damnation: not∣withstanding his death and passi∣on, which coniured mee by Gods permission, faithfullie to resolue
to discard all pleasures, doubts, scruples, or feares, and wholly de∣pend vpon the sweet saying of our Sauiour, Esay. 1.18. Though my sinnes were as red as scarlet, yet hee would make them as white as snow; if so be my repentance proceed from contrition of heart during life; o∣therwise I might feare, mistrust, despayre, for I should much rob God of his iustice in depending vpon his mercy, Ioh. 15.22. Psal. 85.10. and damne my soule with presuming on his fa∣uour, when himselfe protesteth they both kisse each other; especi∣allie his preseruation from so ma∣ny dangers in the world, and the assaults in this my conflict, hath made me resolutely to set my rest vpon the anchor of this hope,
that if neither inward griefes nor penitent praiers by the mercies of our Sauiour cannot attaine vnto the ioyes of heauen; I will striue to mitigate my torments in hell; but certainelie I am resolued ra∣ther to suffer death, then commit any grieuous or wilfull sinne: for I should accompt my selfe more accursed then either Heathen, Pa∣gan, Turke or Infidell, by how much my knowledge exceedes their ignorance, and his proui∣dence my basenesse, in exhaling me out of Sodome to Zoar, from an euill bewitching Court, into a de∣lightfull solitarie Caue, where no fraud, pride, nor deceipt inhabits. O my beloued Brother, if you or any other did but know the inesti∣mable
happinesse, which retired∣nesse bequeathes those that de∣pend vpon Gods prouidence, and are resolued to encounter tempta∣tion by reformation. I am confi∣dent the man liues not that desires preseruation of his soule, but would rather affect the solitarie continent life, then all the plea∣sures of Solomon. Though I must confesse the first two months were both fearefull, dangerous and de∣sperate: but after repulsing the vi∣lent allusions of Sathan by these generall pleas to all his assaulting accusations, alleadging, I both confirmed and acknowledged his words to bee true, that the wic∣kednesse of my life neither had, nor could deserue any hope, fauor
pardon; and that I confidently eleeued as he said, it were impos∣ble so many sinnes should escape npunished, hauing the same God  be iudge, which not onely crea∣ed, redeemed, and preserued, but nowes how opprobrious and ontemptible I haue beene to all s Lawes, Statutes, and Iudge∣ents, giuing credence to his ords from my heart, that euerie ilfull sinne should bee afflicted ith contrary particular torment, onfessing that Gods sacred iustice espected no persons, but rewar∣ed euery man according to his eserts; and therefore hee might est assured of mee when euer my Sauior was pleased to pronounce is sentence: for that I knew my
past life deserued none other, a as for future, himselfe warrant could merit no other. Yet in rega Gods vnsearchable prouiden gaue me life after so many inh¦mane transgressions, and bele¦uing the comfortable sayings  Christs owne words: those thing which are impossible to man, we no whit impossible to God, Mar. 10.27. f that he desired not the death of  sinner, but ioyes more at the co∣uersion of one offender, then nin¦tie nine righteous. Besides him¦selfe had made mee more capab of apprehending Gods hatred t sinne, seueritie in punishment, an his blessings presumptuously abu¦sed by my basenesse. So that  were a monster in nature, if eue
did more offend the Deietie of is sacred name. Heb. 10.26. Ioh. 15.22. For in commit∣ng wilfull sinne, I should bee onfident it would trench against e Holy Ghost, attributing, hee artly rewarded the prentiship of ny seruice in reuealing the naked uth of my wretched estate; pro∣esting vpon the faith of my salua∣ion, let him say what he would, ttempt what hee could, yet no∣hing should allure mee (by Gods ssistance) neither to despaire, nor ffend my Creator more, but lea∣ing soule, body, life and death, at his will and pleasure; acknowled∣ging my selfe, that if he had made me one of his number, I had iust∣ly deserued it; and if his infinite mercy saued mee, I must confesse
it were a miracle. Howsoeuer  would bee no longer disobedient for that might prooue ingratitud vpon ingratitude; I knowing what fauours God hath bestow∣ed, and now hee telling mee wha offences I haue committed, assu∣ring him, if hee were permitted to punish mee with bodily affliction and temporall crosses the mor I were certaine of spirituall com∣fort. Thus is, and euer shall con∣tinue my resolution by the helpe of him that made me; for before I had fixed my heart, soule and sences vpon this intire affection, neuer to be violated by any strata∣gemes whatsoeuer. I was per∣petually troubled with vnchari∣table thoughts, vnquiet feares, &
desperate despaires: but now I nde they are either lessened, or se I am carelesse of them: Inso∣uch, that my inward faculties re mollified with a sensible humi∣ty, to offer vp my morning and uening sacrifice, as a daily trib f contrition, that euer I did  end, and a trembling feare for to ffend; wherein one night aboue ll the rest I cannot chuse but im∣art the rapture of so much ioy, hat me thought my apprehension was transformed into another emisphere, yet durst not presume n his mercy for feare of robbing is iustice, by reason I could ne∣er attaine to so high a pitch of elestiall happinesse, but in a lo∣er orbe of teares and sorrowes,
to which I ascribe God the glo For when I my selfe was a co¦panion of others, those discipli posternes were as heathen gree to me, which now they proo my daily delights of recreation, y shall neuer be at quiet vntill I ha obtained the period of that form felicity, which if nightly watc∣ing, daily fasting, continuall pray∣ing, or corporall affliction, ca extract this vnparalleld comfor I will remaine constant, by th permission of God during life: o∣ly reseruing so much time f nourishing the faculties of natu that I may continue the longe But peraduenture some of yo lukewarme diuines will not ad¦mit of this life, though I am min
owne taskemaster: yet I hope you ill not build vpon the Theory  anothers opinion, more than e practise of your Brother, that inioyned to loue you as his own ule; howsoeuer for my particu∣r, may I neuer prosper in this my terprize, if all deuines should ake it not lawfull by thetorick, eech, or traditions from Adam, ey would not reflect the least ought of reuolt: for that I haue yned more knowledge, hope, nd comfort to my oppressed ule in this one yeere of retired∣esse, than fowre prentiships be∣re; yet I take God to witnesse, ere is no man breathing that weth a more greate reuerence  their function and doctrine,
then my selfe. But if his diui permission amplifies a blessing my second edition (as my hope depending) I will giue such an  sured satisfaction, that your hea soule, and sences shall say, God the author, and man subiect  palpable erronious errours.  the meane time following  president of holy Dauid, my tru is in God, and therefore I feare  what flesh can doe vnto me. Your Brother, though a desert Beadsman Thomas Bushel
To the high and mighty mer∣cifull Sauiour, God of Hea∣uen, and only Judge of Earth. The humble petition of thy distressed and deiected creature, the super∣latiue Prodigall. WIth trembling feare shew∣eth, That a poore Sup∣pliant hath offended the Deitie of thy pious Ma∣iestie, in what not, thats ill, with delectation of affection; whereby I haue lost the birthright of creati∣on,
preseruation, and redemption which my fairest hopes canno presume thou wilt breake th whole course of thy iustice, in o mitting so many crying sinnes t escape vnpunished. For that  must acknowledge with soule heart and conscience, if thou saue me it is a miracle: and if thou re fusest, it were but iust iustice; a¦suring my selfe in forbearing thy chastising affection, I shall eue despaire of thy mercy, and be con∣fident of permanent punishment for that the pensill of holy Wri which will not be violated, Heb. 12.5. Apoc. 3.19. hath plainely expressed, those whom thou receiuest, thou chastenest, and that their long laughing must be turned into bitter mourning, Ioel. 2.12. Luk. 6.25.
before they haue any true hope of thy grace, fauour or pardon. O then deare Mediatour! I beseech thee minister dayly on me thy dis∣cipline correction: Pro. 3. Iob 5. and when thou thinkest it meet, let my in∣ward griefe be my ioy, the agony of death my comfort: but if those will not penetrate my flintie na∣ture, to make mee glorifie thy vn∣speakeable blessings, and appre∣hend my base ingratitude; Grant mee sweet Sauiour a feeling inspi∣ration of torments due vnto the damned, that if then I may not without robbing thy Iustice ob∣taine by thy Mercie a share in thy sufferings; Yet I humbly pray thee, let me be a second Diues vp∣on earth; for admonishing my
poore Christian brethren to pre∣uent the like fall of so fatall a dan∣ger, and the rather, for that thou perceiuest offendours bee not so much terrified by thy iudgements pronounced in holy Writ; as they are mollified at the sight of mor∣tall creatures miseries. Wherein it makes me feare Sathan by thy per∣mission hath a more predominate power, then thou that createst them. All which I leaue to thy diuine Sacred will, and vnsearch∣able mercie; begging pardon for my bold presumption, or if thou please to make intercession, Mat. 8.8. and say Amen to my petition.
The affliction of a Prodigall. O Deare and Immortall God! I thy abiects crea∣ture haue so highly of∣fended thy Deitie, Essence, and Glory, in prophaning thy Name, abusing thy Blessings, and slight∣ing thy Sufferings, that I dare claime no priuiledge by thy death, no comfort in thy promises, nor no fauour from thy mercies: but the rigour of punishment, the wrath of iustice, and reward of the damned. O miserie of all mi∣series what haue I lost! thy Glory
that made mee, thy Sonne that dyed for mee, and thy Spirit that sanctified me. Is there a creature from Adam so wretched? was there a child conceiued from Euab more miserable? then I that haue lost the ioyes of heauen, and pur∣chast the fire of hell. O my birth life and death, I am wrapt in sor∣row, hauing small hope but in dis∣pairing, no comfort but in grie∣uing, nor any ioy but in lamen∣ting. O thou false heart and cursed senses, why were yee made to bring my soule in torture, and your selues in torment, to denie them will not auaile you, to ex∣pect pardon is vnpossible, to con∣fesse them will hardly mitigate them. O then deare Sauiour, see∣ing
I haue brought my selfe by sinfull presumption, to perma∣ent perdition: yet let mee beg at thy hands the agony of indiuidu∣all sorrow, which thou ordainest for the damned; that if then the spectacle of my deserued maladie cannot dissolue thy iustice into mercy, yet may mitigate my end∣lesse misery, and not die like a stu∣pid dog void of sence, knowing thou madest me the image of thy Creature.
The Contemplation of a Prodigall. MY God, Creatour and Sauiour of the world, was not I made thy image to serue and glorifie none other but thy selfe? How falles it out (deare Father) that I haue beene more contemp∣tible against all thy Lawes, Sap. 5. Sta∣tutes and Blessings, Ioh. 3.5. then a sauage beast? I cannot beleeue it procee∣ded from originall sinne, in that thy sacred selfe suffered for sinne; nor from my conception, Ezek. 33. for that thou desirest my preseruation;
but altogether by Sathans assaul∣ting, the worlds prouoking, na∣tures betraying, and my owne stiffenecked transgression. What reason then can my selfe or mor∣tall man conceiue, that thou wilt saue me, when I neuer truely ser∣ued, nor honoured thee? Art not thou a iust Iudge, Ier. 25. as thou hast beene a mercifull Sauiour? To plead weaknesse auailes not, wil∣fulnesse I dare not, nor wanting thy assistance I cannot. Where∣fore then doest thou giue mee longer sustentation, when thou knowest I haue deserued damna∣tion? Fxod. 9.16. Act. 4.27. Is it for that thou wilt ex∣ceed in thy mercies to increase my miseries? Or else are not my sinnes fully compleat for thy determined
sufferings? Why, thou knowest Sathan offended thee but once, I haue euer, they both obey and feare thee, I haue neuer. What madnesse then would it be in mee to presume that thou wilt breake the whole course of thy iustice for my sake? knowing in mine owne conscience I haue lost the benefit of thy redemption by my wilfull presumption: otherwise I might bee confident through vn∣fained repentance to haue assu∣rance of saluation by thy death and passion: which now grieues the intralles of my soule, in that I was such a cursed reprobate to crucifie thee who sufferedst on the Crosse to saue me: Mar. 10.7. so that accor∣ding to humane iudgement my
talent is eternall torment. How∣soeuer I bequeath the disposure of my deiected soule to thee, Rom. 9.15. which shedst thy innocent bloud on the behalfe of me. But why should I being so base a creature reason with thee that art my maker, knowing the clay ought not con∣test with the potter. For it is in thy power and not in mine, to make mee a vessell of honour or dishonour. Therefore in obedi∣ence to thy vnsearchable Deity, I will surcease all disputations, and endeuour to preuent worldly per∣turbations; that I may haue so much hope to be thy creature, as my beleefe assures mee thou art my Creatour.
The Agonie of a Prodigall. MY sacred Creator, and celestiall Father, didst not thou make me of running water and ruddie earth? Doest thou not see how Sathan assaults me? how the world insnates me? and how my owne nature betraies me? O my God how then canst thou but in pittie take compassion vpon me? knowing I haue no power to pre∣uent any of these precedent con∣spiracies, but by thy diuine proui∣dence.
Wilt thou then leaue mee to my selfe, that I might appeare worse miserable than the beast which perisheth? O be more cha∣ritable, for that thou madest mee thy image; cast but thine eie vp∣on mee, and turne not thy face from me; then trie whether thou wilt denie thy mercy vnto mee: were not, sweet Sauiour, my first parents sinners? Did not thy selfe suffer for sinners? and protestedst thou desirest not the death of sin∣ners. Shall then the iniquities of my onely offences blot out the re∣membrance of thy immortal mer∣cies? When thou art my aduocate, I the offender; thou my redeemer, I the debtor. Let mee not then perish for want of thy protection,
when it is not riches, nor honor, I would haue; O my Father, no! or releasement of my miseries I seeke; O my Father, no! or hea∣uen I beg; O my Father, I dare not presume, no! nor any thing I craue; but the increase of penitent teares fit for transgressors, and sor∣rowes due to sinners; O my Saui∣our, no! How then canst thou de∣nie me? when I sue for no more, but what thy selfe hath assured me? O my Christ! are these the eyes that haue displeased thee; let them receiue no light through thee: is this the heart, which hath dishonoured thee; let it bleed to death for thee Is this the flesh which hath offended thee? let fire be her fuell by thee. Are these
the bones which haue brought me woe? let them bee burnt, and borne no more. Or are these the sences which haue sinned against thee? let them be a liuing sacrifice to thee. O my God, I am rackt with griefe, that I cannot grieue; and perplext in repentance, that I know not how to repent. For to proceed after the worlds weake∣nesse, I suspect thou seest their wilfull ignorance. And if I fol∣low thy Gospels professours, I feare thou findst them full of scan∣dall, distraction, and worldly per∣turbation. What then (sweet Sa∣uiour) will become of me forlorne creature, that haue no reliefe? but sinnes to succour me, Sathan to assist me, and a guilty conscience
to comfort mee: without thy sa∣cred sufferings make intercession for me, and accept thy Saints ob∣lations for sinners to thee; I shall be forced to curse my conception, and wish my mothers wombe, had beene my tombe, to haue formed me a lumpe of flesh with∣out life, or any creature but thy image; for then had I liued accor∣ding to creation, and not liable to eternall damnation. Yet, most mercifull and immortall father, should my agonied soule suspect to suffer shipwracke, when thou guidest the sterne? or despaire and die, when thou art liuing? or curse her birth when thou art in being? O my God, rather let her taste the tortures of hell, then be depriued
of life, and lose her hopes in the ioyes of heauen, let then Sathan assay his best, and the wicked world her worst, my deiected soule hath set vp her rest in thee that made her to saue her; Lord I beseech thee to say A∣men.
The Supplication of a Prodigall. MY God, my refuge, my mercy, how dare I re∣member thy greatnesse, when the billowes of my crying sinnes haue raisd the wrath of thy Omnipotent person; who out of meere diuine loue to pious cha∣ritie, createdst me after thine owne image, redeemed mee being lost, and in a word gaue mee all I euer had; yet haue I so much dishonou∣red the Deitie of thy glory, that I made the pleasures of this life, my
Gods on earth, and now they are turn'de my tormenting accusers of Death; O Sacred Father, bequeath the plagues of Egypt for my ta∣lent, rather then this deceitfull world to my portion, which hath not onely bred me disobedient to∣wards thee that made mee, a trai∣tour to thy Sonne that dyed for me; but sacrific'de my owne soule to be the fuell of hell fire. O dead∣ly life of immortall death, what shall I tearme thee? the shape of a Christian, which without thy Sacred intercession for thy neuer dying mercies, I shall remaine quickened with the fiend of hell, to future ages for euer. O do not thou sweet Sauiour forget the pit∣tie of thy goodnes, though I haue
lost the dutie of my obedience; but grant the same fauour to me, thou gauest the thiefe vpon the Crosse, looke vpon the teares of my mise∣ries with the passions of thy mer∣cies, and if neither griefes, groanes, sighes, nor sorrowes can appease thy iust wrath: why didst thou make mee? wherefore was thy death? whom wilt thou saue? or art thou another God now, then when thou wert mercifull to the oppressed, a Father of the godlie, and an aduocate for the damned if they repented. O then enrich my soule with a diuine sorrow for my ioy, the agony of death for my comfort, that I may neither pre∣sume of thy fauour, nor despaire of thy mercie; but haue thy great
Name glorified, thy Sacred death satisfied, and thy poore forlorne sinner saued, Lord I beseech thee, say Amen.
¶ The Prodigalles Prayer. O Deare and omnipo∣tent God, I heere stand guilty of all the barbarous and inhu∣mane sinnes which Sathan can obiect against the cur∣sedst creature liuing. For I haue presumptuouslie committed more riots and offences, then either Hea∣then, Pagan, Turke or Infidell, besides treacherouslie made thy name a cloake for my owne vil∣lanie. Thus, deare Sauiour, haue
I liued a smooth factour for Sa∣than, to the vtter subuersion and depriuation of eternall felicitie, and purchased the reward of con∣demnation with endlesse miserie. Breake, O my big swollen heart, lest a thunderbolt from heauen preuent thee. Gush foorth into a flood of teares, thou Crocodile by nature, in being such a cursed re∣probate to forget thy maker, a Di∣uell incarnate for crucifying thy Redeemer. Ah sauage beast, could neither creation, redemption, nor dailie blessings mollifie my flintie heart to honour thee as a father, feare thee as a God, or loue thee as a Sauiour, but must so Iudas-like, sacrifice thy image to the ene∣mie, thy curtesies to crueltie, and
thy redemption to my dreadfull destruction. O indignation of the Almightie, fall not vpon mee, though I haue sowed the vngrate∣full seed of Plutarchs aire for Scor∣pions to bite my flesh, and snakes to sucke my bloud. Yet, most mer∣cifull Father, should my miserable soule despaire, when thy omnipo∣ten person died for deiected sin∣ners? Or can I presume to hope, seeing thou hast punished thy dea∣rest seruants for lesse offences? Neuer (O Lord) in my wretched selfe, but by the vnspeakable death and passion which is able to re∣leeue the sicke, heale the lame, re∣store the blinde, and helpe the di∣stressed to thee, I submissiue come; whose sacred wisedome knowes
that man is rottennesse, his desires vanitie, and life miserie. Wilt thou therfore shew thy strength against so poore a worme as man, that hath neither creation, preseruati∣on, nor habitation, but by thy di∣uine prouidence? O then, dearest Father, remit the execution of thy iustice; enlarge the liberalitie of thy mercie, and extend thy holie spi∣rit on me thy lost sruant, that I may neither curse my birth nor being, thou repent of thy creation or redeeming; to the end I might liue in thy feare, die in thy fauour, rest in thy peace, rise in thy pow∣er, and remaine in thy glorie. Lord I beseech thee say Amen.
To the Right Honourable WILLIAM, Earle of Derby. MY honored Lord I doe not know how far this my solitary life may trench into the displeasure of your Lordships graue censure. Therefore I thought best to re∣commend those generall reasons which were the occasions of my reuolt from the world: assuring your Lordship it was not the foo∣lish
fantasie of my wandring thoughts, Gal. 6. Pro. 18.13. but a serious considera∣tion of my former transgressions, with an inward meditation of the small time that God will stay for mans conuersion or euersion, made me bequeath the remainder of my daies to this priuate Cell, by your Lordships assisting permissi∣on. Yet peraduenture some will alleadge to your Honour, that this course of retirednesse is nei∣ther commanded nor commen∣ded; what others out of igno∣rance may obiect, fat bee it from your Lordship so to iudge. Phil. 3.6. Socra. scho. cap. 18. For it hath beene practised by the best sort of Christians euer since Christs time, with such precise and strict seueritie, as they did not on∣lie
resist all externall acts of sinne, but chastised their bodies with corporall affliction, 2 Cor. 6.5. which is ma∣nifest in the liues of the Apostles, by their much fasting, watching and praying Likewise Saint Au∣gustines conuersion, and Saint Ie∣romes approbation of Paul and An∣tony the Heremites, besides the discipline he vsed vpon his owne bodie; with manie other ancient Fathers, which for feare of being tedious, I omit. So that if these holie men were fain to vndertake such strait captiuitie for gaining of heauen, what punishment should I endure for preuenting of hell, 1 Pet. 4.17. whose whole course of life hath beene a race of errours: especiallie when the spirit of God dailie
knockes at my heart to prosecute the same austeritie: which giues mee a more cleare reuelation of Gods fauours, where now I finde the theorie so much to be true by practise, that I call God to witnes I am no more able to expresse the felicities I enioie, then remember the catologue of my past offen∣ces, let therefore other men thinke as they please of this alteration, 1 Cor. 4.3.4. it sufficiently contents me that the Saints in heauen reioyce at my conuersion. For God hath spo∣ken peace to my soule, my soule preacheth peace to my consci∣ence, my conscience sings a com∣fortable sweet All-haile to my sad heart: and should the world, the flesh, or the Deuill sound all their
most powerfull instruments to plucke from this my resolution, they may sacrifice my flesh vpon the worlds Altar, but my faith shal be so sure found hanging vpon the hornes of this Sanctum Sancto∣rum as my heart is confident that your Lordships former fauour conferd on me was preordaind to be a meanes of sealing your re∣demption by the death and passi∣on of our Sauiour, were your past transgression red as scarlet; for that I am bounde to acknowledge vn∣der God your Honours affable curtesie established my regenera∣tion, 1 Pet 4.8. and what the reward is in gaining a soule, Ioh. 5.20. beleeue not mee but the promise of Christ exprest in holy writ. Humbly intreating
your Lordship so farre to conti∣nue your respect, as when any shall question my fidelitie, aduise them to suspend their censure till the fortunate, fatall, tribunall day of iudgement; which will decide the question without malice. The rather for that each of vs were baptized with the signe of the Crosse, and both endeuouring to hit the same marke though with seuerall shafts. But if it should fall out to be knowne, that they them∣selues continue in any one wilfull sinne, your Lordship may boldlie giue no more credence to their language in points of Religion, then to a periured man in case of a triall. For as the Law will not admit of the one, certainlie God
will not allow of the other; whe the pensill of holy Writ confirms that the Diuell holds them as we by one sinne as by a thousand. 1 Ioh. 3. A which I leaue to your Honour graue iudiciall iudgement, an rest, Your euerliuing Beadsman, Thomas Bushel.
To the onely sonne and bloud of my owne body. BEloued: the Lord thy God hath com∣manded me to in∣struct thee; thee to obey me vpon pe∣naltie of eternall punishment, that wilfullie breakes the couenant; if my aduertisement agree with the pensill of the holie Ghost, other∣wise thou art free, I only bound; which to auoid the danger of my part, I haue, as God hath enabled my illiterate and humane appre∣hension,
bequeathed vnto thee by my wofull experience, a briefe diuine, and morall way, how to prostrate thy louing obedience towards God and man, for the su∣rer preuenting Natures frailty, the safetie of thy owne soule, Gods glorie, and the discharge of a fa∣thers dutie; that thou mightst not curse thy birth, I thy being, nor diuine prouidence repent of thy making; hoping the president of my late erroneous life, will cause thine to be religious; otherwise my iniquities will bee added to thy transgressions, though no ease to each of our sufferings. Let there∣fore thy internall faculties of body and soule be zealous towards thy Creator in keeping his Comman∣dements
with a trembling feare of violating the least, and a willing desire to performe them all; in so doing, thy mortalitie is sure to bee ratified with immortall glorie. Let his iust iustice euer go before thee, and his infinite mercie will not faile to follow thee. Let thy me∣ditations be alwaies vpon our Sa∣uiours sufferings; then thou canst not be so ingrate as to forget his blessings, nor neglect thy duties. Giue thankes to thy maker for thy nights sleeping, and morne wa∣king, with humble desire of his continuall prouidence for the day following; and at night call thy selfe to a strict account of what good deedes thou hast omitted; and what offences thou hast com∣mitted;
who were the occasions of the one, and neglect of the o∣ther, from such refraine, vnlesse thou canst command thy selfe, not they thee: but if they proceed from thine owne stiffenecked na∣ture, condole thy infirmity, cha∣stize thy iniquitie with continuall abstinency, vntill thou findst rea∣son and religion to master thy pas∣sion and affection; by this means thou wilt euer after sleepe in peace, continue obedient, and re∣maine in safetie: but on the con∣trarie, as thy conception was wret∣ched, so thy life will bee lamenta∣ble, thy death miserable, and thy torments ineuitable. Let therefore thy beleeuing faith bee grounded vpon the rocke Christ Iesus; for
that is the true Religion; the o∣thers are tost vpon the waues of time, proceeding rather from mens frailtie, then any setled veri∣tie. Yet lest thy conscience should be eclipsed, and thy continuance reuerted into the dreadfull danger of a lukewarme Christian, by be∣holding so many graue Senatours of seuerall Religious opinions; I haue held it expedient vpon my death bed, and according to my engagement, as the soule of mee must answer the same at the tribu∣nall day of iudgement, to present vnto thy internall spirits these re∣cited precepts. Let thy heart and conscience bee incorporate to the bodie of Christs vniuersal Catho∣like Church, performing so farre
as in thee lieth, all these prescripti∣ons, which he hath enioined thee to obserue, obey and keepe in holy writ; and when thy conscience, together with thy ghostly Father, approoues of thy inabilitie, to bee capable of the Sacramentall mer∣cie, make a true confession of thy life past, with an inward repen∣tant contrition, that euer thou didst offend, and a constant reso∣lution by Gods permission neuer more willing to offend: but suffer death rather then violate thy con∣dition; as afterwards to commit a hainous sinne, or wilfully con∣tinue in any other. This being zea∣loushe kept, God warrants thee saluation, who then will accuse thee? thy conscience cannot, and
Christ hath protested he will not, if thou doest thy vtmost endeauor to performe thy couenant: and as for mans accusation thou knowst hee is arraind at the barre with thee, how can hee iudge or con∣demne thee, when all his hope is vpon our Sauiours mercie to re∣deeme himselfe. But if afterwards thou shouldest wilfully continue repleat in any one sinne, thy con∣science reiterating daily the same, and yet wilt obstinatelie perseuere in hope of his mercy, I might iustly suspect Iudas receiuing, and feare thy damnation; when the pensill of the holy Ghost hath ex∣prest, He that sinneth wilfullie af∣ter receiuing the knowledge of truth, there remaines no more sa∣crifice
for sinne, but a fearfull loo∣king for iudgement. O then flesh of my flesh, let my present tortures preuent thy future torments; for I call God to witnesse I now wish one of my limbs had perisht when I consented to wilfull sinne, or re∣ceiued martirdome when I com∣mitted mortall sinne; doe not then perseuere in offending, nor delay thy conuersion, for I should sooner curse thy begetting, than ioy in thy being, or hope of thy atchiuing to Gods Kingdome. Trouble not thy selfe with pur∣gatorie, for feare of falling into the perpetuall punishment, but spend the remainder of thy daies in alms∣deeds, fasting, praying and the like, for the surer preuenting of
both, and gaining of heauen. Trust alwaies in Gods proui∣dence, then thy owne conscience will be sure to direct thee better then mens counsells; yet in spiri∣tuall negotiations, and how farre thou maiest trench into temporall affaires, without preiudice to soule or bodie. Be vigilant to ioyne al∣waies thy ghostly father in com∣mission with thy conscience, but let thy conscience bee of the co∣ram; for he cannot saue thee, the other may condemne thee, though he must answere it if hee either neglect or direct thee wrongfully; howsoeuer his tor∣ture will be no mitigation to thy torment. Obey the King to the losse of life, fortune, wife or fami∣ly,
but let thy conscience receiue no impression contrary to its own direction: for if thy soueraigne be vertuously giuen, he will neuer presse thee; if otherwise follow thy Sauiours words, feare not those that destroy the body, but loue and feare him which can de∣stroy both soule and body. Fight not against any Nation that doth baptise with signe of the Crosse and beleeues the invisible Trini∣tie, without thou art commanded by thy Soueraigne or inuaded by themselues; so shall thy hands be freed from the guilt of christian blood; stand not so much vpon the title or theorie of religion, as the practise in religion; for what is a crowne without a Kingdome,
honour without vertue, or lear∣ning without perseuering; neither hunt after the diuine and hidden mysteries of predestination, electi∣on, destinie and the like; for in my conscience they are left eclip∣sed, and as stumbling blocks for seeming-wise men to stagger at. Therefore rest thy soule vpon this resolution, that although the causes be not knowne to thee, yet vndoubtedly they cannot be vn∣iust, being preordaind by the sa∣cred Iudge of all Iudges. Shew al∣waies a reuerent obedience to the supreme head of the Church vn∣der Christ Iesus, and giue credence to their canon lawes, but not as canonicall scripture, though they were debated by the consistorie
of counsels, and established to be reall in the strength of mans capa∣citie, yet they receiued an impres∣sion of mortall frailtie euer since the fall of our first parents; how∣soeuer owe dutie to them all as la∣boures of holy fathers, but faile not to follow those which thou findest plainely quoted in scrip∣ture, or recorded in thy consci∣ence: so shalt thou offend none, but practise all that God will re∣quire at thy hands. And if the controuersie in supremacie startle thy fidelitie, chose rather the ex∣planation of scripture to decide the question, than mans disputation; so shall thy heart not onely haue the rock of Christ thy leader, but his diuine inspiration vpon Peter
the Apostle for thy supporter, and vnlesse thou findst it recald by re∣elation I would not aduise thee o beleeue tradition. Doe homage o God in all sanctified holy pla∣es, and giue due glory to all aints and Angells, as inuisible reatures, already consummated y Christ Iesus. But thinke not f meriting heauen, for then I am ertaine to behold thee in hell; hough thou hadst fulfilled the whole law, yet thy originall sin would accuse thee, thy presump∣ion condemne thee, and Christs eath a witnesse against thee, who then will saue thee? none; ut the sentence of Lord haue mercie vpon thee: onely thus farre hou mayest goe according to hu∣mane
iudgement, and not dero∣gate from the diadem of his sa∣cred Deitie, beleeuing through hi assisting prouident compassion thou standest in a more sure cer∣tainty of saluation then whe thou liuedst in worldly perturba∣tion, owe an obseruant obedienc to those that are elected in th place of Gods ministers, yet con∣uerse with none but those who liues are answerable to their pro∣fession. In so doing thou wilt pr∣uent the ones vice and reape th others vertue: for thou canst n expect to finde all true Leuit when Christ himselfe found o in twelue a traytor. Giue place t thy betters, respect thy elders, e∣pecially those that are in author∣ty;
and goe to law with no man but in thy owne defence; yet if hou canst not play thy part with∣out passion, acquite the stage, for thou hadst better to lose thy repu∣tation and reuenue than hazard thy soule and body. Be curteous to all men, hate no man, doe good to any man, especially to those hat cannot requite thee. Honour old-age, reuerence thy ghostly fa∣her, and if it be possible remaine hy selfe single, but aboue all of is part; so shalt thou be freed from suspecting a third person, hough the sacred integritie of the others fatherly friendship may be quall, yet nature will be iealous, nd make thee alwaies suspicious, which in time might proue perni∣cious.
Deuote a daily dutie to the sect of women, and when thou beholdest any whose ornaments are decent, commend them, if cur∣teous, requite them; if charitable, extoll them; if vertuous, adore them; but if vicious, loath them; if ambitious, scorne them; and if malicious, shunne them: so shal thou bee freed from the ones ini∣quitie, and share in the others ver∣tue: for there is no such compani∣on, as a discreet, religious woman which to my great comfort haue knowne the one, and to my ouer∣charged griefe the other. But i thou appeare so infortunate, a to forsake the celestiall rites of a single life, to obtayne the society of a temporall wife; let her ver∣tues
be the foundation of thy affe∣ction, and thy conscience debate vpon confirmation before thou conclude a resolution, that God may honour the vnion, and your selues ioy in the coniunction, which if diuine prouidence blesse the fruit of her wombe, let thy in∣ward loue be equally descended to thy eldest as scripture hath commanded, and thy gentle corre∣ction as occasion shal be required: so mayest thou redeeme thy virgi∣nitie in raising a posteritie to glo∣rifie God by a fraternitie. But a∣boue all be sure to let charitie be thy gentry, and humilitie thy ho∣nour; let loue be thy laurell, and loyaltie thy louer; let aduersity be thy fortitude, and fortune thy flat∣terer;
let vertue by thy veritie, and patience thy paterne; let wis∣dome be thy wealth, and reason thy ruler; let sinne be thy enemy, and thy selfe her sister; let truth be thy tongue, and temperance thy taster; let iustice be thy iudge, and conscience thy Iuror; let faith be thy father, and obedience thy brother, let children be thy bles∣sing, and education their portion; let mercy bee thy matron, and meeknesse thy minion; let curtesie be thy kinsman, and chastitie thy cosen-german; let virginitie be thy affection, and vtilitie thy aflicti∣on; let repentance be thy professi∣on, and prayers thy peregrinati∣on; let confession be thy contem∣plation, and contrition thy regene∣ration.
Let life be thy lamentati∣on, and death thy preparation. Let thy speech be plausible, and thy protestations irreuocable. Let thy studies be celestiall, and thy sor∣rowes supernaturall. Let thy sighes be Sacramentall, and thy groanes coëternall. Let thy diet be debility, and thy attire decen∣cie. Let want be thy infirmitie, and Will thy integritie. Let thy hope be heauenlie, and feare thy frailty. Let grace be thy guide, and God thy glory. Thus, in a word, thou pledge of my posteritie, thinke, speake, and deale with God, as if all the world did be∣hold thee, and liue, and conuerse with man as if God saw thee. So shalt thou appeare the liuely i∣mage
of thy maker, the crowne of thy mother, the honour of thy name, and the repairing of the Angels. God leade thee by the hand, and a fathers blessing goe with thee, as thou perseuerst in the practise of these precedent pre∣cepts.
To his louing brother Edward Bushel Esquire. BEst beloued, to anni∣hilate your least sus∣pition of my fidelitie or selfe-wild imbecili∣tie in this my retirde pleasing life, I ingenuously ac∣knowledge that mutuall fraterni∣tie ioyned with inward spiration to glorifie God is best pleasing, most accepted, and greatest rewar∣ded. So that I am confident a publique religious life is better than any monasticke priuate li∣uing,
by how much virginitie is esteemed aboue mariage; yet the leaw warranted to be honourable, according to the Apostles words. If thou doest marry thou doest well, but if thou canst abstaine, 'tis better. So likewise if tho canst liue priuate without wilfull sinne, it is well, but if thou canst pub∣lique, it were better. And where he saith, better to marry then to burne; 1 Cor. 7.9. euen so my conscience as∣sures me that it is better to liue pri∣uately without sinne, than burne publiquely in sinne; for you know in the one there is hope of saluati∣on, but in the other certaintie of damnation. Which reduc'de mee to apply for experiment this soli∣ary course to prohibite mee from
former follies, and preuent futur perils. For you know from min infancie I so much naturally de∣lighted in a male-contented life, a our parents disciplinde gentle cor∣rection to withdraw me, fearing  was bewitched. Likewise in the height of my prodigallity, both your selfe and others were wit∣nesses how I then made triall at a poore fishers habitation, which God knowes would haue long continued had not my popula name beene knowne; yet in those dayes such was my childishnesse, that more fear'd the preiudice of my base reputation then the dis∣pleasure of my Sauiour: like ie∣sting Pilate which beleeued the innocencie of Christ, howsoeuer
to satisfie the Iewes, crucified him. Luk. 23.14. Besides, for almost three yeeres, you know, I was tost vpon the waues of time in expectation of a familiar companion, who at last to my great griefe vnfriendly left mee, for no other reason I could imagine, but that he would verifie our Sauiours speech; Mat. 20.16. Many that are first shall be last, and the last first. So that it is no new fantasie, but hatching from my cradle as God knowes & some particular friends that my determination was long agoe bent to leaue the world, de∣ny my selfe, regaine the time, and follow him, were it within the caues of the earth, if his Diuine pleasure allotted mee; But what through the rawnesse of yeeres,
natures frailtie, and instigation of others, I remain'd so long with taking leaue of my houshold, and striuing to satisfie the humours of mortall friends, that almost my vi∣tall hope was turned into despaire of immortall glory. But thankes be to the Diuine prouidence, my own conscience is enlightened by the Gospel of Christ to warrant mee his mercies, will heare my supplications from a poore Cell, as hee did Ionas in the Whales belly. Ion. 2.1. So that, if now I should reuolt, ha∣uing had a yere of vnparallel'd ex∣perience, for either temporall for∣tune or fear of corporal affliction, I must account the offence vnpar∣donable; when the pensill of holy Ghost hath dictated the same by
these irremarkeable fatall words; If wee sinne wilfully, Heb. 10.26. after the recei∣uing the knowledge of the truth, there remaines no more sacrifice for sinne, but a fearefull looking for iudgement. Therfore I hope by Gods permis∣sion, your beliefe of my fidelitie will expell all doubts, scruples, or feares, knowing that I haue be∣queathed these lines to ensuing memorie as a recorded wit∣nesse on the contrarie against mee at the Day of Iudgement. 2 Pet. 2.21. In the meane time let him that is tied to loue you as his owne soule, perswade your diligent search into the world without par∣tialitie, and then I dare boldly say, you will find nought worth lo∣uing, no fortune worth valuing,
nor no pleasure worth following but he that first made you: in con∣science then, he ought onely to be lou'd, valu'd, and seru'd. For my owne part, I by woefull experi∣ence haue found it; you by tradi∣tion from a brother may shun it. Let not then others ends, set a end to your owne happinesse, no natures frailtie barre the fruition of your future felicity; but be sur to curbe the one, and scorne the o∣ther; in so doing your conscience shall say, I was your friend, no your flatterer, as mine must al∣waies acknowledge you a father more then a brother. Yet giue me leaue louingly to chide your wil∣fulnesse; since by Diuine proui∣dence I haue rebuked my igno∣rance.
Your causes of discontents its knowne rise early; will you therefore keepe them in perpetu∣all waking? Those crosses that stand betwixt you and happines, are mortall; must you then make your sorrowes perpetuall and im∣mortal? The way to shorten them is to sleight them, and the best meanes to mitigate them is not to minde them. I by experience doe sensibly feele it, you by practise may bee sure to finde it. O then, gentle brother, let not griefe for a wildernesse, Mar. 8.36. preuent your birth∣right in Paradise; for vnder cor∣rection (deerest Sir) if you cannot brooke a temporall misfortune, in my conscience you will neuer at∣taine
to a spirituall blessing: when our Sauiour and all his Elect are witnesses against you; Mar. 10.24. yet I must confesse your afflictions are grea∣ter then mine, though my sinnes are a thousand for one of yours. Howsoeuer not equall in deme∣rites, nor disasters to the A∣postles, therefore ioy as they did in calamities, that you may bee found a Cosin-germane to Iob, shewing alwaies true Faith by your Workes, otherwise were you my Father, as you are my Brother, I should forget nature, and greatly feare you haue no share in Christs death. Pardon, dearest heart, if I haue soared too high, it is in your power to clip
the wings: but God knowes I e∣steeme your soules safetie, more then man or mortall felicitie. All which I leaue to his Diuine pro∣uidence and your perseuering goodnesse.
To the Religious and Vertu∣ous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Willoughby. YOur Beadsman fearing the distance of place, and dispensation of wed∣locke, might cause a reuolt from your Ladiships former welwishes induc'd mee to recommend these weake lines, as an Antidote to preserue me from the shipwracke of your displeasure; whose ver∣tuous societie, I euer honoured more then temporall felicitie; for that I was daily an eye witnes of
your pious charitie; religious discourse, and noble hospitalitie, which makes mee presume the goodnesse of your chaste dispositi∣on, wil rather condole my misfor∣tunes of inward griefe then attri∣bute discontinuance to the weak∣nesse of nature or want of ma∣trimoniall affection; especially hauing so much conference with a graue Diuine before my depar∣ture, as your Ladiship may more perspicuously perceiue by these following lines; wherein I spar'd not the reuealing of my woefull tragicall life to his iudiciall con∣templation; humbly intreating him, that as I had opened the bowels of my miseries, so hee would impart the trueth of his
knowledge. Whereupon with a modest and solemne countenance desired my age, who replied a∣bout sixe and twentie, he then be∣gan to expresse his sorrowes, that so young a man should haue tren∣ched into such lowd offences, yet questionlesse if contrition did pro∣ceed from my heart, there was no doubt but vpon true repentance God would forgiue mee. Citing the parable of the Prodigall; Luk. 15. the president of Mary Magdalen, an diuers others, for confirming Hope, and preuenting Despaire He thus hauing ended, I gaue him much thankes for his fatherly counsell, assuring his reward was celestiall not temporall; wishing it might stand with his occasions,
leaue, and liking to heare mee a word, who seemed to bee more willing then I was readie; at last imparted vnto him that I presu∣med a retired strickt Monasticke life, would be the safest and surest hope to depend on; for by such meanes I fhould not onely auoid sinne, the occasion, but discipline my selfe, and the rather for that I had affection to the life from my infancie. Besides the often drea∣ming what ioy I found in it; inti∣mating my conscience daily reite∣rated the same; and that if I did continue wilfully in any one sin, here was no foundation for Di∣uine mercy to build on; Heb. 10 which the world, custome, and frailtie of na∣ture had prohibited mee from the
one, and induc'd mee to the other, as by my confession he knew too true. Yet by no meanes he would not giue way, alleaging the life was neither lawfull, requisite, nor honest, for that it was not allowed by the Lawes of God to cloister vp my selfe: nor admitted by our Church, expressing Scripture, that I was not borne for my selfe, but for others; and that my prayers could not bee so much auaileable as when two or three were gathe∣red together. But if these reasons might not disswade mee from my intended resolution, yet the vow of mariage prohibited me, though it was solemnized in the rawnesse of my youth; by reason I had promised before God to forsake
father, mother, and cleaue vnto my wife, assuring mee I should neuer haue his consent, nor hard∣ly the Church of Rome: notwith∣standing they allotted such bug∣beares to fright the poore Laitie. Whereupon I rose vp (God knowes) as a man going to the gallowes, or like Iudas that betrai∣ed our Sauiour, and thus accor∣ding to my weake apprehension replied: Where hee exprest cloi∣stering, and that man was not borne to himselfe, but for others, I beleeued it; assuring him, my selfe neuer meant it, but onely to turne those purple robes of prodigalitie into an Hermites weed; denying none to visite, 1 Tim. 4.8. but willing to in∣struct any so farre as God would
enable mee; promising future life shold be answerable to my speech, and where he said, prayers are not of that force, as when two or three were gathered together, I confes∣sed it; if so be they were all ioyn'd with inward spiration to glorifie God, otherwise they rather hinde∣red then furthered, citing the first chapter of Ionas for my president. But touching the lawfulnesse; I al∣leadged that our Sauiour praye alone: the Apostles wandred i sheepskins alone, Tim. 8.2. whose liues we ought to follow, intimating the aduice, My Sonne come out of e∣uill company. Besides, the word of our Sauiour, Mat. 5.29. If thy eye offend pu it out; much more (in my opinion cast off the world. And for marri∣age,
where he said I must leaue fa∣ther, mother, and cleaue vnto my wife, I could not deny it, replying vnto him, that if I was to leaue fa∣ther and mother for a wife, cer∣tainely I was to leaue father, Luk. 9.23. mo∣ther and wife for Christ: especial∣ly himselfe expressing, and con∣firm'd by three Euangelists; Mat. 10.37. that  were not worthy of him, if I would not: as it did more trans∣arent appeare by the seueritie of ur Sauiour, who would not ad∣it one of his Apostles to per∣orme the dutifull rites of a sonne, Luk 9.62.  bearing his owne father, when e called him: much lesse the rites f marriage. Yet he suddenly an∣vered, that both Saint Paul and e Church hath forbid the same
without it were by consent, and that but for a time; which made mee breake into a kind of passion, with these words vttering; Had our Sauiour said to the man, hee should not taste of his Supper though inuited, Luk. 14.20.24. for that his excuse was the marriage of a wife. A∣gaine, where hee said, No man ha∣uing put his hand to the plough, an looking backe, was fit for the king dome of God: Notwithstandin hee intreated but so much time a to take leaue of his houshold. Be¦sides, had God said, Man was th glory of his Maker; the woma the glory of the man, the man th head of the woman, and yet ha not the head priuiledge to serue h Creator, without consent of th
feet; intimating vnto him, that miserable was the bondage to soule and bodie, if they were not called both at one time. But seeing the holy Apostle had not allowed it, I assured him I would doe my endeauour to gaine her consent; howsoeuer I resolu'd him I should rather depend vpon the mercie of my Sauiour for that offence, 1 Cor. 7.17. then continue more in offending; and follow the president of holy Saint eromes Confession, where hee aith, If his father stood weeping n his knees before him, and his mother hanging on his necke be∣inde him, and all his brethren, sters, children, howling on eue∣de to detaine him in sinfull life with them; he would fling off his
mother to the ground, despise all his kinred, runne ouer his father, and treade him vnder foot, there∣by to goe to Christ when hee cal∣leth him; and thus wee parted, protesting vnto mee, though him∣selfe would bee as neuter, yet his prayers should be alwayes perma∣nent for my good successe, hoping the like fauour from your Lady∣ship, the rather for that I receiue so much inward comfort, and your vertues no preiudice. But when I had imparted to my wife, the dolourous griefes my heart su∣stained, alleaging that neither her estate, person, nor any temporall thing lining could ease my sur∣char'd sufferings, for that they were immortall & inuisible; Eccles. 5. wch if
she pleased, hauing disclosed my sorrowes to her secrecie, as either dispence with my person, or else bee content to lead the same Mo∣nasticke life and leaue the world; In so doing our soules should bee surer saued, my heart better con∣tented, God more glorified, no man iniur'd, if shee were satisfied. And to auoid suspition of disloyal∣tie, the holy Sacrament should te∣stifie my integritie. Yet nothing would preuaile, alleaging her ma∣riage was for loue, not for wealth; for person, not for picture; which I knowing her words to bee true, my heart pleaded ingratitude if I left her, and my soule whispered ruine if I continued. But in the end, considering with my selfe, I
was bound to obey the Creator more then the creature, Tim. .12. and she to obey mee, rather then I her, espe∣cially when it tends to the glorifi∣ing of God; but (honour'd Lady) that were too great a blessing for mortall creature, to haue two hearts contracted, and both vni∣ted in one disposition; which re∣uolution reduc'd mee to lessen my former respect, Ephes. 5.30.32. and obseruing whether those allusions would extenuate her fond affection; which in process of time wrought such an impression, as shee grew tractable to my disposition; wher∣in I secretly ioyed more then a Generall that gaines a conquest by stratageme. Assuring your La∣diship, if the prayers and admoni∣tions
of the one, can make the o∣ther immortall, her ioyes are per∣petuall, and our nuptiall eternall; which spirituall-wise prooues the greater affection according to the first institution, as will hereafter more at large appeare, if God giue a blessing to my second Edition. In the meane time I pro∣strate my selfe vnder the chastitie of your pious vertue and fauoura∣ble censure, resting constantly your seruant, faithfully your lo∣uer, and eternally Your Beadsman, THO: BVSHEL.
To the Right Worshipfull, his indeered Friend, Sir Matthew Gary. WOrthy Sir, knowing you to be of a Noble, free, af∣fable disposition, makes me to feare some Parasite might worke an impression vpon the goodnesse of your nature, where∣in I haue presumed to bequeath these experimentall lines, as an Antidote to preserue you from the assault of familiar Flatterers; For when my selfe was entring into af∣fectation of popular applause, I
chose mee an old stagger of the times, as a bosome friend to dis∣close my secret thoughts, accor∣ding to the course of the world; but hauing made knowne my fan∣tasticall humor, hee seem'd to bee so much delighted in my vaine glorious speech, as perswaded me they were but tricks of youth, and sutable to others, which soone kindled the fire of my affection in∣to the flame of Prodigalitie: for of my selfe I was prone by nature, but being back't proued a mastiue curre; yet after the period of one yeeres experience, I assur'd him I much doubted, that my soule and bodie must answere for my con∣tinuall prde, bribing, drinking, and wenching; desiring his opi∣nion,
whether it were not better to leaue off seruice, by reason cu∣stome had wrought such a priui∣ledge that I should hardly bee re∣cal'd, liuing among so many that were addicted to the same follies; and that my selfe spent more idle∣ly, then I got lewdly; but his re∣ply to mee was like some insinua∣ting Statesman, that applaudes his Souereigne whatsoeuer hee sayes, be it right or wrong; not for that their Iudgements are weake, but by reason their hopes, fortunes, and greatnesse depends vpon the frowne or fauour of them. Euen so, this Sycophant, in expectation of pettie curtesies, gaue way to what my fantasticke humour de∣sired; guilding ouer the foulenesse
of my vices, with those pleasing delights; that my pride was but fit for the place, and equall to my fellowes; For drinking, it was but according to my betters, and ex∣pected from others; for my bri∣bing they were but gratuities pra∣ctised by my predecessours, and as for my wenching, they were only errours of youth bred by nature, and subiect to all men. But touching my reuolt from seruice, by no meanes hee would not con∣sent, alleadging I might profit my selfe, pleasure my friends, and help the distressed. Thus did this cock∣atrising Matchauill sooth mee vp in all my loathsome pleasures, till at last I told him I was credibly enformed that the world laugh't
at me; who presently replyed, It was but the liuery shee gaue to all men, intimating, if I would but continue one yeere more, my selfe should so much goe beyond the spungie braine of common know∣ledge, that humanitie would dis∣solue their crueltie into curtesie, alleaging it were Romane like to spurne at the frowne of fortune, and in sleighting the calumnious tongues of men, I was more then heroicall: Which eleuated my weather-cocke disposition into laughter and action, vntill, I had both equal'd the dog to his vomit, and ruinated mine owne soule. Wherein, Christ knowes, I now daily wish the plagues of Egypt had been my delights, rather then
he my associate, or those my cōm∣panions. For I call God to witnes, I would cancell the debt I owe to nature, but to call in the errours of my former follies. O then, sweet Sir! let the infortunate spectacle of your friend, preuent the danger in your selfe, and beware of these smooth factors for the Deuill, whose inchanting wordes I feare doeth hazard more young mens soules, then the originall sinne of nature: Hoping my late repen∣tance will extract a timely refor∣mation, if you finde cause by the faithfull friend your owne consci∣ence.
To his approued beloued Mr. Iohn Eliot Esquire. THe ample testimony of your true affection to wards my Lord Ve∣rulam Viscount Saint Albans, hath obliged me your ser∣uant. Yet least the calumnious tongues of men might extenuate the good opinion you had of his worth and merit: I must ingenu∣ously confesse that my selfe and others of his seruants were the oc∣casion of exhaling his vertues
into a darke eclipse; which God knowes would haue long en∣dur'd both for the honour of his King, and good of the commonal∣ie; had not we whom his bounty ursed, laid on his guiltlesse shoul∣ders our base and execrable deeds to be scand and censur'de by the whole Senate of a state, where no sooner sentence was giuen, but most of vs forsooke him, which makes vs beare the badge of Iewes to this day. Yet I am confident, there were some Godly Daniels a∣mongst vs; howsoeuer I will not mention any for feare of attribu∣ting more then their due, and of∣fending others; but leaue the sequel to their owne consciences, who an best iudge of innocencie. As
for my selfe with shame I must ac∣quite the title, and pleade guilty; which grieues my very soule, that so matchlesse a Peere should bee lost by such insinuating caterpil∣lars, who in his owne nature scorn'de the least thought of any base, vnworthy, or ignoble act, though subiect to infirmiries, as ordain'de to the wisest: for so much I must assure you was his hatred to bribery, corruption, or symmonie, that hearing I had re∣ceiu'de the profits of first fruits for a Benefice, which his pious cha∣ritie freely gaue, presently sent to me, and being asked of his Lord∣ship, I sodainly confessed, where∣upon hee fell into so great a passi∣on, that repli'de, I was cursed in
my conception, and nursed with a Tiger for deceiuing the Church, threatning I should be no longer his seruant; for that one scab'de Sheepe might infect the whole flock. Yet notwithstanding, vpon my submssion, the noblenesle of his disposition forgaue me the fact and receiu'de me into fauour; but neuer could obtaine a spirituall li∣uing afterwards: which makes me certainly beleeue they that mini∣ster'd those hellish pils of bribery, gilded them ouer, not onely at first with a shew of gratuity, or in the loue of courtesie, but waited the opportunitie of his necessitie: o∣therwise it had beene impossible to haue wrought an impression. So that by such stratagems the wi∣sest
men may proue weakest a∣mongst all officers; for those whose consciences are innocent of mitigating iustice, either by bri∣bery, gratuity, friendship, fauour or courtesie, let him cast the first stone and be canoniz'd for a Saint vpon earth. But the report goeth, that it is the policy of other States, when once the subiect groanes vnder oppression, to select some man of worth for allaying clamor of the vulgar, and congratulate the giddy multitude: which if his misfortune were such, he was not the first, nor, I am confident, wilbe the last. So that in time it may re∣flect some comfort to you and o∣thers that honoured him in their hearts, but not with their lips.
To my Christian Brethren the Ofsprings that proceeds from Vniuersities. BEloued Brethren if you haue past the ex∣ercises, Ceremonies, and degrees with ap∣prou'd allowance by the cōmon lawes of man to take the orders of Priesthood, Mini∣ster, Teacher, Pastor and Shep∣herd, which is the most worthy, honorable & blest title confirm'd on man. Let not then (Deare
brethren) my affectionate aduice be displeasing, in perswading your diligent resolutions to search the lawes, statutes, and commands, which God both requires and ex∣pects at your hands; for if any of you vndertake the tuition o soules, and then by the neglect o your duties, there should perish ei∣ther man, woman, or child, you are to answer for their sufferings, Ezek. 23. though no ease to the parties grie∣ued: So that as the dignitie of your profession doeth excell the power and authoritie of Kings, Empe∣rours, or Monarches; euen like∣wise their perils, hazards, and dan∣gers are equall to their greatnesse by how much the one com∣mands; but the bodie temporall
and the other Charge of the soule eternall. O then, gentle Sirs, let me intreat you for my poore bre∣threns sake, Gods glory, and the safegard of your owne soules, search narrowly into the fraile dispositions & conditions of your owne natures, and then ponder whether your abilities are of that efficacie and power to discharge so noble a calling, without degra∣dation of the title, perill to your soules, and losse of our poore bre∣thren, setting aside the president of others, which I pittie some, feare diuers, suspect the best. Yet I hope there will bee found many righteous Abrahams, chaste Lots, godly Daniels, and patient Iobs. O∣therwise, wee of the Laitie are in
great danger, if the Clergie should be lost: for how can the bodie liue when the head is dead. First, then deare brethren, let mee per∣swade you to follow the old Pro∣uerbe, Looke before you leape, read and consider vpon the oath requir'd by man; next, examine your hearts if you can keepe the same which is expected by God; then, whether you are in loue and charitie, whether more flesh then spirit, more addicted to pleasures then deuotions, more delighted in worldly trifles, then heauenly treasures, or whether more for re∣uenue of the place, then Gods glo∣ry, and profit of your brethren. For if any of those temporalties haue gained the vpper hand, yet it
were weakenesse to attempt, but madnesse to vndertake, vnlesse you can command them, not they you. Otherwise, your soules are in danger, and they infortunate that are planted vnder your iurisdicti∣on. For beleeue it (hopefull Sirs) you cannot serue God and Mam∣mon, 2 Cor. 11.13. which those vainely expects remission, whose liues be not an∣swerable to their profession: for if the Deuills should omit their ac∣cusations, yet the poore soules, which perish vnder their tuition, will cry out vengeance for their condemnations, and God is iust, as he is mercifull; So that I feare their language, Doe as I say, and not as I doe, will not protect them. Yet, worthy Sirs, you perceiue the cal∣ling
was honorable from the insti∣tution, and the reward is glorious aboue any, if you liue answerable. But on the contrary, miserable, wretched, damnable to your selues and others that neuer iniur'd you; so that it is better to bee an open wicked man, then a luke-warme Christian Diuine; for the one ruines but himselfe, the other ha∣zards many, yet I had rather be no man then either of them. Wherefore, deere brethren, if vp∣on mature deliberation, you finde your selues able to encounter those enemies, which originall na∣ture and custome hath claim'd a priuiledge, goe on boldly in the celestiall enterprise, and take these precepts along with you, as a help
to your pious indeauours. Let the sensible faculties of your hearts be holy, religious, and zealous to∣wards God, with an inward af∣fection to edifie your charge, ac∣cording to the directions of Christs Catholike Church exprest in holy Writ, not making any dif∣ference or respect of persons. In∣struct them publikely, admonish them priuately, rebuke them sharpely, Iam. 2.9. and if those will not re∣call them, proclaime it openly, without fearing the displeasure of any humane creature. For they are not worthy to bee Comman∣ders, that either distrusts in their Generall, or feares their Souldiers. But aboue all let me intreat you to be mindfull of Baptisme, The Sa∣crament,
and visiting the sicke: For the first easeth your professi∣ons; the second testifieth your in∣tegrities; and the third dischargeth your duties. For as it confirmeth their saluation or damnation; so likewise it remaines the highest pinacle of your profession: and if it be possible (adopted Sirs) enter∣taine no wedlocke, but rather striue to curbe nature with spare∣nesse of dyet, 1 Cor. 9.27 then satisfie the flesh to vse such helpers. For your selues had need bee well grounded with inward spirations, nay in a man∣ner gods on earth that vndertake such bosome friendes, and per∣forms the weightie charge which will bee requir'd at your hands; hoping your owne innocencies
will neuer bee tempted to appeare in any spirituall preferment by the way of Sinon Magus, Act. 8.18. or helpe of his coadiutors: for surely those are neuer consecrated by God, nor al∣lowed by Lawes. How then (gen∣tle Sirs) in your owne conscien∣ces can they absolue, baptise, in∣struct, or minister the Sacrament, but with a trembling feare of murthering the soule, like a ty∣rants conscience that is imbru'd in blood. O then you anointed branches, bee not perswaded by a mould of clay to trench in so great a crime, knowing your selues as yet vnspotted. In so doing, Matt. 12.50. Gods Name will bee glo∣rified, your brethren edified, and
your owne dutyes discharg'd; which will remaine presidents to others, ioy to your parents, comfort to your friends, and happinesse to your Soules.
To my wel-wished Christian Brethren, the Laitie. IF any of you are so infortunate, as to detaine the Rights and Profits, which was ordained by God for the maintainance of the Church and members therof; Let mee beg vpon my knees, as with teares I write it, that you make re∣stitution, contrition to God and man. For if your consciences pre∣iudicate they are wrongfully kept backe, and yet willfully con∣tinues,
can it bee denied but that you rob God of his Iustice, if you expect saluation by the death and passion of our Sauiour; though ad∣mit you will plead prescription by Act of Parliament, and that it was and is lawfull for you to receiue, continuing so long in descent from your ancestors. Yet, my deare Bre∣thren, I pittie your weake, Right, Title, and Interest; for that it was not warranted from Heauen, but by Gods permission confirm'd in Hell. So likewise you may plead damnation from your forefathers for foure thousand yeres together, which is the more ancienter title, and surer to descend, if from your hearts proceed not repentance. Howsoeuer, fearing you should
suspect spleene or imbecillitie: Let mee intreat you to fearch the re∣cords of holy Writ, and if there your selues find God pardon any one man that robbeth the church, without it were in ignorance, or satisfaction by vnfained amend∣ment, remaine as you are. But on the contrarie, looke vpon the dreadfull death of Ananias and Sa∣phira, Actes 5.5. for detaining some part of their owne goods by deceit from the Apostles: much more you, that not onely take your own, but other mens; when Christ him∣selfe saith, Mat. 22.21. Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars. And if God would not spare his owne Tribe for one offence, certainly (deare Brethren) hee will not omit you which ob∣stinately
persist in the same: Rom. 11.21. for that hee is a iust Iudge; as hee is a mercifull Sauiour; but peraduen∣ture you will obiect, the inducted partie is more vicious then vertu∣ous, more wicked then religious; howsoeuer it is the sustentation of his birthright, and ought not to be diminished. But assuredly himselfe and those are accursed that insti∣tuted him, by how many soules perish with his carelesse neglect. O, beloued Brethren, if you would but ponder with your selues of the strickt account which will be required from you and them at the day of Iudgement; I durst en∣gage my life, there is not one true Christian, but would rather choose to bee fed himselfe, wife,
and family, with the almes of cha∣ritie, then liue wrongfully on the tythes of Laitie; for question∣lesse, as they nourish the bodie, they starue the soule. All which I leaue to your owne consci∣ences, praying daily for reforma∣tion.
To my vnmarried Christian Brethren. BEst beloued Sirs, if you be not so fortunate as to performe your chaste sin∣gle liues, 1 Cor. 7.. according to the Apo∣stles words, which placeth your selues next vnto God, but must of necessitie haue the vnion of se∣cond helpers. Let mee, your wel-wishing Brother, aduise each of you to entertaine diuine religious thoughts in the daily contemplati∣on of your choice, before you at∣tempt so weightie, and great a
charge, which will be demanded at your hands, otherwise it may seeme a hard and ouer-strict capti∣uitie in being bound and thrall with the cares and humors of an∣other: for if it should fall out that any of you doe meete with more bone then flesh, more flesh then spirit, your liues will alwayes bee most miserable and wretched, 1 Cor. 7.28. as by woefull experience diuers of your predecessours can informe you; that for one houre of their folly, being a fault committed without malice, and by meere o∣uer-sight; yea many times to obey the aduice of Parents, they brough themselues into a perpetuall bon∣dage: Which accustomed misery (deare Brethren) proceeds from
a fraile imbecillitie of nature, and want of spirituall discipline; they hauing not grounded themselues vpon the fundamentall points of marriage. For beleeue me (gentle Sirs) if that your chiefest and only end bee not to auoid fornication, and a desire of procreation to glo∣rifie God by a mutuall societie, your Nuptialls were neuer solem∣niz'd by him, nor allowed by his lawes. For it were impossible, if God had a hand in the coniuncti∣on, that euer there should pro∣ceed either iealousie, malice, rage, or any other miserable condition. But it may be, some will reply, that the Scripture confirmes all marri∣ages are made in heauen: So li∣wise you know Christ died for all
sinners, yet few are the number that shall be saued, . 20.16 by reason the one wants, either beliefe, a good life, or true repentance, and the other omits performance accor∣ding to the first institution, which makes both dangerous, fearefull, and infortunate, for that humane creature rather  depends vpon the weakenesse of his owne strength,  then Gods promises; the allure∣ments of Satan, then the blessings of our Sauiour. O then, my vnited brethren, let neither beauty allure, honor tempt, lust prouoke, wealth encourage, nor parents compell, for they are all both imperfect and fatall, without you sweetly uper them, by reducing their extreamities into the chastitie of
vertue. Likewise, deare Brethren, there is another charge impos'd, greater then the former; whereof you must haue an especiall care to edifie your wife, children, and fa∣mily in the commands and seruice of God. For if any of them perish by your neglect, the soule of you must bee sure to answere for it, which grieues my very heart to behold so many of our predeces∣sors runne the hazard of eternall perdition, by this one transgres∣sion in parents. For most com∣monly they neuer thinke so much of the mutuall loue in glorifying God, as the reuenue of wordly profit, and temporall honor. Nay, I haue knowne some parents will marry the wise to the foole, which
makes themselues prooue tyrants to the of-springs of their loynes, for a little wealth to binde the li∣uing to the dead; but assuredly, howsoeuer it is carried in the sight of men, . 5.13 they are accursed before God, and those infortunate that must suffer the bondage, who at last will cry out vengeance on the parents that begot them:  which is the greater crueltie, but iustly re∣warded.  Wherfore (beloued Sirs) if I were worthy to aduise, there should none follow the parents humours, yet please both parties according to the lawes of God, which not any is to obey further. Let then your selues but mitigate your fond and childish affection; your parents suspend their rash
couetous dispositions, vntill yeres and experience haue indued you with reason and religion to appre∣hend your fathers counsell with∣out repentance. Ezek. 1 20. By this meanes the iniquitie of your fathers will not light vpon your selues, nor yours vpon your fathers, but each of you shall receiue ioy, the other comfort, all pleas'd, and God glo∣rified.
To his Christian Brethren Ʋniuersall. IF any of your hands haue beene wilfully guiltie in sheding the blood of your Christian brother; let me humbly craue for appeasing Gods iust wrath, and safegard of your owne soules, that foorthwith you abdicate all scru∣les, doubts, or feares; and retire your selues vnto some wast de∣art, or religious Monasterie: there editate on the crying sinnes you
haue committed, what a great God you haue offended, and what torments you haue deserued; ap∣plying dailye to your deadly wounds the salue of sighing, grones, sobbing, teares, and in∣ward sorrowes, accounting each of your selues not worthy to liue, 2 Cor. 4.17. nor inhabite amongst Gods crea∣tures. Otherwise, dearely beloued, I should sooner beleeue there was no hell, then such a transcenden sinne will bee admitted into hea∣uen; for you should much rob God of his sacred Iustice, in ex∣pecting saluation by his death and passion, without your hearts and vitall parts penetrate a proporti∣on of bleeding sorrow in lieu o contrition; which to make th trueth
more perspicuous, let mee treat you to search the pensill of oly Writ, & if there you find God ardon any one man (though they were his anointed) without so ue and vnfained repentance, as euer afterwards to commit a hei∣ous sin, nor wilfully any other, ut remain'd to their dying dayes  the mournefull melodie of fa∣ing, watching, and praying; yet uld not all these submissions, ontritions, nor petitions, extin∣uish the hatred hee bare to so in∣umane a sinne; but would pu∣sh them temporally, though in e multitude of his mercies sau'd em eternally. O then, vnfortu∣ate brethren, seeing the case is so euitable wretched, betake your
selues to the same true repentan for preuenting the danger of  dreadfull a ruine; and I am con∣dent you will be restor'd, Ezek. 33. Iohn 20. Sap. 21. thoug the fact is fatall, yet 'tis finite, at Gods mercie infinite. But on t contrary I lament your miserie pittie your calamities, and fea your destinies; for certainely h that would not spare the root, b vpon such austere contritions, it much to be doubted he will neu forgiue the branches vpon les submissions. Rom. 11.21. And those Diuin which shall aduise you to a mo short and easier way of humilia on, I am assur'd in the end, y will finde them not your friend but your flatterers, for they da not warrant you: Yet by leadi
e remainder of your liues sin∣rely, according to this prescrip∣on, God himselfe protects you, oth in the Old and New Testa∣ent, with these words, which ill not be violated; That all sins pon true repentance were pardo∣able; Luke 12.10. but the offence against the oly Ghost: and which is more, otesteth he neuer forsooke a sin∣er, Ezek. 18 23. without first a sinner forsooke m. O then (distressed Sirs) can u beleeue but God is mercifull, if e doeth condemne you, when ou may be saued if you are truely rrowfull: why should you then tertaine a thought of desperati∣, or bee perswaded by mortalist  stay your conuersion; though ey should alleadge sustentation,
yet the bloodie sinne crieth for ∣tisfaction, and God expects tru contrition, or else no remission▪ But peraduenture some will ob∣iect that the Iurie hath acquite them, or a Kings fauour pardo∣ned. Admit they haue; the one power is but temporall, the o∣fence eternall, Luk. 12.5 and for the othe they may discharge the person,  conceale the crime, but not fro the King of Kings, nor your own consciences, which I appeale  for your future comforts, God glory, and discharge of my Chr∣stian dutie. O then, forelorn Sirs, breake through the viole temptations of earthly creature accounting those friends traitor those wiues Iesabels, and those ch¦dren
bastards, that shall desire to detaine you one houre from the fruition of your apparent redemp∣tion. Reu. 8.3, 4, 5. Luke 5.52. Iam. 2.13 Mat. 9.13 In so doing the Angels are constant to make intercession for your restitution, and God will ne∣uer deny absolution, seeing his greatest glorie is magnified by your inward re∣cantation.
To my Christian Brethren Ʋniuersall. IF any of you, my beloued, hath ingendred with the roote of that originall sinne, 1 Ioh. 3.8. called Pride; let mee, the fatall vassall of the Christian world, perswade a suruey in the whole fabricke of your Microcosmos; for that now the prodigall pleasing pride of my youth sounds the dolefull tune of deadly damnation, as I feare your
selues continuing will equall my maladie, if not exceed my mise∣rie; which to mee will rather ag∣grauate sorrow, then extenuate my dolour. Wherefore, I beseech you for Gods cause, and safetie of your owne soules, bee no longer stiffe-necked, nor selfe-will-con∣ceited in so high an offence, as not onely depriues you from all eter∣nitie, but bequeaths you to end∣lesse miserie; which if the spectacle of my irrecouerable calamity, can∣not mollifie your detestable ini∣quitie: Search but the pensill o holy Writ and there you will fin legions of Angelles abdicated o their dignities for the same offence Besides; Iudg. 1.6. millions of your progen∣tors. Nay more, my adopted bre∣thren,
I dare boldly say not one man that sprang from the loynes of our first Parents, was euer ad∣mitted into Gods kingdome, with∣out his humilitie verified our Sa∣iours words, to become so inno∣tent of pride as a little child. Mat. 18.4, 7. How hen, dearest Sirs, can wee that are he branches expect more mercie hen our forefathers, Rom. 11.21. when Christ ot onely confirm'd the contrary n his life of humanitie, but re∣eal'd the same by his sacred Word to all his Apostles, as an as∣red marke of those that shall bee ected his seruants. O then, hope∣ belou'd, let not fraile nature de∣de, intising world bewitch, nor nishing honour seduce you; hen your tortured brother fore∣warnes,
warnes, humane reason prohi∣bites, and God himselfe forbids vpon penaltie of eternall damna∣tion. Who then will saue you, when Christs death, your owne consciences, and all his Elect are Iudge, Iuror, and witnesse a∣gainst you; None (my belou'd) but Lord haue mercie vpon you I by woefull experience groan vnder the burthen, though God knowes my outward ornament alwayes exceeded my inward fa∣culties; yet so much consenting, a I feare daily repenting will hard extinguish hellish tormenting.  then, you (clayie tabernacles) mak my miseries your timely pres∣dents, and be not so in loue wit a Wildernesse, Mark. 8.36. as to lose a Paradis
nor so much dishonour your Ma∣ker, as any longer to crucifie your Redeemer. But let innocent Hu∣militie raise you, pious Prayers re∣store you, that Christs death may be effectuall for you. In so doing my afflictions may be mitigated, your dangers preuented, and all our shipwrackt soules saued.
To his Christian Brethren Ʋniuersall. IF any of you haue permitted betraying nature to inact so dead∣ly a sinne as de∣testable Adulterie, let my pre∣sent calamities preuent your fu∣ture miseries; otherwise I shall be certaine to condole your deaths, as I am confident you will curse your births: for when you com∣mit that loathsome sinne of lust, you waken the indignation of
Gods iust iustice; witnesse your owne consciences. VVill yee then persisist in offending, vpon hope of his mercifull suffering? O my deare Brethren, I might sooner beleeue the Deuill should bee called, then any of you cho∣sen without so true a reformati∣on, as your contrition shall ma∣nifest the detestation before God and man. Otherwise, according to my poore iudgement, your conuersion hath no foundation for Christ to consecrate his pious absolution. What your Genius may out of Rhetoricke po∣licie, or selfe-wil'd fidelitie in∣corporate a more easie way of sustentation by his death and passion; Yet I feare those that
depend vpon such Diuinitie, tren∣ches too neere the Diademe of his Sacred Maiestie, for euer re∣ceiuing remission by his miserie, Iam. 2.13 Psal. 85.10. in regard God himselfe assures vs his Mercie and Iustice kisseth each other. But peraduenture, some of you will not deny to reply, the wordes of my wic∣kednesse; That which is bred in he bone, will neuer out of the flesh. Howsoeuer I now find the Apostles saying to be true, He that ues in the flesh dyes in the spi∣it; For it speakes death vnto ee, and I am perswaded (vpon ontinuance) damnation to each f you. O then, co-partners, let y too late vicious affection use a timely depriuation; for
when I beheld (by diuine pro∣uidence) the naked trueth, there I found his fatherly commisera∣tion had indued man with the facultie of reason to bridle stiffe∣neckt nature. Besides, vpon ex∣treamitie ordain'd him matrimo∣niall vnitie for auoiding incon∣stancie. But searching into the chastitie of sauage beast, I loath' my selfe, and hated the inchan∣ters; which so sure as there is a God, each of you must doe th like either in this life, or bee for ced in the other to your con∣demnation without redemption. O then, I beseech you, that an the imaginarie creatures of you Maker, bee a little more mode then the brutish beast, that Go
may ioy in your creation, and reward your soules with salua∣tion; Otherwise, as your con∣ceptions were wretched in the wombes; Prou. 1.24. so I feare preiudi∣cate torments will follow your tombes. Wherefore then, bap∣tized Christians, will yee bee a∣ny longer deluded with wicked Iesabels, or betraying Abime∣lechs? Ezek. 18.23.25. When GOD himselfe protesteth you may yet bee sa∣ued, if you doe but truely re∣pent. Luk. 5.32 What father could haue said more? Matt. 9.13. What Sauiour would haue demanded lesse without de∣fying his Essence to satisfie your basenesse? I appeale to your own consciences, whether any of you that knowes the danger, and yet
will perseuere in so heinous a sin, can expect remission by his death and passion: Howsoeuer, God forbid, that I should foretell your palace to be in hell. But if spirati∣ons will not penetrate, curtesies nihilate, chastisements mollifie, nor future torments terrifie; giue mee leaue to mistrust, despaire in your atchieuing to the Paradise of Heauen. O, infortunate Sirs, if your greatnesse pleads protection, Act. 10.33, 34. remember God respecteth no per∣sons, if your customary presidence pleads prescription; Iudg. 7. remember the burning of Sodome and Gomorrah; and if his mercies confer'd on Mary Magdalene allures your pro∣uocations; remember his Iustice punished legions of your proge∣nitors.
O my beloued brethren, it grieues my verie soule, that our Sauiours compassion towards one offendour, Rome. 2. shall be made a shelter for millions to continue in offen∣ding, when his iust Iustice execu∣ted vpon thousands for such trans∣gressions, will hardly bring any to a true cessation, till the vice haue left them, not they it. Therefore I must conclude with Gods owne words, Apoc. 22.12. I will exercise Iudge∣ment in weight, and Iustice in measure. FJNJS.
