4697.5 20211926 23803
A MILITARY Dialogue betweene PHILOMVSVS and MILES. Lively expressing the horrible Effects of War and the unspeakable benefit of Peace. Dulce bellum in expertis. By Richard Carter. LONDON, Printed by John Okes, and are to be sold at the white Lion in St. Pauls Church-yard, MDCXL.
To the Reader health and happines. REader, retire thy selfe a while, Where private thou mayst be And read (although in rustick stile) This Poem pend by me. For Pan, and Coridon, gives light, Like Phoebus now and then; So truth shall spring and shine full bright, From my illiterate pen, Truth seeks no Trumpet for to sound, She wants no pray so of man: Good Wine we know, it may be found, Without a gay Garland. Briefly therefore, I shall declare, The scope which I intend, To shew the genuine fruits of warre, And Peace with Truth commend. The Souldier he would fight the field, Fond Fame for to increase, Philomusus doth cause him yield: They both conclude in Peace. Now least this Preface should exceed (The Books) and be too great: No further here, I will proceed, And now I shut the gate.
Philomusus thus beginneth. WHat suddain winde hath blown you back, How comes this quick return? Where are the spoyls of warre and wrack: What ailes thee thus to mourn? It lik'd thee not to bide at home, And work from day to day, But needs (forsooth) you must be gone, Philo gives Miles a harsh entertainment A Souldiers part to play. Why look'st thou thin? why shougst thou so? Why art thou thus arraid? Do Souldiers in this habit go? And with such wages paid? Thou wents from hence in good attire, And money in thy bag, But back again thou dost retire: Not with one comely rag. Now for my part, I love not jarres: God send me health and peace, I take no pleasure in the warres, My fortunes to increase. I hope your hotnesse at the first, To follow Souldiers train, Is cooled now you have no lust: In warre to gad again. Miles thus replyeth. I Must confesse, I do repent Before the time I thought: And that I have by this attempt, More losse then booty caught.
Yet blame I not the Warres therefore, Miles confes∣seth his ill suc cesse in the Field. But still gives to warre the due prayse thereof. For Warre is such a gaine: Some that were poore return with store, Some rich, come home with shame. As for my losse was small I say, For (when I went from hence) I hardly had where with to pay My charges and expence. And thus I warred in this case, Nervus belli pecuni. In joy for hope of pay: But Coyne was scarce, and Warres did cease: So home I took my way. But as for you and all such like, You flow in wealth at will: I wonder not that you dislike, The bloudy Warres so ill. Your money cannot fight for you, Can wealth defend the Land? But such as I, and all my crew: Must in your quarrels stand. You do of Souldiers base esteeme, For we are abjects now: The time will come, it may be seen: To Souldiers you may bow. Philomusus respond. WEll now I see you like it well, Still idle to remain: The more thou stirre, the worse you smell, The Proverbe speaketh plain. An honest man some course will take, To live upon some Trade; Philo proceeds in reproving vagrant Soul∣diers. And as we do our bargain make; So is our wages paid.
If harme thou catch, whose is the blame? Not his that did thee hire: For as thou dost thy wages claime, So men thy work require. Thou must not think to loyter then, Most like the idle Drones: Consuming that which other men, Have got with painful groans. These happy times were in my minde, When all were well employd; When hardly one we could not finde, That idle did abide. But idle persons now do shift, Great multitudes do swarme; Committing murther, whoredome, theft: And every mortall harme. One saith, he gladly would take pains, Yet work he will not seek: If he one day in work remains, Will play therefore a week. Some wrap their legs with clouts and salve, In corners where they lurk: But Souldiers chiefly think they have, A priviledge from work. Thus vagrant Souldiers go and come, Untill good Laws take place: Then some reforme, and other some Doe die with great disgrace. And Souldiers do with ill intent; Set all at five, and nine: And when your means you have all spent, All others you repine. If Souldiers can in warre I say, All mortall pains embrace, I nothing doubt but they that may, Aswell take pains in peace.
For he that can doe nothing more But Peascods sheale (they say) Three quarters of a yeare therefore, For want of worke must play. Miles. VVE Souldiers stand in all the strife, For to defend the Land: With Pikes and Gunnes, and losse of life, Your foes we doe withstand. When we have passed all this harme, With great distresse and cost, Some one a Legge, and some an Arme, And other joynts have lost. Yet nothing to us will you give, But poore Nay and delay: Our wants you will not once relieve, But we must packe away. Sometimes a sore or festered wound, Lame souldiers may protect: But such as I (whose limbes be sound) We live still in suspect. For vagrant persons now we goe, And scorned here, and there: So that in warre, with mortall foe, We live not in such feare, And when a Souldier would take paines, His service is refus'd: But if from labour he refiaines, He must not be excus'd. If begge, or steale, the Law takes place, Which way then shall we live? If steale, (we doe dye with disgrace) The Law will not forgive.
I thinke it better to embrace The Warre (and purchase Fame) Than thus to live in time of peace, In such reproach and shame. I can with Musquet travise so, Ho well plaid boasting Thrasoe. And tosse the tottering Pikes: I know to skirmish with my foe, And when I ought to strike. I know to spurre the Barbed Horse, And how to make my Race, And warily my foes to course, And valiently them chase. I can well scale those fenced Walls, Against which I am sent I want no skill, when time thus falls, Ambushments to prevent. I know to keepe me in array, To march and to retire: And take advantage on the day, When need shall so require. I skilfull am how every wing, In order should be plac'd, For war-like Feasts, in every thing, I will not be out-fac'd. These things are hard for Carpet Knights, Who sleepe in ease and rest: But Souldiers gaine (though got in fights) In time of Warre is best. Philomusus. OH boasting Thrasoe, I thee heare, How faine thou wouldst excuse Thy loytering life; but stay, forbeare, Thou dost thy selfe abuse,
What man so mad, or voyd of care, Or of so little wit, That doth not thinke the warres now are In time of peace, unfit. Warre doth disturbe, and vexe each thing, And order doth deface; And doth dis-throne a right borne King Out of his Regall place. Warre setteth in the selfe-same Throne, Usurpers for to reigne: The Lords and Peers then grieve and groan, When Commons all are slaine. The Virgins ravished most vild, The new borne Infants dye: The Father sees his murther'd child, As he doth wounded lye. The Wife lamenting, weeping goeth, Anon alike doth speed: And still the murthering souldier doth, In shedding blood proceed. Then fiery flames consumes the Towne, When murthering Cannons rore: The Barbed Horses trample downe The fruits of all our store. And noble sparkes, in place most high Are then a Souldiers prey, Some plead for life, some desperately Doe cast themselves away. Who speedeth best hath for his hire The losse of wealth and life: Most stately buildings flame with fire, Whilst swords doe end the strife. The tattering Terrets shake with shot, The battered Bulwarkes breake: Hall, Church, nor Temple, standeth not; Our strength is then too weak.
Thus raging rigour, rules the roast, Rash ruine riddeth all: Yet thou of warre dost brag and boast, As if our losse were small. To this intent, example take, Of Souldiers lewdnesse great: That I may prove these words I speak, I briefly shall repeat. A Tragedie of Souldiers art, Most worthy of all blame: Both for the terrour of the fact, And authours of the same. The Country, place, and parties name, I nominate will not: Because that Christians did the same, But Christ they clean forgot. A sad tragicall Relation. A Captain had (I say agen) Obtain'd at Prince his hand, For to conduct a Band of men, Into an other Land. And marching on approached neere, Unto a Peasants Farme: (For so they terme the Yeomen there,) This yeoman thought no harme. But (as he durst not contrary, So did he entertain: The Captain with all courtesie, The Souldiers did remain. Within a Village joyning neere: The Captain onely bee, With other Souldiers he had there, As after you shall see.
Who lodged at this Yeomans house, Who feasted them with store: That he might still prevent abuse, Was carefull evermore. This Host three comely Daughters had, The eldest was most faire: Which made the Captain almost mad: His lust was set on fire. Her fore-head high, did register, Her feature men adored: There was not one, like unto her, Like Venus so adorned. Her Crimson cheeks; and Christ all eyes, Her lips, like Cherries red: Her words right fober, grave, and wise; Her haire like golden thred. Ʋenus with her could not compare, Queen Dido. Which won the golden Ball: Nor Dido, that sweet Lady faire, Who had the love of all. Her voyce did sing melodiously, To such as did her heare, That all which heard her harmony, Their drooping hearts did cheare. Much further yet I could proceed, Nature did thus adorne: You may in her love-lines still read; Shee did all basenesse scorne. If outward parts like starres did shine, Which men did plainly see: Doubtlesse her soule was most divine, (I judge in charity.) The Captaines Lust this did renew, The estate of those places that are vext with Warre. With furious fiery : He bidding honesty adiew, Then snatcht her in his armes.
This lustfull Captain would not stay, This Virgin to intreat: But hayling her, by force away, I blush this to repeat. The Devill on this Leatcher eggs, He throws her on a bed: Some (of his Souldiers held her legs, Her armes, and some her head. Whilst he commited viilany, To feed his lustfull will; In vain she screeks, lament and cry, None could prevent her ill. This being done, he jeeres her too, I will omit to shew, What bloody teares, and throbs also: Did from this Ravish'd flow. Then did she seek to revenge it, And thereto was she bent, Behold also: how time did hit, To further her intent. She snatching up a Knife which he, (Had lefe upon the board) Then suddenly to him stept she: And to the heart him goard. Stone dead he sinketh down that day, The rest were in a Maze: But she did start aside whilst they; Vpon the corps did gaze. She told her father what was done, And forth with fled away: Alas she knew not where to run, But to the Lord did pray. Desiring rather death, then life: And then report was brought, Vnto the Souldiers of that strife, And who that fact had wrought.
The Soulpiers run as they were wilde, Untill they had her found: She being caught, these Tyrants vilde, Fast to a Tree her bound. The Souldiers then discharged there, At her their thund ring shot: So that their bullets left in her, Not one free place or spot. Thus dyde this peerlesse Paragon, For whose death we may grieve: The like to her I know not one: That do amongst us live. I must bewaile the female sexe, And wish they may amend: But yet the Captain did her vexe, And first the Law offend. In this unhappy Tragedy, There many more were slain: The Yeomans house they did destroy, Who did them entertain. This is your warlike havock still, This is the Souldiers trade: Who having got the reyns at will, Run mad like Colts unmade. Consuming all; and laying waste, Always both night and day: And rushing head-long at the last, Into their own decay. Miles Respond. ANd what of this? though some do ill, Will you condemne the rest? As if mens bloud, onely to spill, A Souldier thus were prest,
Nay, (by a Souldiers troth I sweare) Our Discipline is such: That now in peace, amongst you here, You use not halfe so much. Philomusus. ALL Souldiers not condemned are, Vbi non est bellum, ibi pax perver∣sa. But some we must commend; Who prudently (by lawfull Warre) The Common-weale defend. But better were it, without doubt, (If God so pleas'd would be) That there peace the World throughout, Withall of each degree. Miles. I Do confesse it may be said, That (peace with truth is sweet) But circumstances duely wai'd, Warre sometimes is as meet. You speak disdainfull of Warre now, I say to you again, In time of peace more mischiefe flow, Then do in Warre remain. First know, that peace doth plenty cause, From plenty still proceeds; The hurtfull breach of all good Laws; Prosperities now breeds. As Whoredome, Pride, and Lechery, In time of peace are rife: Contempt of God and man alway, With gluttony and strife.
If Souldiers in the Warre do spoyle, The Miser for his gold: In peace the Rich, the poore do foyle, Much more a thousand fold. In Warre by sword, sometimes we die, And then is peace begun: But poore men are by Usury, In time of peace undone. In Warre the Victor shews mercy, Unto his yielding foe; In peace the debtor loud doth cry, Yet to Gaole must goe. In Warre hard lodging, mean attire, And homely Joans men use: In peace all these with fond desire, Most proudly fools abuse. In Warre the presence of our foes, A view of death doth give: In peace your folly you disclose, And dreame you shall still live. In time of peace true Justice sure, With most can beare no sway; Yet such great feare Warre doth procure: It chaseth vice away. If that the cause of Warre be good, The end then proveth so: If not; our sins, they have withstood, Vice is our greatest foe. Philomusus. ALas, poore silly simple man, What, are thy wits thine own? Thou speakest much, but little can, To good effect be showne.
And sure I am of this always, 'Tis hard for one to take: From peace, her due deserved prayse, Or good of ill to make. Thou saist peace breeds plentiousnesse That freely I confesse: But (saying store breeds idlenesse) Therein thou do'st digresse. Wine is not drunken of it self, Though Drunkards it abuse: Nor idlenesse proceeds from pelfe, Though some it leudly vse. Nowe Judge thyself whether that man, In idlenesse doth rest, When he doth labour what he can: Of store to be possest. Or he that hath not wherewithall, His empty maw to feed; With tooth and naile, and hand doth hall, For to supply his need. We live in peace, with what we got, You live in Warre, and want; It doth appeare, we loyter not: But you in worke are scant. If you more idle did not live, In warre then we in peace: Plenty breeds not idlenesse, but the abuse thereof. You freely would to others give, And not their goods decrease. You say there are of vices swarms, In peace and plenty now; But I conceale a thousand harms, From bloudy warres that flow. I rather plough, and sow in field, With sweat to get my bread: Then in the Warres with golden shield, A Troop of Horses lead.
O noble, Athens, hadst thou used, Dame Pallas gift aright: Thy walls had then not been abus'd, But still had stood in sight. Before the walls were raized above, And ere the Town had name; Or God Neptune with Pallas strove: For honour of the same. Their strife was this: first Neptune smote, Neptunus est Deus Maris, vel Mare ip∣sum. A Rock with Trident Mace: From whence a warlike Horse did trot, Well harnessed in that place. Then Pallas smote the ground most free, With Javelin she did beare: From whence afresh, green Olive Tree, Did presently appeare. The warlike Horse did represent, In warre most good successe: The Olive Tree: did with consent, To Athens peace expresse. Then wisely Athens took their course, In one they did agree: Forsaking Neptunes armed Horse, They choosed Pallas Tree. If they fore-seeing victory, Did rather seek for peace, How much more then ought we then they, From doubtfull wars to cease? Now Souldiers leave Tou-to-lo-gie, If men in peace do wrong: Good Laws have now free liberty; To punish them ere long.
Miles. BVt by your leave I am not mad: My wits are not yet flowne: I doe not make a good thing bad: Nor speake of things unknowne. Epe-mi nun-das doth report, That under Cloak of peace, (Vice vaunteth out, with pompe and port) But vertue doth encrease. Sodom and Gomor, in the plaine, With divers Cities more; There did not one of them remaine (But onely little Zoar.) These liv'd in peace, and fond desire, Geu. 19. Fearing no warre at all: Till from the Lord Brimstone and fire, Did downe upon them fall. When did Darius Kingdomes jarre, Who Asia all possest? But when he was unarm'd for warre, And gave himselfe to rest. You trim your selves in Peacocks plumes, Security and sloth are fore∣runners of de∣struction. Sporting in Ʋenus Court: You are besmear'd with sweet perfumes, And use each want on sport. A Helmet hides your handsome face, Oh take heed of a Gunne. Your Mistris you cannot embrace, If Mars his course you runne. You are foole bent, with fond intent, To dance in Ʋenus string: To all delights you are attent, All care away you sing.
What did you never heare this truth, What stories do report: Of Hercules; how in his youth There did to him resort, Two Ladies, one a dainty dame, In stately Robes beclad, The other plain of Natures frame, These found the yongster fad. To Hercules these females came, But one with wanton tricks, The other vnto fight for fame. His youthfull courage pricks. But Hercules he did detest, The first; and all she said: Unto the second Ladies heast, He during life obeyed. By Hercules his choice and fate, We easily may gesse; That peace makes men effeminate, Which Warre will soon suppresse. Philomusus. NOw Tully doth preferre ill peace, Before a most just Warre: Therefore when Foxes teach the Geese Great danger is not farre. For Pius Anthonius said, I better like of peace; Then other Kingdomes to invade: My glory to increase. And Andrianus also said; He rather would divide, Small bounds in peace, then make aside, To conquer Kingdomes wide.
For Warr that changeth peace (I say) Is like a harebrain Colt: That leaves the plain and beaten way, Ore Hedge and Ditch to bolt. Not peace, but the abuse of peace, The abuse; takes not a∣way the use. Gods anger doth provoke, When Sodome did her sin increase, Gods wrath on them did smoake. I say not but that wisdome would, In peace we should prepare: Against our foes, alwayes we should, Still have a watchfull care. I wish our ships may multiply, And in our Havens ride, And that we may both farre and nigh, Artillery provide. I wish our youth with Marshall strain, May train in every place: By means hereof we may attain, Great skill in little space. Miles. INdeed your words I understand, But oh how brave a thing, It is when fame in every Land, Our valiant Prowesse ring. But heare me now, I tell you what, To this you needs must yield; No fame can be compar'd with that, That is obtain'd in field. Thus famé doth frump them to their face, Who do all Warre deride; Such do condemme the Eagles grace, And praise the Peacocks price.
Philomusus. THou seemest to have a valiant heart, Thou countst of bloud but light: Consider thou a Christian art, And they that with thee fight Are Christians too aswell as wee. What should there be more said? In Truth, and Peace, we must agree: As members of one head. The Heathen they were still at odds, God was to them unknown; And every man, ador'd his gods, Or Idols of his own. But Christians have one God most good: That God we worship all. Know thou, that shedding Christians blood, Is not a trespasse small. Lucre of gain did move their hands, To Warre, and bloody Rage: For quarrels small on forreigne Lands, Ungodly Warres do wage. As they their Triumphs did erect, So envie did abound; And they (whom least they did suspect: Did first their pride confound.) Where is the Parsian Macedon? And Roman Empire wide? And Thesius, that valiant one? And Hercules beside? Alexander, with thousands more, Which I omit to name; Did hazard life, and all their store, To follow fleeting fame.
What can you say, now of these men, That shed of blood such store? For, take away the cause, and then; Their fame remayns no more. Yet such as you (as Tully says) That nothing have to lose: Hee that hath nothing of his own, would have all things common. Are forward still in brawles and frayes, For then your profit grows. In troubled waters you may fish; Not waying others wracks For blood and Warre, you ever wish, To satisfie your lack. And now (my friend) since that our King, And Countrey rest in peace, Forbeare to strike this jarring string, From blood and brawls now cease. But when by Law thou shalt be prest, Obey the King alway, Then thou shalt have my wishes best: That thou maist winne the day. Miles. YOur words with me do now prevaile, And this I adde beside, In vain the shipman hoysts his Saile: Against both Winde and Tyde. And now I see you partly yield, To Mars his honour right: True fame obtained is in field; When Souldiers bravely fight.
Philomusus. I Say (indeed) that Fame always, In lawfull Warre is good: And worthy prayse (if otherwise, It may not be withstood.) But all those Kings I more prayse yet, That rule in peace aright: Then such as have a pregnant wit, Against their foes to fight. To this Cicero is not wrong, Who says let weapons yield To men in Gowns that use the tongue, Romulus primus rex Romanorum. Numa Pom∣philius vir Sabinus Ro∣manorum rex, secun∣dus à Romu∣lo. Resigne the conquered field. Though Romulus fought valiantly, As Rome can witnesse well: Yet Numa (ruling quietly) Did Romulus excell. But lo, what need I rove to Rome? To fetch examples farre Great peace we do enjoy at home; And are not vext with Warre. (Lord) blesse King Charles with peace & health And still preserve his Grace: With Nestors age, and Craesus wealth To rule in Regall place, Give to thy Gospell passage free, To flourish every where, Make Christians all in Faith agree: In Europe farre, and neere. The fertile earth by tillage all, Re-yields in time her store: Each fruitfull thing of moment small. Doth prosper daily more.
We nothing want (if Grace we have) To be in heart content; With thankfulnesse for to receive, Those gifts which God hath sent. Religion here is grounded pure, Like England, now no Coast Throughout the bounds of Europe sure, Hereof, like us may boast. For Discipline like ancient Rome; For wise, brave men of might: A Thebes for wealth: wee are become, Corinth and Athens right. Our King doth prize his people high, Their goods, and lives, alway: And all true subjects willingly, His Highnesse do obey. Both Prince and Peeres, with noble train With solid Councell sage, Do seem, for to renew again; The former golden Age. Foule crimes, we see, now punish'd be, And good men have reward: Now Justice hath to each degree, Of Judgement true regard. O happy Realme, King Charles happy, O happy subjects all: O that we knew, how happily: Our happinesse doth fall. Then should we highly prize the Reigne, Of our Renowned King: With melody and mirth amayne, Our Muses thus would sing. Our King with Kingly Majesty, Sol And other vertues rare; (Wherein to Solomon full high; His Grace we may compare.)
You that with Envy do corrode, Like grisly Gorgons fell: With tumours great like Aesops Toade, Gorgonius: So Rammish and Goat-like do all Here∣ticks, and Schimaticks smell. In poysoned Malice swell. Will you to Hell your selves engage? Know God will work his will: Not spightfull Saul for all his rage, Could good King David kill. Your spight is spide, your knots are known, Your secrets are bewrayde: And God upon your plots hath blowne, Your selves you have betraide. The like successe God grant to those, That wish King Charles ill: (O God) prevent our mortall foes, Thy Church oh prosper still. Thy Tents how goodly garnisht be, Great Britaine greatly grac't? No Nation can compare with thee; Great priviledge thou hast. Had I the learned Homers strain, Or Virgils stately speech: If Tullies tongue I could obtain, Thy prayse I should impeach, Therefore in silence leave I will, Thy full flourishing fame To wiser wits, and learned quill; To publish forth the same. An Ivy-bush is hung in vain. Where good Wine is to sell: Here now I shall my selfe contain, And still thus pray I will. (O Lord) with walls of brasse, Environ Britain round, When all the World shall her admire, Prayse shall to God rebound.
Thus to my purpose, now I come, From which I have digrest, (Brave Souldier) this shall be the summe: Leave Warre, and live at rest. Enjoy those fruits of Peace that fall Philo. hath not a long tongue and a short hand. I will relieve thy lack: This money take; and therewithall, Buy rayment for thy back. If thou didst know, that small increase, Which other Nations taste, Then wouldst thou more esteeme of peace, And make to Warre lesse haste. Now whilst this peace we do behold, Let us ensue the same: With heart, and voice, still as we should, Thus prayse, and laud Gods Name. And render to our famous King, Such firme Allegeance true; Those fruits the Gospell forth doth bring: From faithfull subjects due. Miles returneth thanks to Philomusus. FOr this great love to me you shew, Most hearty thanks I give: I purpose still to pray for you, Whilst here on earth I live. (Good sir) let not my misery, Offensive be a whit, Too bold behav'd my self have, My ignorance remit. Your counsell now I do embrace, (As reason doth require) And that the Lord would give me grace, The same I must desire.
I wish good Warrs may prostee well, With triumph and increase, To subdue all that do rebell: Against our King of peace. As God hath blest his peacefull Raigne, Those yeares, already past, Oh still let him and his remayne: In peace that aye shall last. And now in peace, whilst here I live, I shall be ready prest: To peace and Prince, my selfe will give, In Warre to do my best. Philomusus concludeth. I Like thy resolution well; Thereto I doe agree: Let thou and I together dwell. We both as one will bee. FINIS. Jan. 2. 1638. Imprimatur Matthew Clay.
