6112 99851575 16855
TIME WELL SPENT IN Sacred Meditations, Divine Observations, Heavenly Exhortations. SERVING TO Confirme the Penitent. Informe the Ignorant. Reforme the Obstinate. Convince the Hypocrite: Encourage the Fearefull. Resolve the Doubtfull. Comfort the Afflicted. Uphold the Tempted. And, Cherish the true-hearted Chri∣stian. By that late able, painfull, and worthy Man of God, Mr. EZECHIEL CULVERVVEL Minister of the Word. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for H. Skelton in Little-Britaine: 1634.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and truly religious Mrs. MORE. Right Worshipfull and worthy Mi∣stresse More: THe Church of God hath not only be∣nefit by ex∣act and just treatises knit together in a Me∣thodicall dependancy of one part from ano∣ther,
but likewise of sententious indepen∣dent speeches, that have a generall lustre of themselves as so many flowers in a garden, or Jewels in a casket, wherof every one hath a distinct worth of themselves; and this maketh them the more acceptable, that being short they are fitter for the heart to carie, as ha∣ving much in a little. This moved this re∣verend man of God, to spend what spare houres his sicknesse
would afford him a∣bout thoughts in this kinde. He was many yeares Gods prisoner under the gout and stone, such diseases, as will allow but little liberty to those that are arrested and tortured by them. So fruitfull an expence of time, in so weak and worne a body is seldome seene, scarce any came to him but went away better than they came; God gave much strength of spirit to uphold his spi∣rit from sinking under
the strength of such diseases. It were a hap∣py thing if we that are Ministers of Christ, would in all conditi∣ons and times thinke of our calling, that our office is not tyed to one day in a week, and one houre or two in that day, but that upon all fit occasions we are to quicken our selves and others in the way homeward, as guides to heaven. We read not of the opening of hea∣ven but to some great purpose. So it should
bee with the man of God, he should not o∣pen his mouth and let any thing fall (so far as frailty and the necessa∣ry occurrences of hu∣mane life will permit) but what might mini∣ster some grace to the hearers. The reason why I made choise of you to dedicate them unto, is not that I might dis∣charge mine own debt unto you with another mans coine, but that I could not thinke of a∣ny fitter than your self,
whom this ancient minister of Christ e∣steemed alwayes very much for eminency of parts and grace, and you him as a man faith∣full and one that main∣tained his ministeriall authority with good successe in his place; God allotting your ha∣bitation in your youn∣ger yeares in that part of the countrey where he lived, and where you first learned to know God and your selse. In those times though those parts
were in regard of the aire unhealthfull, yet The hun∣dreds in Essex. that aire was so sweet∣ned with the savory breath of the Gospell, that they were termed the holy land. Here∣upon I thought meet to commend these sen∣tentious speeches by your name, to others. Which though (divers of them) may seeme plaine, yet what they want in shew they have in weight, as comming from a man very well experienced in all the wayes of
God. The Lord fol∣low you with his best blessings, that you may continue still to adorne the Gospell of Christ in your place. Yours in all Christian service. R. SIBBS.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, THE PUB∣LISHER HERE OF wisheth, Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Fa∣ther, and from the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. CHristian Reader, Thou hast here offered unto thee (a rare boxe of precious pearles) on most sub∣jects, many sweet, grave, a∣curate, wholesome, fit, and choise passages. What the Author was, what his care for Gods glory, his delight in Gods worship, his desire of the good of others, his hatred of
sinne, his griefe for sinne, his zeale and fervencie in pray∣er, his knowledge of the word, his contempt of the world, his experience of Satans subtil. ties, his compassion towards the afflicted members of Ie∣sus Christ, his skill in ex∣horting, dehorting, repro¦ving, comforting; his joy∣fulnesse in the society and company of Gods children, his usuall endeavours and employments, his daily me∣ditations, his ordinary spee∣ches, his grouth in grace, and measure of sanctification, &c. may be easily perceived, and plainly discerned by this his ensuing Treatise. Well knew he the worth of time, well knew he in like manner how to employ the same to his best advantage. Apparent it
is, that he thought that time to be ill spent, wherein he was not doing some good to him∣selfe or others, and therefore endeavoured alwayes to bee thus employed. Was he a∣lone? then was he either oc∣cupied in prayer, reading, meditation, or such like Chri∣stian exercise. Was he in com∣pany? then were not his words idle, vaine, worldly, unprofitable, but gracious, poudered with salt, tending to edification. Was he at din∣ner or supper? then would he take occasion to speake of the use of Gods creatures, the thankfulnesse we owe unto God for the plenty we enjoy, together with the usuall abuse of Gods mercies by most men and women. Was there a question propounded unto
him? in the resolution there∣of would he take occasion to dehort from some one or other vice, exhort to some one or other vertue. Did he observe in himselfe any thing defe∣ctive? how did he labour for humiliation; for a supply? Did he observe sinnes in o∣thers, which were not in himselfe? how did he pitty and pray for them, blesse God for himselfe, yea be hereby perswaded that the Lord lo∣ved him, as through whose goodnesse he was made see and hate such things as are so highly esteemed in the world, and pursued by men of this world, whence he became de∣sirous This Book (be∣ing of M. Culver∣wel's owne hand wri∣ting) doe I finde to have beene begun a∣bout 40. years a∣goe, and to have beene written at severall times, and upon seve∣rall occasi∣ons, some passages, being night-me∣ditations, some ut∣tered at dinner or supper, some upon occasion of a que∣stion pro∣pounded, as others upon oc∣casion of some one or other trouble. &c. the more to love the Lord with all his heart, and to be so delighted in him, that he might esteeme no∣thing
without him, nor bee carryed away by any thing from him, in whose favour is all fulnesse of joy for ever∣more. A faithfull Steward he was of the mysteries of God, and who well knew, how to divide the word aright, and give every man his due portion. Thus much no doubt and much more might be said by any of those which entirely knew him, my selfe having at no time otherwise seene him than in his workes, this especially, warranting all that I have affirmed of him. Whatsoever thou art, whatsoever thy condition, thou maiest here have suta∣ble matter which concerneth thy good. Here may parents learne their duty, children theirs. Here may Pastors
learne their duty; people, theirs. Here may all learne, both young and old, rich and poore. This will informe thy judgement, this in like man∣ner stirre up thy affections. Thou then who wouldst learn to performe thy duty towards God, thy duty towards thy neighbour: Thou who would∣est learne at all times to em∣ploy thy time well: Thou who wouldest know with whom thou shouldst converse, and what use to make of good com∣pany, &c. come here, and en∣joy thy hearts desire: What is here offered thee, despise not, but blesse God for the same, accordingly making use thereof to his glory and thine owne good. Farewell. A. SYMSON.
THE AVTHOVRS PRAYER AT the writing of this Booke. MOst gratious God, and lo∣ving Father, pardon & for∣give all my sinnes, and write those things in my heart by thine holy Spirit, which shall be written in this booke, that as this booke shall through thy
grace helpe my memorie, so thy Spirit may sanctifie my meditatious, that tho∣row this grace I may heare to understand, understand to be moved in my affecti∣ons, and not for a time, but for ever to remember, meditate and practise thy word, with an holy and humble perseverance, tho∣row thy deare Sonne, and our only Lord and Savi∣our, Iesus Christ. Amen.
Time vvel spent.THe lips of the righteous feed many. Prov. 10. 21. Hee that winneth soules is wise. Prov. 11. 30. The Preacher was wise, hee still taught the people knowledg, yea hee gave good heed, and sought out and set in order many proverbs. Eccles. 12. 9. Meditati∣on.I will meditate also of all thy workes and talke of all thy doings. Psal. 77. 12. O how love I thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. Psal. 119 97. Observati∣on.Who so is wise and will ob∣serve those thngs, even they shal understand the loving kind∣nesse of the Lord. Psal. 107. 43. Exhorta∣tion.Preach the word, bee instant in season, and out of season, re∣prove, rebuke, exhort, 2 Tim. 4. 2.
THE PRINCIPAL heads of all things con∣tained in this book. A. ADmonition. Page. 1 Affections. Page. 2 Affliction. Page. 3 Angels. Page. 11 Anger. Page. ibid. Assurance of Gods favour, E∣lection and salvation. Page. 12 Atheisme. Page. 24 B. Baptisme. Page. 24 Benefits or blessings. Page. 26 Birth-day. Page. 31 Buying and selling. Page. ibid. C. Calling. Page. 33 Christ. Page. 34 Christian. Page. 36
Christianity. Page. 36 A Civill life. Page. 40 Comforts. Page. ibid. Communion. Page. 46 The Commnnion of Saints. Page. 48 Compassion. Page. ibid. Complaint. Page. 49 Concupiscence. Page. ibid. Conference. Page. 50 Confidence. Page. 53 Conscience. Page. 54 Consent. Page. 57 Contempt of grace. Page. ibid. Contentation. Page. 59 Contracts. Page. 60 Corruption. Page. 62 Good Counsels. Page. 63 D. Holy Dayes. Page. 64 Death. Page. ibid. Decay in grace. Page. 68 Delay Page. 73 Delight. Page. ibid. Devils. Page. ibid. Discerning. Page. 77 Discipline. Page. 78
Despaire. Page. 79 Distrust. Page. 80 Doctrine. Page. 82 Doubting. Page. ibid Dreames. Page. 99 Dulnesse and deadnesse. Page. 100 Duty. Page. 102 E. Earnestnesse. Page. 102 Ease. Page. 103 Elect and Reprobate. Page. ibid. Evills. Page. 104 Excuse Page. ibid. Examples. Page. 105 Exercise. Page. ibid. F. Failings. Page. 106 Faith. Page. ibid. Falls. Page. 133 Familiarity. Page. 135 Fasts. Page. 136 Feare. Page. 137 Feasts. Page. 139 Feeling. Page. 140 Fellowship with the wicked. Page. ibid The Flesh. Page. 141 Flock. Page. 142
Friends. Page. 142 G. Gift. Page. 143 Gods favour. Page. ibid. Gods goodnesse. Page. 144 Gods glory. Page. ibid. Gods mercy. Page. 147 Gods patience and long-suffer∣ing. Page. 148 Gods providence. Page. 149 Gods will. Page. 150 Godly. Page. 151 Godlinesse. Page. 153 Gospell. Page. 158 Grace with the growth therein. Page. 159 Griefe. Page. 182 H. The Heart. Page. 184 Helpe. Page. 185 Hereticks and Heresies. Page. ibid. An Holy life. Page. 187 Hope. Page. 188 Humiliation. Page. 189 Humility. Page. 193 Hypocrisie. Page. ibid.
I. Ignorance. Page. 193 Indifferent Things. Page. 196 Infirmities. Page. 197 Ioy. Page. 198 Iudge. Page. 202 Iudgements. Page. ibid. K. Knowledge. Page. 205 L. Law. Page. 205 Learning. Page. 206 Love. Page. ibid. The Lords day. Page. 210 M. Magistrate. Page. 211 Man. Page. ibid. Mariage. Page. 213 Meanes. Page. ibid. Meditations. Page. 214 Memory. Page. 218 Mercies. Page. 219 Ministers or preachers. Page. 220 Mirth. Page. 230 Mistrust. Page. ibid. Mortification. Page. ibid.
Motions. Page. 231 N. A good Name. Page. 231 Nurcery of the Church. Page. 240 O. Offences. Page. 240 P. Parents. Page. 241 Patience. Page. 242 Peace and joy. Page. ibid. To please God. Page. 246 Poore. Page. 248 Popery. Page. 249 Praise and dispraise. Page. 250 Prayer. Page. ibid. Pride. Page. 260 Priviledges of the Saints. Page. ibid. Profession and professors. Page. 263 Promises. Page. 265 Punishment of sinne. Page. ibid. R Reconciliation. Page. 267 Regeneration. Page. 269 The Regenerate and unregene∣rate. Page. ibid. Remembrance of good. Page. 277
Renewing. Page. 278 Repentance. Page. ibid. Reports. Page. 279 Reproofe Page. 280 Riches, Page. 282 S. Sacrament. Page. 282 Saints. Page. ibid. Salvation. Page. 283 Satans courses, subtilty, and temptations. Page. 285 The Scriptures. Page. 295 Selfe-love. Page. ibid. Sicknesse. Page. 299 Sinne. Page. ibid. Slander. Page. 304 Sorrow for sinne. Page. ibid Soule and b. Page. 318 Spirituall decay. Page. 319 Disquiet Sprit. 320 Godly Strife. Page. ibid. Students. Page. ibid. Suffering. Page. 321 Selfe-Suspition. Page. 322 T. Table-talke. Page. 323
Teares. Page. 323 Temptations. Page. 324 Thankes. Page. 328 Thoughts. Page. 329 Tryall of a mans selfe. Page. 331 The truth, Page. 335 Time. Page. 336 Y. Vertue. Page. 337 Visions. Page. 339 W. Warfare. Page. 340 Watchfulnesse. Page. ibid. Wishes. Page. 341 The word of God. Page. ibid. Worldly mindednesse. Page. 346 Worldly wisedome. Page. 347 V. Young children. Page. 349 Z. Zeale. Page. 350
TIME WELL SPENT. Admonition. 1. MAny can stirre up themselves, Not every one is fit to admo∣nish. which cannot admonish o∣thers, much lesse they which admonish not them∣selves, can admonish others. 2. Having admonished our brother in meeknesse, Hovv to deale vvith those that follow not counsell. and not prevailing, its good to require him to trie his conscience after his sleepe,
what peace he hath in refu∣sing our admonition. 3. To speake to the con∣sciences Hovv a man may speake to the consci∣ence of a∣nother. of others, & to rip up secret smnes, a man must marke diligently his owne heart, whereby hee shall see the secret corrup∣tions of flesh and blood which are in all men. Affections. 1. An excellent tryall of The tryall of our affe∣ctions. our affection of anger, grief, joy, &c. is by this, whether they make us fit to serve God or not. 2. Its a notable point of Our affe∣ctions are in compa∣ny to bee made knovvne as little as may bee. wisedome to make our affe∣ctions knowne in company as little as may be, as did Io∣seph, and not to be extraor∣dinarie at the table either in joy or sorrow, without speciall cause, but privately
with some godly friend, or onely with the Lord to powre out our hearts. 3. Every excessive affe∣ction The hurt of affecti∣ons vvhen they are excessive. bringeth his owne pu∣nishment, anger, griefe, love, jealousie, and the rest, as daily experience shew∣eth. Affliction. 1. The onely way to mo∣derate Hovv to moderate and sancti∣fie our vvorldly griefe. and sanctifie our earthly and naturall sorrow (which in it selfe is not un∣lawfull, but necessarie as a meanes to make us seeke to the Physitian of our soules) is this, so oft as we feele the prickes thereof (which bee in none continuall, but have their fits;) so oft wee should consider of the end why the Lord hath sent them and so continueth
them, that so by labouring The end and use that is to be made of affliction, is to bee considered. to make the right use of them, not only our mindes may bee withdrawne from vaine discoursing of our losse, but also by making some profitable use of them wee may sooner attaine to the end why they were sent, which alone comfort∣eth the Christian heart, for otherwise it were a double griefe, to suffer these things To suffer and not to profit thereby is fearefull. in vaine, yea not to profit by chastisements is and ought to bee a fearefull ter∣rour to our consciences. 2. As for such as have Simil. Dange∣rous to be without affliction. running sores to be without physick is dangerous for fe∣stering, so for us that have running sores of sinne, to bee without afflictions. 3. All outward afflictions The end of afflicti∣ons.
serve to worke the inward griefe for sinne, which if it be, the other is needlesse. 4. An especiall remedie The pre∣fit of pre∣paration for trouble in trouble is to be prepared to undergo the same, when∣soever it commeth. 5. Our wofull experi∣ence Afflicti∣ons un∣vvelcome to flesh & blood. daily shewes how un∣welcome any affliction is unto the outward man, and therefore what neede wee have to bee well armed in the inner man, against grea∣ter tryalls, lest wee sink un∣der them. 6. It cannot bee denied Psal. 89. 31, 32. but that sinne is the onely deserving cause and occasi∣on, of whatsoever evill be∣falleth us, and therefore the Lord is just in all the evills he bringeth upon us, how∣beit he hath many ends why
hee layeth them as well on Why the Lord affli∣cteth as vvell the godly as the un∣godly. the elect as reprobate. The wicked hee plagueth to shew his justice on them, to encrease their sinne and condemnation, as also to make them inexcusable. The elect hee chastiseth to turne them from sinne, and Job. 33 17. 1 Cor. 11. 32. keepe them from damnati∣on: to make them parta∣kers Psal. 94. 13 Heb. 12. 10. of his holinesse, and preserve them from further 1 Pet. 1. 7. Psal. 119. 67. danger: to exercise their faith, manifest their strēgth or weaknesse, and draw them nigher unto himselfe. 7. When we are in affli∣ction, we are not so witty Mans scottish∣nesse in the time of affliction. of our selves, as to see the cause of it, or if wee see the cause, wee see not the mer∣cy of God, that his hand which is upon us is not a
destroying hand, but a deli∣vering hand. 8. Whereas all Gods children bee in continuall battell against sinne more or lesse, it falleth out for the most part, that as earth∣ly Simil. soldiers living at ease in their campe, the enemie hath more vantage, and more prevaileth; so in our prosperity the flesh usually prevailes over the Spirit, but when God sends some Affliction a speciall meanes to subdue the flesh. affliction its as a fresh band of men to helpe the Spirit against the flesh, whereby they daily get more victo∣rie. 9. This is a speciall com∣fort What cō∣forteth the Saints in their trou∣bles. in all afflictions, when first wee beleeve that Gods meaning is to make us bet∣ter; and Secondly we finde
by experience that wee bee so, and daily hope for more gaine thereby. 10. The gaine we are to What gaine wee are to make by our affli∣ctions. make by our afflictions is to be brought to more sight of our chiefe sinnes, and sor∣row for the same, to seeke more earnestly for pardon thereof, and power to a∣mend: to fight the more against them, whereby they may bee the more over∣come. 11. When God layeth Why God layeth his hand upon us. his hand upon us, its that our faith and patience may be the more tryed and exer∣cised to his glory, the exam∣ple of others, and our owne comfort. Afflictiōs are to bee taken as Physick to cure our infirmities 12. Howsoever God hath divers ends in the affli∣cting of his, and all are not
for the same, yet its safer for most Christians to take them as Physick to cure their infirmities, which else would fester. 13. Wee must take all Afflicti∣ons dravv us nearer to God. afflictions as meanes to pull us neere unto God from sloathfulnesse. 14. The visitation of such Prosperity more to be feared then adversity. as grow in grace is not so much to be feared, as their deliverances, lest through unthankfulnesse and ease they lose the fruit they have so dearely purchased of the Lord. 15. A Christian in the In afflicti∣on a Chri∣stian can∣not judge of himselfe aright. time of his affliction, for the hardnesse of his heart, can∣not judge of himselfe, no more then a man sleeping of that hee did waking, Simil. whence it is, that many de∣ceive
themselves in looking to fee alwayes the like mea∣sure or greater of Gods graces in them, for there is some intermission in the worke of the new birth though the Spirit never de∣part, yet must not they bee secure herein, for this must humble them, though not dismay them. 16. No affliction so much What affli∣ctions doe most vvork on the godly. crucifieth a true hearted Christian, as his owne cor∣ruptions and temptations. 17. Its good for affli∣cted consciences to remem∣ber Remem∣brance of our future state a cō∣fort in trouble. the state to come, that they which sow in teares shall reape in joy. 18. Its a common fault to bee more touched when Private troubles doe more affect us then the publick. the crosse privately tou∣cheth us, then when the
whole Church suffereth. Angels. How the good Angels of Hovv the Angels vvarch o∣ver us is not curi∣ously to be searched. God watch over us, is not curiously to be searched af∣ter, but we must pray, that by faith we may feele that they pitch their tents round about our Tabernacles. Anger. Whether our anger bee Hovv spi∣rituall an∣ger may be discerned from car∣nall. carnall or spirituall may bee thus discerned; If it hinder not but quicken our holy exercise of prayer and other religious duties, if it inter∣rupt not our meditations, nor withdraw us from per∣forming our duty to the party offended, neither make us peevish to others, its spirituall not carnall.
Assurance of Gods favour, Election, and Salvation. 1. As it is a most blessed estate to be hid under Gods What it is to be hid under Gods vving. wing, that is, to be sure by faith of Gods favour and protection, that hee will keepe us from danger, or preserve us in it, that it hurt us not, and so in the end deliver us, and make it profitable; So its hard to How hard it is to have an as∣surance of Gods fa∣vour. come to this, and harder to keepe it, whereof amongst others, these may bee the causes: We too little think The causes hereof. of such matters, or prise them not when we doe; yet either wee despaire, or pre∣sume and post off; if we goe about them, yet through ignorance or sloath attend not thereon. The remedy The reme∣diēs.
is to labour and pray to see 1. the gaine which might make our paine, pleasant; till then all will be tedious. Wherein this may further: to consider our present 2. dayes wherein no small store have beene suddenly taken away from all they sore toiled for. And seeing our father hath allowed us 3. sufficient of thesc things be∣low, what childish follie is it to spend our time in play as it were, and leave our chiefe duties, wherein wee should most please God, and most procure our owne welfare, present peace, and What vvee must finde in our¦selves to assure us of Salvation, and that we are beloved of God. eternall happinesse. 2. For our comfort in the assurance of salvation, wee must consider what worke of Gods Spirit wee
doe certainely finde in our selves, as in particular, these. 1. A sound knowledge of the doctrine of Salvation. 2. a true beliefe of it. 3. Joy and comfort in it. 4. desire and care to glorifie God for it, in hating and striving to forsake all sinne, in loving and endevouring to doe all good, in every of them, be∣ing humbled by reason of our weaknesse, yet comfor∣ted through the measure of Gods grace in us. 3. As Gods children bee The Saints infirmities hinder thē of comfort that God is vvell pleased vvith thē. hindered many other waies so this way not the least, that by reason of our com∣mon infirmities in our best actions wee have not com∣fort that God is pleased with us, and so are discou∣raged, and finde not that
joy in our profession wee might doe, for redresse hereof know we thus much, that herein wee offer great injurie to God and our They are injurious o God vvhich thinke no∣thing vvill please him that hath infirmitie. selves, in thinking God so strait and hard, that nothing will please him which hath infirmitie, whereas indeed as hee knoweth what wee doe or can doe, so hath hee revealed himselfe to bee as readie to bee pleased with the meanest endevours, and to forgive and beare with wants, as ever parents were. Againe, if we had not infir∣mities, Through Christ our infirmities are covered what need we Christ one main benefit of his, be∣ing to cover our infirmities Whence it commeth to passe that so fevv be assured of Gods favour. so then wee ought to be∣leeve that God in Christ will forgive and accept us. 4. To have a sweet fee∣ling
of Gods fatherly love and so to know and be assu∣red our names are written in heaven, that wee cannot perish, being (as Christ tea∣cheth) the matter of greatest joy, as whereon all other comforts depend, and with∣out which there can bee no sound joy, no marvaile though so few attain there∣unto, it being reserved for such of Gods children as be deepest in favour with him, the rest but seldome, and the hypocrite never sound∣ly, but in fancie enjoying the same. Though this bee the free gift of God, given to whom, and so long as pleaseth him, yet bee there many lets which keepe men from it, and meanes to at∣taine and keepe it. Besides
the common contemners, even in those that faine Lets of this assu∣rance. would have this assurance, and oft mourne for it, there be many lets. 1. A great 1. Igno∣rance in most hovv or vvhere∣on to build it. part bee ignorant how or whereon to build this assu∣rance, the most building their faith on their life, which cannot be sound, and oft faileth and can never be constant; whereas the true building is to build life on faith, and faith onely upon Gods mercy and truth re∣vealed in his word, not to the righteous and godly, but sinners and ungodly: thus, Seeing the Sonne of God The true foundatiō thereon. who hath given himselfe to worke mans redemption hath freely offered himselfe to save me a wretched sin∣ner voide of all grace, and
subject to damnation, pro∣mising fully to save me, if I will come to him, and whol∣ly cast my selfe upon him, receive him for my Savi∣our, Lord, and Husband, and giving my selfe wholly body and soule to be his to serve him for ever, there∣fore knowing and belee∣ving that hee both can and will indeed fully performe his promise, and defiring to enjoy the same, doe faith∣fully give and betroth my selfe to him, and thereon doe build my assurance, that I in him shall obtaine Gods favour, and all the fruits thereof, for my present cō∣fort, and eternall happiness. 2. Another great and com∣mon 2. Many vvill not goe to the price of it. let of this spirituall joy and comfort in the Lord e∣ven
in those that oft com∣plaine of the want thereof, is this, that they will not goe to the price of it, that is, valuing it above all wee can aske or thinke, therefore to sell all for it, forgoe any thing for it, and seeing what will keepe us from it to put it away, though as deare as our right eye, our gaine, credit, ease, and pleasure; and knowing any meanes that will helpe us to it, to spare no cost, no time, no labour, but constantly to use all meanes till wee get it, and so to keepe it. Now seeing this is tedious to our cor∣rupt 3. Many are forget∣full therein nature, many through meere forgetfulnesse (mind∣ing other things too much) let all this care and travell
alone, seldome or sleight∣ly minding this matter. O∣thers of meere slothfulnesse 4. Slothful neglect to take the paines for it, whereas without much paines it will not bee gotten and kept, and none can bee too much. Others too much in love with the 5. In love vvith the vvorld. world, seeing the attaining and keeping of this assu∣rance of God favour, will not stand with the use of a∣ny unlawfull gaine, credit in the world or vaine de∣light, or with the abuse of lawfull, therefore the cove∣tous, ambitious, and volup∣tuous▪ loath to forgoe any part of their wealth, pomp, and state, of their braverie, feastings, pastimes, and the like, can never get or hold this pretious treasure of re∣joycing
in the Lord. A∣mong those may be recko∣ned such who not so much choaked with these, yet seeing that to hold this confidence will cost them sore trouble and many affli∣ctions, of meere fearefulnes 6. Feare∣full and o∣ver-tender. and over-tendernesse, being loath to suffer any thing, are discouraged from seeking it, and so content to live without it. Others through meere distrust that they 7. Distrust∣full. shall never attaine or hold it, faint and give over. In some there hath been some 8. Given unto some foule and reproach∣full sinne. foule and reproachfull sinne which lyeth as a thorne in the flesh, that til it be pulled out there is no ease, which they loath to see, and more loath should bee seene, and they should beare the shame
of, doe so hide and smo∣ther, that in the end it fla∣meth out to their greater confusion. In all, the Lord hath his stroke, who for these or other most just causes often hideth his lo∣ving countenance from his owne children, and though he love them, will not let them see it, lest they should abuse it, and to make them set more by it, to seeke it earnestly & above all when they want it, and to keepe it charily when they have it. The remedies of all the former diseases be the ear∣nest The re∣medies of the fore∣mentioned lets. labour for the contrary vertues, more to value this pearle, more to minde it, to spare no paines in prayer, meditation and other good exercises, love and desire
nothing in comparison hereof: to hearten our selves against al discourage∣ments, and to be content to suffer any thing for it, and to rest on Gods mercy and truth, that as he hath given an heart to seeke, so wee shall in the end obtaine, and therefore to be patient and constant to the end, to pull up any stub in our consci∣ence, by wise meanes clee∣ring our selves before God and the world as need re∣quires, and lastly to consi∣der the many tokens wee have of Gods love though hee seeme to frowne upon us, and to hide his face. 5. He that most denyeth Who may have most assurance. himselfe, and of love yeelds himselfe wholly to God, may have most assurance of
his effectuall vocation and election. 6. Hee that feeleth his heart fully perswaded of How to try the truth of our assu∣rance. his Salvation must examine whether it breede answera∣ble love, zeale, and care to please God, with griefe for offending his Majestie, else may it be but presumption. Atheisme. Atheisme is more to bee Atheisme more to be feared then Po∣pery. feared then Papisme, seeing many renounce Popery, who yet care not for Chri∣stianity. Baptisme. 1. The Mi∣nisters badnesse hindereth not the ef∣ficacie of the Sacra∣ment. A Godly man may have his childe baptized of a minister though unreve∣rently handling that holy
mysterie, that being alone the ministers sinne, and which cannot hinder the blessing of Gods ordi∣nance: the Apostles being very ignorant, baptised. 2. The Fathers presence is requisite at the bapti∣zing The Fa∣thers pre∣sence re∣quisite. of the childe to pro∣mise for it; or if he cannot come, to certifie the con∣gregation that hee would have his childe baptized, and make that promise by others which present hee ought. 3. Baptisme is a seale of the Crosse of Christ. Baptisme a seale of Christs Crosse. 4. The childe of an harlot may bee baptized, though not for her sake, An har∣lots childe may be baptized. yet for the forefathers within the same generati∣on.
Benefits or Blessings. 1. In all our mirths and rejoycing wee are to re∣member We are to be mind∣full of the Spanish invasion and gun∣powder treason. the great benefit of our deliverance from the Spaniards in 88. and from the Gun-powder-treason on the 5. of No∣vember, by meanes wher∣of wee enjoy those bles∣sings wee daily partake of. 2. As our hearts must We must be perswa∣ded that Gods bles∣sings flow from his love in Christ. rejoyce in Gods benefits, so we must be perswaded that the same flow from Gods fatherly love in Christ, else can wee not give spirituall thankes, but either none at all, or only carnall. 3. Being perswaded that Gods benefits to∣wards Our love must bee kindled thereby. us proceede from his love, the same should
so kindle our love, that we should heate thereby all that come neere us, as fire doth, the want whereof shewes our great unthank∣fulnesse. 4. Whereas the most Abuse of earthly blessings an hinde∣rance from growth in grace. professors bee in nothing more hindered, from growth in grace, yea and most from true happiness, then by the abusing of those earthly blessings they enjoy, health, wealth, beauty, strength, wit, lear∣ning, credit, friends, which through their sinne fur∣ther their miserie, and shall witnesse against them, this must be accounted an high favour to a true beleever Rightly to use them is Gods spe∣ciall bles∣sing. to have grace so to use those, that they all may become his friends to fur∣ther
his happinesse, where∣by hee shall become more assured of Gods everla∣sting favour, and have so many witnesses of the same. 5. This right use stands either tovvard God 1. That they bee received thankfully, so as every vvay Wherein the right use of bles∣sings con∣sisteth. they bind us more to him, more to love him, rest upō him, seeke to him, & serve him. 2. That they be all used to Rom. 12. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 33. his glory. Man Our selves Temperatly: so as they no vvay hinder our Luc. 21. 34. 1 Cor. 9. proceeding, but make us fitter. Providently Soule BodyLuc. 16. 9. Eph. 4. 28. Neigh∣bours Justly, Psal. 15 Mercifully, Prov 6. Whereas there is no one thing which more Earthly care a maine hin∣derance of our spiri∣tuall life. hinders our spirituall life, then our care for earthly,
its the speciall favour of our Lord Jesus, to free us from this care, and to shew us a way how we may bee abundantly provided for of all things necessarie for this present life, that so wee may more seeke spi∣rituall: this he doth by tea∣ching us thus to pra, Give Hovv the Lord fre∣eth his therefrom. us this day our daily bread, whereby he puts as it were a privy key into our hāds, to open all Gods treasures that by prayer of faith we may fetch from God. 7. Many times the Lord Why the Lord sometimes blesseth e∣vn above meanes. above all meanes doth be∣stow a blessing upon his children, even more then they could looke for, that they should not stay too much upon the meanes, but acknowledge every
good gift to come from him, and therefore stay themselves on him, and to the same end also many times he crosseth them in Some∣times eros∣seth in the meanes. the meanes, that either they cannot use them, or using them they prevaile not, even to humble them that he may be God above all. 8. When God bestow∣eth any good gift upon us The crosse seasoneth Gods bles∣sings. its good to feele some crosse to seale and season it in us. 9. We often want out∣ward Why ma∣ny vvant outvvard blessings. blessings, because we so little esteeme inward graces. 10. Its a common thing God bles∣seth before he punish. with the Lord to blesse be∣fore he punish.
Birth-day. The celebration of a Hovv a mans birthday may be ce∣lebrated. mans birth-day may bee used of some and at some times, without pompe, su∣perstition or carnall plea∣sure. Buying and Selling. 1. In buying and selling wee must bee carefull that Rules to be obser∣ved in buy∣ing and selling. every one may have bene∣fit; and in selling rather to bee under the market, then otherwise. 2. In buying and sel∣ling this may bee a good rule to guide us, to doe as wee would be done unto, for example, when wee sell consider wee whether knowing the marketable The tryall of the rules. price, and goodnesse of the thing, wee would gladly give so much as wee de∣mand,
if wee would not, wee deale not justly; so in buying: but herein take wee heede that our hearts deceive us not, whereto we be very prone. 3. Its a sore disease cō∣mon The love of gaine hvv com∣mon, dan∣gerous, & prejudicial & dangerous among the best professors, that they for love of gaine, doe many wayes injure their neighbour, and allow themselves many practises contrary to love, as buying a thing deare to sell for more then its worth, when they sell it, and so casting their losse on their neigh∣bour. 4. In buying and sel∣ling this is a sure rule, to be We must be sure our neighbour gaine by us. sure our neighbour gaines by us.
Calling. 1. IF earthly men in earth∣ly Cheereful∣nesse re∣quired in our cal∣lings, espe∣cially the Ministerie. things do swallow up great troubles, and with cheerefulnesse undertake and accordingly undergoe many hard travells for the satisfying of their desires in pleasure or profit, how much more ought wee which be Christians, espe∣cially Ministers to cheere up our hearts with the hope of our gaine, that with glad hearts we might studie, pray, preach, and performe the like exerci∣ses. 2. They who have The rich must bee most pain∣full in their cal∣lings. double allowance of food and wages, should doe
double service, therefore the rich should more pain fully labour in their voca∣tions. 3. No troubles unlesse they bee in case of meere We must not for∣sake our callings. ungodlinesse may make us forsake our callings, which are never free from trou∣ble. 4. Whensoever we be out of our calling Satan Hovv dan∣gerous to be out of our calling hath fit occasion of temp∣ting us. Christ. 1. Two things are ne∣cessarily What doe espouse us to Christ. required to e∣spouse us to Christ, the one, to use the pure meanes, the other to use these meanes with pure hearts. 2. The onely way to The vvay to come & receive Christ. come to and receive
Christ, is upon good knowledge of his excel∣lencie to desire him, and by the free offer and faith∣full promise of himselfe to us poore sinners, to give credit to his word, taking him for our Lord and Sa∣viour, to give our selves wholly body and soule to him to be his faithfull Spouse and servants for e∣ver. 3. By this among ma∣ny Hovv one may knovv vvhether he hath recei∣ved Christ. other notes, may one know whether he indeed hath received Christ, If he finde such affection to Christ in heaven, as is in a betrothed virgin to one whom shee dearly loveth being beyond sea, think∣ing the time long till shee enjoy his sweet fellow∣ship.
This is too too rare. Christian. It were a very profita∣ble The ana∣tomie of a Christian in his se∣verall parts how need∣full for us. labour for our selves and others, to have the whole Anatomie of a Christian, laid forth di∣stinctly in all the vertues pertaining to him, in all the corruptions cleaving to him, with all the pro∣mises of God, and privi∣ledges both in this life, and the life to come, for encouragement: as in like manner all the threats and miseries of the wicked here and hereafter, to en∣force abstinence from sin; every of them gathered cleerly out of the Scrip∣ture with the quotations. Christianitie. 1. It may be justly com∣plained,
that if the whole course of our best profes∣sors (except very rare men, ministers and people, here and there one) were right∣ly examined, that they are so far off from that course which is by precept and example laid out to us in the Scriptures, that the most have neede to begin Most have need to begin all againe. all againe, and to lay a better foundation in the assurance of their salvati∣on, for want whereof wo∣full The vvant of a good foundatiō what wo∣full effects it produ∣ceth. effects follow, gene∣rally such a contentednesse in their estate, because of some conscience of duty remaining in them, that there is no sighing after a better life, and therefore no great endeavouring for it, which breeds an uncō∣fortable
reckoning in the end, and indeed from hence it comes that the se∣cret wayes of the Lord are not knowne nor sought af∣ter, but so it is for the most part, that if a man have any grace more then is in the common multitude, he is highly reckoned of, though he come more short of the true Christian course which he should at∣taine to, (and some care∣full Christians doe) then he goes beyond the multi∣tude, and to such a passe is our Christian profession come, that if any should step beyond this common coldnesse and backward∣nesse, he is thought worse of; as if in godly griefe, too melancholique; if in zeale,
too heady and undiscreet; if in humilitie, too sillie and foolish; if in love and liberalitie, too carelesse of his estate; and so in other particulars. 2. Christianitie seemes Christia∣nity the onely li∣berty. a bondage, that a man may not doe what he list, but is forced, yet indeede its the onely liberty to the re generate, who would not doe otherwise: to whom onely sinne is a bondage. Those having within them a good conscience, (which is a continuall feast) doe finde here even in this life no small pleasure in the service of God. Besides their joy in the assurance of the reward to come, which is unspeakable. Contrarily, there is no
peace to the wicked, The vvic∣ked Satans bōdslaves. though to outward appea∣rance they live pleasantly, yet are they Satans bond∣slaves, and after this life shall bee tormented with him and his angels world without end. A civill life. Many living a civill ho∣nest life, (as its termed) Gods goodnesse in making civill men on their death-bed reveale their hid∣den sinnes. and yet lying in some se∣cret sinnes, doe at or be∣fore their death often de∣test the same, and shame themselves, which is Gods goodnesse, to shew the truth of his threatning, to stop the rage of the wic∣ked, and keepe his from se∣curitie. Whence it commeth to passe that the godly live not merily in this vvorld. Comforts. 1. Its much to bee la∣mented that God having
provided that his children might live merily in him, few finde this more then in prosperitie as world∣lings doe, which comes by our ignorance, or light re∣gard, or want of faith of obtaining those sweet cō∣forts the Lord hath pro∣vided for us. 2. They bee few that Why so fevv have assurance they be in Christ. have good assurance they be in Christ, which comes by our meere negligence in making sure our calling and Election, no marvell though such feele small comfort in their professiō, contrarily, who so hath this assurance, it must needs be great ignorance or sloath which deprives them of the same. 3. To an afflicted con∣science
this is comforta∣ble, that although it come to passe after some travell in the new birth Gods graces be not so sweet, nor sinne so grievous as it was at our first entrance into regeneration, but wee are now weaker in the lesse assaults, then at the begin∣ning in our stronger temp∣tations, yet are we not to despaire, considering that gratiousproceeding comes from God, who shewed Why God shevves himselfe more fa∣vourable in the be∣ginning of our con∣version then after∣vvard. himselfe more favourable in our first beginning, lest he should discourage us, and for that we wholly re∣sted on him, even in our least temptations, deny∣ing our selves, and now hides himselfe for a season, to make and give us try all
of our strength when as we lesse forsake and suspect our selves; no not in grea∣ter temptations, that wee taking the foile might bee humbled, and acknow∣ledge the continuance of our health to come onely from him. 4. Many hinder them∣selves from true comfort All true comfort comes frō Gods rich mercie. in feeking it from their owne worthinesse, which they doe in being without hope because of their un∣worthinesse, when as all true comfort comes from Gods rich mercie with whom is plentifull redem∣ption. 5. As its dangerous to perswade our selves of comfort, when there is no feeling of inward corrup∣tions,
so it is perilous to refufe all comfort when our sincere purposes are defiled with many corrup∣tions in our practises, and therefore they from whō Satan laboureth to steale away the sincerity of their Its some∣times Sa∣tans policy that vvee should still complaine and grieve for our corrupti∣ons. hearts must take heed they be not still complaining and grieving for their cor∣ruptions, as that they ob∣scure the worke of Gods spirit (which must encou∣rage us against our mani∣fold faintings) and make them to walke uncheerful∣ly in their callings, seeing that the glorious blood∣shed of Christ is not so impotent, as being of force to save the greatest sins and sinners, it should not bee able to purge the
smaller infirmities of the Saints, and if any thinke their prayers and obedi∣ence all but in fashion, this sense with griefe sheweth that it is not altogether in fashion, and the sense of this imperfection doth more please the Lord, then the imperfection doth dis∣please him. Gods children often see The godly are often deprived of the cō∣fort which they had before. no comfort in their life though they have had true comfort, and have forgot∣ten it, or suspect it, who though they should die, without that sense of com∣fort they desire, yet their salvation is not to bee doubted of, seeing they shall not be judged accor∣ding to the instant of their death, but the course of
their life. Wee are not Gods mer∣cies to∣vvards such in their death not to be mi∣strusted. therefore to mistrust Gods mercie in death, bee wee never so uncomfortable, if so be it hath beene before sealed in our vocation and sanctification. Communion. 1. For sitting or knee∣ling at the communion its The peace of the Church to be sought. good to seeke the peace of the Church, lest the reme∣die of evill be worse then the evill it selfe. 2. A good minister will A minister must pre∣pare his people be∣fore hand. take great care to prepare his people for the Com∣munion, both privately and publiquely, marking their proceeding thereaf∣ter. 3. These promises are Promises to be re∣quired of Commu∣nicants. fit to bee taken of them who first are received to
the communion, and that in the sight of God, and presence of some faithfull witnesses, that they would labour, 1. To grow in 1. knowledge of the word. 2. To depart from their 2. former sinnes, and to lead an holy life. 3. To keepe 3. the Sabbaths in godly ex∣ercises as much as may be, and come to be instructed publiquely and privately. 4. If they fall into any sin 4. to abide the censure of the Church, yea not profiting in knowledge to bee sus∣pended from the Sacra∣ment. 4. After wee have par∣taked Examina∣tion re∣quired af∣ter our participa∣tion there∣of. of the holy commu∣nion, wee are to examine our selves, whether wee received the same worthi∣ly,
and that whether wee had Christ, the tryall whereof is by our comfort Whether or not vve have recei∣ved Christ therein. of all good from him, and our conscience to yeeld our selves wholly to bee his, and to serve him; Oh the happinesse of such as have received him, they watch and pray lest they enter into temptation. The Communion of Saints. Its a principall part of the communion of Saints Wee must still be do∣ing or re∣ceiving good. to be most carefull either to bee doing or receiving good, therefore when we joy to see our friends, this must humble us, that wee want this Communion. Compassion. Wee must learne to Wee are to sympathize vvith o∣thers in their griefe pittie them that beeing grieved with themselves,
and finde no peace with God, are grieved with o∣thers and impatient, for this was in David and o∣thers of Gods deare ser∣vants. Complaint. 1. Wee complaine of We make little use of our com∣plaints. many things amisse, but see not, nor search for the cause, much lesse labour to remove it, and so make lit∣tle use of our complaints. 2. It cannot bee but a most dangerous estate, to Hovv dan∣gerous to complaine of our vveaknesse, and yet therevvith to please our selves. bee ever complaining of our weaknesse, and yet therewith to please our selves, though wee finde no prevailing against the same. Concupiscence. To avoide concupis∣cence, By vvhat meanes concupi∣scence may be avoided continually exa∣mine
thy selfe by the law; meditate with reverence on the word; walke paine∣fully in thy honest calling, shame thy selfe before thy friends; use temperate di∣et, sleepe, apparrell; watch over thine owne eyes, eares, and other parts of thy body; have a zealous jealousie of places, persons, and all occasions, to avoide the evill, and seeke the good; humble thy selfe with shame of sinnes past, griefe of sinnes present, and feare of sins to come, with a diligent use of fa∣sting, prayer, and wat∣ching as neede requires. Conference. 1. Its too commonly seene even among deare friends and those also true
Christians that in much talking even about good In confe∣rence con∣tention often ari∣seth. things also, there fall out diversities of opinions, which commonly (if great care and conscience be not had) breede contrary rea∣sonings, in which most of∣fend by stiffenesse in main∣taining thereof, and hard it is not to let slip some in∣considerate speech, which if it be ill taken makes breach of love, and falling out many times when no ill was meant, whereupon considering me thinks the The fault is princi∣pally in the ill ta∣king of things spo∣ken. greater fault is in the ill ta∣king of any thing spoken or done, rather then in do∣ing or speaking, for this proceedeth rather from temeritie and inconside∣ratenesse, upon a sudden
motion, which a right good man may offend in against him whom hee dearely loveth, and pro∣ceeds not simply from so great want of love, as might be thought; even as wee may see in a loving mother to her childe. But ill taking proceeds from more deliberation and rea∣soning The rea∣son. of the matter, and more manifestly bewrayes want of love to take any thing worse then is meant in either partie. Its a sinne Three se∣veral faults compared together. to speake inconsiderately that which may offend, a greater to take that speech in ill part, and the greatest for the first to take in ill part that his speech was ill taken. Prayer re∣quisite be∣fore confe∣rence. 2. Being to conferre of
any weightie matter, we are to prepare our selves by prayer both to speake and heare. 3. The viewing, tou∣ching, Suspition of evill to be avoided or familiar talking with a woman, especially religious, either without necessary occasion, or then without prayer for holy af∣fection is dangerous. Confidence. 1. Its a sinfull feareful∣nesse Hovv dan∣gerous it is not to cō∣fesse our confidence in God. in any sound Christi∣an, not to professe his con∣fidence in the Lord, and not to glory in his porti∣on, and to have no com∣fort that he glorifieth God. This is found very dishonourable to God, un∣profitable to themselves, and hurtfull to good and bad.
2. It seemeth that of all Confidēce and com∣fort in God he Christians crovvne. the gifts of the Spirit, our confidence and comfort in God, should especially bee called our crowne, as eve∣ry way the chiefest for our selves. 3. Herein may wee be Hovv to be confi∣dent about Gods judgemēts. confident, that God hath provided a way, whereby we may bee assured either to scape the judgement which falls upon others, or at least to bee bettered thereby, that it doe us no hurt. Conscience. 1. The testimonie of A good conscience may breed joy, a bad sorrovv: vvith the reasons of either. a good conscience may, ought, and doth breede joy, because it confirmeth to a man that he doth be∣leeve, and ought not make him beleeve who did not.
So the accusation of mans conscience, that his life shewes no sound fruit of faith, may, ought, and doth oft breede sorrow and feare, for that it be∣wrayes the want of faith, and ought not hinder him from beleeving, who doth not at all, or very little; whereupon followes, that all such as be so carelesse in their life, ought to doubt What the carelesse in their life are to doe. whether they truely be∣leeve, and so be grieved for it, that they rest not, till they by application of Gods promises unto them doe soundly beleeve, that thereby their life may be amended, and their hearts soundly rejoyced; by all which appeares that true Godlinesse increaseth not
faith, but sheweth faith, True god∣linesse en∣creaseth not faith; nor un∣godlinesse decrease it. and so makes more sure of salvation then bare faith: neither ought any ungod∣linesse decrease our faith, but rather shew the want of faith, and thereby drive men to seeke more sound∣ly to beleeve, lest they pe∣rish. 2. In affliction especi∣ally when the conscience Hovv to comfort the consci∣ence in time of af∣fliction. (though perswaded that the Lords intent hereby is to make us better) can hardly finde comfort of Gods love that he is not offended, its good to ap∣ply this comfort, that, be∣ing in Christ nothing shall be laid to our charge, nei∣ther any thing condemne, seeing God in Christ is ful∣ly satisfied.
Consent. Ifonce we give consent to sinne, wee are made Dange∣rous to give con∣sent to sin. ready to fall into more and many sinnes, and making no conscience of one sin, wee shall not make consci∣ence of many and great sinnes, and so being once inwrapped in sinne, its an hard thing to get out of Hard to get out of the devills clavves. the clawes of the devill. Lord give us grace to see and resist the very first sinne. Contempt of Grace. 1. Though it be won∣derfull Whence it is that ma∣ny do not embrace pardon & life offered to them. that any sinner knowing pardon and life to be offered to him, should at least not embrace it, yet both Scripture and experience daily shew it to be so, even as in many
earthly cases is to be seen: let a Prince offer pardon to many rebells, or a fa∣ther reconciliation to his disobedient sonne, or a Physitian healing medi∣cines to his diseased pati∣ents, not a few of them re∣ject the same. The causes of this contempt may bee 1. From ignorance many; some men of meere ignorance know not the excellencie of the benefit, and therefore neglect. O∣ther 2. From feare it would cost too deare. would be glad of it, but judge it would cost them too deare, too much travaile and paine to come by it. Others through in∣fidelitie (naturally run∣ning 3. From infidelitie. in all, till God give more grace) doe distrust they shall never have it, and so deprive themselves
of it: by all which and the like meanes it comes to passe, that though grace in the Gospell be offered to all, and many know so much, yet very few truely embrace it, even such alone whom God draweth. 2. Such is the corrup∣tion of our nature that the best things waxe vile by Why the Gospell is not now so respected as before. the commonnesse of them, no marvell then that the Gospell have no such cre∣dit, and be so loved, reve∣renced, & embraced now, as it was at the first en∣trance thereof amongst us. Contentation. 1. Unlesse a man bee perswaded by faith that he dischargeing his duty Hovv to use this vvorld vvel. for his maintenance, that portion which God send∣eth
is fittest for him, and that he can be content to be poore, he can never use this world well. 2. To breede content∣ment with our condition Hovv to be content vvith our condiion. whatsoever; weigh wee, 1. That nothing comes to passe without Gods decree and providence. 2. That the same is not only good in respect of God, but also for the best to all Gods children, wherewith ther∣fore wee ought to be con∣tented. Contracts. 1. Contracts before Directiōs touching Contracts before ma∣riage. they bee published by the Minister are to be knowne of him, and therein this is a good orderly proceeding before some honest wit∣nesses to demand, 1. How
neere or farre off in con∣sanguinity they bee. 2. Whether they toge∣ther 2. or either of them to other have beene precon∣tracted. 3. Whether they 3. have their parents consent, without the knowledge whereof he is not to pro∣ceede. 4. Whether they 4. purpose to solemnize their marriage in the congrega∣tion. These being granted before the parents or their 5. vicegerent to proceede to 6. prayer, and exhortation to some generall duties of men and women, and so to contract according to the common Liturgie in the sight of God with prayer The exhortation (after the defence of this duty be∣longing to the Minister)
may be briefly a discourse of the doctrine of the law and faith applyed to their estate of marriage, and so their speciall callings, and most neede. 2. They which contract themselves without their The Pa∣rents con∣sent to be had. governours or parents consent, if they be alive, are to confesse their fault publiquely before they be marryed, that others may heare and feare. Corruption. 1. Such is the corrupti∣on of our nature that Men doe lesse e∣steeme Gods gra∣ces vvhen they most abound. though wee bee wonder∣fully delighted with Gods graces, yet when wee a∣bound with them, we lesse esteeme them, then when wee begunne to enjoy them.
2. Our corruption is Our cor∣ruptions like the vvanton∣nesse of children. like to the wantonnesse of children, who either will doe as they list, or else leave all undone. 3. Its a common cor∣ruption Immode∣rate griefe occasion∣eth forget fulnesse of former mercies. so to grieve at e∣vills present, that unthank∣fully wee forget former mercies. 4. Its too common a Dange∣rous to re∣veale some▪ conceale our grea∣test infir∣mities. corruption that wee can disclose many of our infir∣mities, and keepe the grea∣test close. Good Counsells. Beleeve to be saved, as a Publican; live as a Justi∣ciarie: Hovv to beleeve to be saved, live, pray, labour for grace, pro∣vide for our soules. Pray as idle beg∣gars who live by begging: Labour for grace, as worldlings toil for wealth: Provide for thy soule as thou doest for thy bodie,
rest, food, apparell, and such like necessaries; feede Note. to be fitter to labour: so labour, as to get a stomack to thy food. Holy Dayes. IN those, wee must re∣deeme the time in re∣sting The use of holy dayes. from our callings. Death. 1. This amongst others ought often to be thought on, to have all things in a We are to be in rea∣dinesse a∣gainst our departure out of this vvorld, dai∣ly prepa∣ring for the same. readinesse against our de∣parture out of this wret∣ched world, and therefore not onely to set our out∣ward estate in order (which naturall wise men doe) for the good and peace of our posteritie,
but especially to set our spirituall state in such a readinesse, that wee may with continuall care and comfort, waite for our change, and our Saviours second comming, and withall to leave to our po∣steritie some testimonie of Gods satherly dealing with us, and fidelitie in performing his promise to us, the seede of faithfull parents, that our posterity may be hereby stirred up to serve the Lord God of their fathers. 2. Wee can better a∣way To medi∣tate on death or judgemēt, vvhich best liked. to meditate on death which Sathan covereth with eternitie following; then on the day of judge∣ment where wee all must make our accounts.
3. The bare meditati∣on of death doth so farre move us from suffering with delight to dwell on earthly things, as reason disswadeth us to make any cost about a tenement, where wee know we shall dwell but a while, yet such imaginations of death build up in the meane time the kingdome of pride in us. Wherefore it shall bee Hovv to meditate on death profitably. more availeable, when wee meditate of putting off this Tabernacle, wee thinke also of putting on the Tabernacle of Righ∣teousnesse, and how with∣out that we shall never stand with comfort before Christ in his Kingdome. 4. As wee are so to Hovv to thinke of life and death. thinke of life that wee bee
content to die, so wee are to thinke of death, that wee be contented to live. The feare of death is no more to be disliked, then The feare of death not to be disliked. not to feare, for both may be with good conscience, and in faith, if they exceed not; for its allowed by grace and nature to feare Gods judgements. 5. To call to minde old sinnes of them which are The use to be made of dying peo∣ple. a dying is necessary to bee done of those which visite them, for if they have tru∣ly repented them, then are they not guilty of them, and others may pro∣fit thereby. If they bee guilty, the trouble of their minde shall turne to their good, in that they finde their judgement in this
world, and escape the e∣verlasting judgement to come. Decay in grace. 1. A most grievous A great judgement it is not to thrive by the many helps vvee have of our spiri∣tuall nou∣rishment. judgement of God it is (though secret and there∣fore not to us so sensible) that having many excel∣lent helps for our spiritu∣all nourishment, yet Gods curse seemeth to be there∣on, in that wee thrive so little thereby, wherein notwithstanding the Lord is to be cleered, who (gi∣ving his grace ordinarily by meanes) doth most just∣ly The causes hereof. keepe it from us, partly for our unworthinesse, ei∣ther for some olde sinne 1. unrepented of, or some present corruption not re∣sisted, 2. and partly for our
contempt of it, in that we setting so little by it, have so sleightly sought it, and having received it in any measure, were no more charie and carefull in kee∣ping it, but through our carelessenesse lost it, and through our pride and pre∣sumption provoked the Lord to take it from us, let our earnest purpose and The R∣medie. prayer bee, for the better obtaining of it, to avoide the letts, and to use more carefully and constantly all good helps, and parti∣cularly holy conference, which by experience wee shall finde to be exceeding profitable. 2. The causes why ma∣ny The causes vvhy many decrease in godlinesse. decrease in godlinesse be divers, as namely the
neglect of those meanes 1. which before they used especially of the private dealings with themselves, and brotherly conferences in such strict manner as be∣fore, whereof wee be soon wearie, in that by nature wee seeke our ease, and through custome grow cold, and through security and pride waxe blinde and see not our neede thereof. So also that wee by Satans 2. suggestion and our owne corruption doe privily fall into a good liking of our estate in regard of for∣mer grace received, wher∣by it comes to passe, that wee feeling our selves to bee freed from the danger of sinne and condemnati∣on, doe not so feare it, nei∣ther
are terrified with the sight of it in us, but through a privie presump∣tion of our safety, we easi∣ly pardon our selves, and deale not so straitly with our selves as before, and thus sinne creepes sore up∣on us to our great hurt. Some there be, though the 3. fewer, who more then they ought torment them∣selves for their little growth. Others (and those the greater sort) 4. who have and doe conti∣nue in a carelesse peace, whom indeed it much cō∣cerneth to be humbled for their little growing in grace. The meane wher∣in a man may with some The Re∣medies. comfort stay himselfe must partly arise from a
wise judgeing of himselfe by comparing his former and present estate both in the use and profit received by the meanes: wherein this may fitly be conside∣red, that a young plant doth more sensibly shew his growth, then an olde tree, but the olde tree brings forth more sound fruit in his season; the de∣cay or want whereof wee must thus remedie, even by calling our selves to a strait account, to see upon what warrant wee enjoy our peace, and so to feare our hearts with such testi∣monies of Scripture as doe tell us that this life is not the life of a Christian, who must bee a new creature, and must walke in the spi∣rit,
and must mortifie the deeds of the flesh, that so we may withdraw peace from our consciences till wee see some change of our troubled state, and re∣coverie thereof. Delay. Many times when wee Why the Lord of∣ten delay∣eth com∣fort. have used all good meanes the Lord deferreth the successe, that we being the more humbled, may bee the fitter to receive com∣fort. Delight. Who so delighteth in Who the Lord de∣lighteth in the Lord, in him doth the Lord delight. Devills. 1. By creation good A descrip∣tion of the devills or evill spirits Spirits; by their fall dam∣ned and wicked spirits changed into evill: finite,
immortall, invisible, ad∣versaries to mans salvati∣on, exceeding many, of great power, Lyons, able to doe any thing not above nature; in respect of their malice, compared to Dra∣gons; their subtiltie, Ser∣pents; their experience, termed olde, using secret ambushes with shewes of good; tempting the pro∣phane, never to minde salvation; the civill to rest in common honestie, as the carnall protestant in outward holinesse; the weake beleever either to be scrupulous, or to take vice for vertue through ig∣norance; the strong to sin against knowledge and presume, to hinder a grea∣ter duty by a lesse, to use
good actions to bad ends, to doe evill that good may come thereof, to grieve so for one sinne as to neglect others; so running into extremities; yea to winke at sinne, to thinke it tole∣rable, to tast it, to commit it, to continue in it, to de∣fend it. 2. This is much to bee lamented, that in time of superstition men were more feared with the de∣vill when they heard of his hornes, clawes, hollow Of olde, men vvere more af∣fraid of the devill then novv. voice, and such like, then now in the Gospell when they heare of his privie working and fighting a∣gainst mens soules, which is much more dangerous, and yet is nothing feared, and yet wee can never be∣leeve
and feele the graci∣ous Note. help of Gods holy An∣gels, till wee beleeve and feele the hidden assaults of Satan and his Spirits. 3. As God and his good Angels are about us, so is The pro∣tection of the good angels comfort∣eth in vvell doing; as the evill spirits being a∣bout us humbleth in evill do∣ing. the devill and his evill spi∣rits; and as good Angels have beene seene, so have and may bee the wicked spirits, not soules of men, but devills in the ayre; and the knowledge hereof is greatly for our comfort in well-doing, that being in great danger voide of all helpe of man, yet God is with us, and his Angels, for our humbling in evill doing, that though no man see or can hurt us, yet the devill and his spirits bee a∣bout us.
Discerning. 1. Many are outward∣ly Man seeth not as God seeth. well, that is, rich in this world, which are inward∣ly ill, that is, poore in Gods account, and many hate outward evill things, which for want of spiritu∣all knowledge, or the spi∣rit of discerning, see not the corruptions of the heart. 2. Wisedome must bee Wisedome and chari∣tie requisit desired in discerning of men, but charitie in judge∣ing and praying for them. 3. They with whom we would converse may Three notes vvhereby to try those vvith vvhom vve vvould converse. be tryed by these three notes, 1. Whether in pro∣fessing godlinesse, they speake upon grounded knowledge. 2. What fee∣ling they have of their in∣ward
corruptions. 3. How loving they are to others in being ready to do them good, and warie to speake of their infirmities, and that with griefe. Discipline. 1. Wee are bound to be thankfull to God for that discipline wee have, (though there bee great want of it) for its the Lords will to advance his glory hereby, in taking that to Gods vvis∣dome in affording no stricter discipline. himselfe, which if we had stricter discipline wee would attribute to it, for besides that hee doth that by his word and prayer which may bee done by discipline, it may be disci∣pline would hide many hypocrites, which now are discovered, and cover
many a Christian heart which now are knowne, for they that bee godly now, be godly of consci∣ence, being a discipline to themselves, but many may seeme godly under disci∣pline which doe it for feare rather then for love. 2. This is a good order A good order of discipline. of discipline, first general∣ly to declare that, 1. Sinne is broken forth. 2. To name the sinne. 3. The partie offending, after to admonish him, then to sus∣pend him, lastly to leave him to Satan. Despaire. 1. Its a fearefull and dangerous policie of Satan to make men continue in sinne without care of reco∣verie, in taking from them
all hope thereof, which he Hovv the devill dri∣veth to de∣spaire. doth by perswading them that their sinnes bee so great, so many, and of so long continuance that they cannot be forgiven. 2. A dangerous policie of Satan it is to provoke Satan tem∣pteth at sometimes to despera∣tion, as at other to presum∣ption. men to despaire inperswa∣ding them they have no faith at all, because they have it not in this and that particular: againe in pro∣voking to presumption to perswade them thus, I hope I have faith in gene∣rall, and therefore my faith is sound in every par∣ticular. Distrust. 1. Distrust is a doubt∣ing of Gods helpe in our Hovv ca∣pitall a sin distrust is, neede: its a capitall sinne above others, robbing
God of his truth, power, wisedome, mercie, and his other attributes, drawing others by our example to distrust, which in like manner robbeth man of his chiefe comfort in all distresses. 2. How prone we are Wee are prone to it. to it may appeare in our tryalls of paine, debt, and the like, wherein we trust to meanes. 3. Wee fall into this by Hovv vvee fall therein resting too much on meanes, neglecting to me∣ditate on Gods truth. 4. To trust on God is Hovv to remedie it. the speciall remedie to cure this maladie. Gods for∣mer libera∣litie doth not preju∣dice his fu∣ture mer∣cies. 5. Its a common temp∣tation to afflicted consci∣ences to perswade them∣selves after some few deli∣verances
that they can looke for no more, be∣cause the Lord hath beene so liberall, but these must know that God is not like man, for his gifts are with∣out repentance, and when he beginnes to shew mer∣cie he will never cease. Note. Doctrine. When there is a doctrin generall or equitie in the word, the exāples though particular may bee gene∣rally applyed. Doubting. 1. What manner of doubting may stand with Hard to discerne vvhat doubting stands vvith faith. faith, though it weaken faith, and what doubting quite shuts out faith, is not easily seene, and more hardly uttered to the sight of the weake.
2. Although this be by the wise providence of God that many of Gods true children, who there∣fore have had sound com Gods children doubt and vvaver of∣tentimes, vvhich the Lord dis∣poseth to good. fort in Christ, doe especi∣ally in their infirmitie oft greatly waver and doubt and so become uncom∣fortable, which the Lord for good cause disposeth, lest by their sudden change from so damnable State and uncomfortable, to so happy and joyfull, they should be lifted up, made conceited and secure, and so presumptuous, the fore∣runners and causes also of a fearefull fall; yet this is certaine, that this is their sinne, a weaknesse which To doubt is a sinne, and to bee vvithstood. must be withstood and o∣vercome, for the attaining
whereto, the cause of this doubting must be searched and so removed, which ordinarily is our owne in∣firmities, neglect and Hovv to remove the same. weaknesse in good duties, too great pronenesse and strength in sinne, where∣upon the tender consci∣ence feareth his former comfort was vaine, and so doubteth of his estate; for the right removing here∣of, this is duly to be con∣sidered that as the roote of our comfort in Christ is not the strength of our Christian life, so the weak∣nesse herein ought not to breede doubting of our salvation by Christ. But Causes of Salvation. for so much as all our com∣fort stands in this that God who justifieth the un∣godly
hath freely given his Sonne, and in him is reconciled to us being his enemies, and hath by his Gospell called us, and by his spirit wrought faith in our hearts to receive Christ so given unto us, whereby wee being dead in sinne and having no goodnesse in us, were made alive to God, and so were new borne, and then doe beginne to bee changed first in affection, and then in conversation by little and little, from a childe growing to a riper age in Christ. Therefore if wee The assu∣rance of our nevv birth a re∣medie a∣gainst doubting. have this assurance of our new birth, though we feele much weaknesse of the spi∣rituall life, yet wee ought not to doubt whether wee
bee Gods children, seeing hee that is so new borne as aforesaid, can never dy; but rather we are to remem∣ber, 1. Wee are but chil∣dren, and therefore weak. 2. Wee are very subject to many spirituall diseases, some such as take away sense of life, and therefore must seeke to bee cured and not despaire of life seeing wee cannot perish. This cannot breede secu∣ritie Sense of our vveak∣nesse and infirmities no breeder of security. in sinne to any, for he that seeing himselfe mise∣rable doth beleeve to bee saved by Christ, cannot but love God, and for love studie and travell to obey him, no more then fire can be without heate, so that they who say they thus be∣leeve and live not Christi∣anly,
are lyars & the truth Faith and an holy life goe to∣gether. is not in them. If any ten∣der conscience, ignorant & weak (for so must they needs be) should say, I am such a one, because they Comfort to a tender conscience feele so little grace in them, they may manifest∣ly be disproved by the true effects of faith, which no faith can be without, true love of God, his Word, his Saints, desire to please God, griefe for former and present sinnes, and such like. If any hypocrite The hypo∣crite dis∣proved. will say he thus beleeveth, and in some measure thus liveth, let him try his in∣ward affections why hee doth all duty, it will bee found not in love to God and recompence of his kindnesse, but either for
the credit of the world, or mercenarily for obtaining Gods favour, whom his securitie, jollitie, presump∣tion, and want of sense of his infirmities and of an holy feare of falling and care to please God in se∣cret will descrie. 3. A true beleever fal∣ling into sin, ought (if hee can) Having fallen into sinne to doubt of Gods fa∣vour vvill not raise up. hold his confidence, though he be foulie fallen, and rather lament that hee Gods childe should so dis∣honour his father; for the doubting of Gods favour cannot raise him from his fall, but the beholding of it, is that alone which will breede holy and accepta∣ble sorrow for sinne and conscience of amend∣ment.
4. Its evident that ma∣ny They vvho most sus∣pect their ovvne vveaknesse prove strongest in the time of tryall. of the carefullest Chri∣stians seeing their infirmi∣ties, doe most doubt whe∣ther they have faith, who yet for the most part in time of tryall finde more then others who bee more secure and confident, but yet this is their fault, that they looke too much to ef∣fects and not to the cause of their justification, and in beholding the effects The saints looke too much on the effects, too little on the causes of justificati∣on. through ignorance and feare, judge amisse, not see∣ing the true effects of faith in them, being blinded with their wants. 5. This is found in ma∣ny true Christians, that they oft doubt of their sal∣vation, and feare they bee not Gods children, because
they see such sinnes and wants in themselves, and hereupon be oft moved to greater care of an holy life thinking that otherwayes Many see∣ing much corruption in them∣selves, vvea∣ken their faith that they might by feare be made more carefull in life, vvho should in∣deed in∣crease their faith, that they might be more quickened thereby to an holy life. they may not beleeve; and on the other side, that if they see more mortificati∣on of their corruptions, and more strength to good duties, that they may boldly beleeve: wherein they pittifully deceive themselves many wayes, 1. That they often ob∣taine not their desire in mortification. 2. That if they by this meanes prick themselves to more care for a season, yet so soone as their feare is slacked their care is ended. 3. That if their care should conti∣nue, yet this is not that
which can either cause them first to beleeve, or else any way encrease their faith, onely this can more certainely prove, that they have and do in∣deede beleeve, and so may comfort them; for there is nothing that can beget or encrease faith, but Gods promise, and seales there∣of truly applyed. They therefore who doubting doe thus think to encrease faith by leading a better life, doe take a wrong course, and plainely shew that in their holy life, they seeke themselves and not the Lord, and are not mo¦ved thereto by the true love of God, which is the chiefe mother of true obe∣dience, whereas they
ought rather, (having good cause to doubt whe∣ther they have soundly be∣leeved, seeing they finde in themselves no comfort∣able fruits of their faith) to labour more stedfastly to beleeve, that so their faith, as fire encreaseth by the heate of it, may send forth more fervent effects of love to God and obedi∣ence, which shall then ef∣fectually comfort them, seeing such fruits of such a root. 6. In the deepest thoughts of our salvation A princi∣pall means of vveak∣ning faith. this oft riseth up to wea∣ken our faith, that God having ordained some to destruction, and yet (to make the sole cause of mans perdition to bee in
himselfe) prepared a re∣medy for all, and in his te∣stament bequeathed it to all, and publiquely pro∣claimed it to the world, though for his part deter∣mining to give grace to re∣ceive it onely to his cho∣sen, and to leave the other to themselves, what war∣rant wee have to beleeve, that we are of them to whom God hath determi∣ned to give his grace, and who indeed shal receive it, and not of those who here∣in deepely deceive them∣selves, whereunto the The remo∣vall there∣of. soundest answere is this, that, the secret determina¦tion of God is to himselfe, and not to be enquired in to of us, who cannot know our election till wee know
our effectuall calling; who to this end must attend to his revealed will, wherein he certifieth all to whom the Gospell commeth, that he would have none pe∣rish, but beleeve, & there∣fore inviteth all of them, exhorteth, entreateth thē by his ministers to be re∣conciled unto him, and sore threatneth if they be∣leeve not. Upon all which this may bee concluded, that its great sinne and fol∣lie for him to whom the Lord hath revealed his will concerning his salva∣tion, and by many meanes prepared him thereto (as giving him sight and sense of his miserie, knowledge of, and unfained desire of Christ the onely remedy,
calling and commanding him to receive him, toge∣ther with cleere know∣ledge that he in his word hath promised this reme∣die to him) for him I say its great sinne notwith∣standing all this (upon no ground, but onely a suspi∣cious feare) to doubt that God will not yet save him, but doth this to his farther condemnation, whereof there is no feare, but to such as contemne this grace, or receive it in vain, not being drawne thereby in truth to love and seeke Gods honour by unfained obedience to his will, whereas all they who knowing the benefit by Christ in respect of the greatnesse of it, and their
owne great unworthinesse doe feare they shall never obtaine it, though they a∣bove all desire it, they I say ought to be bold and count it no presumption Its no pre∣sumption to give cre∣dit to God in his Word. to give credit to God in his word, that hee will ac∣cording to his promise be∣stow his Sonne, and in him eternall life upon them; for such doth Christ ex∣pressely call unto him, Mat. 11. 28. yea hereup∣on ought they boldly without feare to adven∣ture their soules health & eternall happinesse, that by this perswasion they may bee drawne to love and obey God, and so bee confirmed, yea more to feare their hearts from this horrible sinne of unbe∣leefe
(the greatest of all o∣ther) Unbeleefe an horri∣ble sinne. whereby they know∣ing what God hath said, yea unto them, doe yet in not giving credit to him that he will be as good as his word, make him a lyar, and so a false God; much more such as have received the earnest of Gods Spirit renewing their heart and lives, ought to be of good comfort and shake off such doubts. The cause of this Causes of distrust. distrust is in many their owne unworthiness, which bewrayeth great igno∣rance and errour, that God giveth his Sonne to the worthy, though not of merit (which no Prote∣stant holdeth) but ofmeer mercy to those that truely repent them, (which is
petie Poperie) whereas the truth of God is, that hee having given his Son to none but such as had no grace nor repentance in them, that they by recei∣ving Christ by faith, might receive grace to beginne to repent, and so daily to grow therein, therefore as none ought to beleeve be∣cause they have repented, so none ought to be afraid to beleeve because of his Our un∣vvorthines must not let us from beleeving. unworthinesse, the sense whereof doth make him most fit to beleeve, and re∣ceive Christ. The want of knowledge and due regard of this one point is a prin∣cipall cause of distrust on the one side, and vaine pre∣sumption on the other, both workes of perdition.
7. For removing of Hovv to remove doubts of Gods fa∣vour. our doubts of Gods favour either generally or in some particular actions▪ there must bee, 1. A sound judge∣ment to direct when wee ought to doubt or not, and 2. A daily labour ac∣cording to our judgement to doubt and beleeve as cause is. Dreames. Of dreams which make some deepe impression in The use to be made of dreames vvhether us, and abide longer, its good to make some profit, and they may be thought to come from God or the devill, according to their divers ends and effects. An evill, evill dreame shewes an e∣vill heart, in some sinne either committed, or whereto we be subject, and
may shortly follow. If they be terrible, they may terrible, forewarne of some evill to come, that we may a∣voide it by good meanes, yet so as we neither feare or them too much, nor quite contemne them: so for the good, that we perswade not our selves of having it, good. nor yet neglect it. The same may be said for the event of witcheries and slanders. Dulnesse and Deadnesse. 1. A common thing it is in Gods children after Dulnesse vvhen chiefely found. their greatest joyes to feel great dulnesse and dead∣nesse of minde. When the same seiseth upon us, 1. We ought to search the cause, whetherdoing some The causes thereof to be searched evill, leaving off some
good to bee done, negle∣cting the meanes of salva∣tion, not seeing or not re∣penting some sinne seene, or not repenting so sound∣ly; or for unthankfulnesse for former graces. 2. Wee must use the remedie, not The reme∣die to bee used. pleasing our selves in this deadnesse, but stirring up our selves as from slumber, calling to minde Gods spe∣ciall mercies on us, and our unworthy receiving and using of them, using all good meanes to quicken us. 3. In using the meanes to offer our selves to God, Gods help to be vvai∣ted for. waiting patiently for his helpe, esteeming neither too little nor too much our Note. affliction. 2. It falleth out that Gods children are some∣times
more dull with the Why the godly are sometimes more dull vvith the publique meanes then vvith∣out. publique meanes, then without, which may arise from hence, that either they are too remisse in the use of the private, or else fall to loathing the pub∣lique, because they have them so often, or put too much confidence in such places, which the Lord correcteth by denying the use, and such like. Dutie. For infirmities sake to leave a duty undone is to The omis∣sion of a duty for infirmities sake hovv dangerous. cover sinne, not to over∣come it. Earnestnesse. IN our earnestnesse its In earnest∣nesse the heart is to be searched necessary to searth our
hearts, whether it be of the Spirit, or of the flesh, and if we cannot see the depth of our hearts, it ar∣gueth want of prayer and travailing with our affe∣ctions to know them. Ease. Long ease will bring ei∣ther Long ease hovv dan∣gerous. superstition, pro∣phanenesse or heresie through our corruption. Elect and Reprobate. A Reprobate of know∣ledge Difference betvveene the faith of the elect and of the reprobate lying in despaire, may beleeve that both Christ can and would ease him, if hee could beleeve and come unto Christ to be eased, but distrusting this, comes not, turnes a∣way frō God. But the elect beleeving that Christ will ease all commers to him, is
drawne by Gods Spirit to apply this to himselfe, and make reckoning he com∣ming shall bee eased, and therefore indeed seeketh with faith to Christ, and is eased; to come to Christ is not simply to beleeve, What it is to come to Christ. but (beleeving Christ will be as good as his word) in spirit to goe unto the throne of grace, and desire the same, as a begger invi∣ted comes for reliefe. Evills. These be two evills ve∣ry dangerous: To pretend Tvvo dan∣gerous e∣vills. great comfort, and make small conscience in our life, and to confesse our faith is weake, and yet to be content therewith. Excuse. Unvvil∣lingnesse to do good to be stri∣ven against When we are unwilling
to doe good, an excuse is too readie, its good there∣fore earnestly to strive to overcome this, and then to take opportunity to doe the same. Examples. Particular examples Particular examples vvhen to be made generall instructi∣ons. may be made generall in∣structions, when the cause of the mis generall. Exercise. As God hath given great variety of heavenly The varie∣ty of hea∣venly exer∣cises tedi∣ous to our nature. exercises, and matters to be exercised in, so we shall finde such irkesomenesse in our nature, that wee care not to use this variety for our reliefe.
Failings. WHen we see where∣in wee have failed What use is to bee made of our fai∣lings. in any part of our daily practise, we are not to make slight thereof, or favour our selves therein, but labour speedily to re∣cover, lest we grow hard∣ned and incurable. Faith. 1. Such as by hearing of witches and fearefull A proofe of a vveake faith. practises of Satan be sore frighted, are to know their faith is weake and comfort small (for the sound belee∣ver shall not feare for any evill tidings) and there∣fore they must never cease striving for faith and com∣fort,
till they finde a sweet and bold resting in the Lord their father who will preserve them. 2. Faith being the band What be∣nefits vvee enjoy by faith. of our union with Christ, we doe thereby enjoy peace with God, are fa∣vourably accepted of him, joy in the hope of happi∣nesse, have comfort in af∣fliction, patience, experi∣ence, hope, boldnesse to pray, love to God and de∣light to serve him, wee please God, long for hea∣ven. 3. The way to encrease Hovv to encrease faith. faith is to apply to our selves Gods promise in his word and Sacraments, by hearing the word, praying, meditation, conference, and the like, and to this
end also every one who desires to finde strong comfort in the Lord, and Manes vvhereby to be en∣couraged unto all godlinesse. thereby good encourage∣ment unto all godlinesse is daily to consider deepely, 1. His owne miserable e∣state 1. by nature, that there∣by he may be stirred up to cry with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And 2. he is no lesse to re∣gard the remedie here of in 2. Christ, that beholding the singular benefit thereof, he may more uncessantly de∣sire it: and so 3. the truth of Gods promise, that hee 3. may be more and more as∣sured that Christ is his and he the Lords, that this may comfort and encou∣rage
him in all godlinesse. 4. There is great diffe∣rence Difference betvveene knowledge and faith. betweene know∣ledge and faith, for a re∣probate may know by the word of God, and so be∣leeve that God hath pro∣mised his Sonne to him (as well as to others) and yet not lay hold on this pro∣mise, which is true faith, which he onely doth who so receiveth Gods promise that thereby he is certain∣ly perswaded that he shall have the thing promised, which makes himselfe stay for his salvation hereon, and patiently to waite and looke stedfastly for the same. 5. The true doctrine of The true doctrine and pra∣ctise of faith a stranger. faith is a stranger, much more the practise of it,
that men seeing them∣selves most cursed wret∣ches, yet should be assured that God hath given them his Sonne, and in him eter∣nall life, for he that hath this assurance, cannot but have much comfort even in afflictions; and this only is it, which will make a man willing to deny him∣selfe. 6. Its a matter very Fevv knovv or doe e∣very thing in faith. weakely knowne, much more weakely practised of most Christians to doe e∣very thing in faith, which must needes deprive them of much comfort, if they live not securely, content∣ing Foure things to be labou∣red for of him that vvould doe any thing . themselves with opus operatum, for remedy here∣of this is to bee knowne and laboured for of him
that doth any thing in faith, 1. That hee know 1. the thing he doth in omit∣ting or committing bee commanded of God, and therefore endeavour to please God therein. 2. That 2. he know and remember Gods promise made in Christ to such obedience. 3. That he give credit to this promise, that God for 3. Christs sake will accept his true though weake obedi∣ence. 4. That hee with this perswasion doe offer 4. up his service to God in the name of Christ. How infinitely in all wee all doe faile is lamentable to con∣sider, especially that wee Note. doe not the things we doe in faith, and therefore no marvell it is, though God
withhold many sweet cō∣forts, which otherwise we might finde. 7. True faith in my judgement is never so True faith never throughly quenched. quenched, that neither the owner nor any other can see any life thereof, but there is ever some fruit of the Spirit to be seen if we marke it. 8. An holy life cannot make any unbeleever to An holy life shevv∣eth in vvhat sort vve beleev, as iniquity vvho be∣leeve not. beleeve, neither properly increase faith, but onely as fruits prove the tree good, and shew in what sort we beleeve: so no ini∣quity ought to hinder any from beleeving, but only Hinderan∣ces of faith 1. Security occasion∣ed tho∣rough ig∣norance, neglect, or contempt. sheweth who beleeve not. 9. Hinderances from faith are these, 1. Securi∣tie, making no reckoning
of it, or too small, or both, either of ignorance, neg∣lect, or contempt, and therefore either never goe about it, or too slightly, using some meanes, not all, or not constantly to the end. And 2. in such as 2. Presum∣ption or discourage∣ments. make reckoning of it, ei∣ther presumption, (that they have it when they have it not, or may and shall have it without such meanes used, as without which it cannot be looked for) or discouragements, 1. That it is impossible for any, or for them either so weake, that they shall never hold out, or so un∣worthy that God will not give it them. 2. That it is over tedious to attaine to, will cost too much paines,
or bring too much trouble, by forgoing all delights and gaine, or falling into many dangers and perse∣cutions. To remedie Remedies hereof. which, 1. we must make chiefe reckoning of it, as 1. the pearle for which wee will sell all. 2. Consider 2. the difficultie, that we sus∣pecting our false hearts, and weake strength, may use all meanes to attaine it. 3. Comfort our hearts by the word of the Lord, 3. that its not only possible but easie, even for us in our owne eyes most un∣worthy, through him who is able to performe what he hath spoken, and is more willing to grant, then wee to seeke, as ap∣peares by his inviting us,
who seeke not after him. 10. Faith is well likned to fire, whereof if a man Faith like∣ned to fire. have a sparke covered in the ashes, if he shall con∣tent himselfe therewith, not labouring to encrease it, in time it will goe out, and if not, hee shall yet have but small use of it, and oft have much to doe to finde it; So they who finde some faith in them, and therewith content themselves shall soon leese it, or be so to seeke of it, that they have small use of it in their lives, either to comfort them they are the Lords, or to guide their lives; whereas every one ought to kindle his li∣tle sparke, so that he might alwayes have the heate of
it, and warme others. 11. Whosoever armes How dan∣gerous not to be ar∣med vvith faith. not himselfe with faith, shall live securely or feare∣fully, not comfortably. 12. Qu. Whether is this speech, I will goe to Whether this speech, I vvill goe to my fa∣ther, be of faith or before it. my father, of faith, or may it be before faith? An. The parable is to bee under∣stood of professors such as the Jewes were, who were in profession the children of the covenant, and had God for their father, and therefore the ungodly a∣mong Whence it is that be∣ing per∣svvaded that God is true in all that he saith, vvee should yet not be∣leeve some things vvhich hee saith. them and us, are like the prodigall childe who returnes to his Fa∣ther. 13. It seemeth strange that a man being fully per∣swaded that God is true in all that he saith, should yet
not beleeve some things which he knoweth God doth say, and so make God a lyar, which is yet the sin of all men who know God, and his word. The cause hereof is not easily seene, and therefore so hardly removed: indeede if God speake any thing which our judgement can∣not object against why it should not be, we doe rea∣dily beleeve, as of al things past, and many to come, that our bodies shall rise, and wee come to judge∣mēt, the wicked be dāned, the godly saved; but that we being ungodly shall be justified by Christ, this is hardly beleeved, not only because wee be naturally moved to feare that God
for sinne will condemne us, but also because wee measure God by man, that he will not love such as hate him, and doe good to his enemies. 14. Our most holy faith is worthily compared to a Faith cō∣pared to a noble prin∣cesse. noble princesse, who hath ever harbengers, going before to prepare for her, and a goodly traine after, so faith hath knowledge, sorrow, feare, desire of pardon, going before it, as Graces▪ preceding and succee∣ding faith. all the honourable Ladies of vertue; peace of consci∣ence, love of God and men for his sake, and such others follow after. 15. The easiest tryall By the temper of the heart faith may be best tri∣ed. whether our faith be alive and burning, not halfe dead and cold, is by the
temper of the heart; for if faith be lively, then shall we finde our hearts cheer∣ed and ready to serve God in any duty, prayer, heare∣ing the word, and the like▪ yea then will our zeale burne to bee thankfull to God, and willing to die, ready to forsake all: but if the heart be dull, drow∣sie, or dumpish, then is faith cooled; For how can any have feeling of Gods love, and not bee quickened in love to God Note. againe, which will con∣straine us to deny our selves, and to seeke his glory, and to please him in all things. Many de∣ceived in thinking they have faith, and have not. 16. We doe in nothing more deceive our selves then thinking and quietly
resting, herein, that wee have faith, when indeed if we saw the want thereof it could not but shake us. 17. Musing what is the chiefe cause why wee so Chiefe lets of faith or causes vvhy so fevv be∣leeve. hardly beleeve, and put not such confidence in Gods word and seales, as wee doe in mans, I ob∣serve these, 1. That this is our feeble nature, that we 1. can hardly but feare so long as there appeares any danger, that may fall on us, though we have great se∣curitie against it, as a man at sea, or on an high scaf∣fold Simil. or tower, when wee looke downeward we can∣not but feare though there be great safety. Howbeit as they who have had oft experience & be acquain∣ted
with these doe feare lesse, so in matters of the soule some are hardned and desperate, others re∣maine quaking and feare∣full, the best keepe the meane betweene both, so feare the danger as that they are made carefull to avoide it, and that with hope of escaping. 2. That 2. this also is in all by nature till it be defaced, that sin condemnes and drives Wee more easily be∣leeve vvhat God hath said shall be, though it be above nature, then things cō∣cerning our selves if they bee contrary to nature. from God, and its as much against nature for a sinner to looke for favour from God, as fire to be cold; we more easily may beleeve that shall be, which God hath said shall be, though it be above nature, as our bodies to arise, but in mat∣ters concerning our selves
if they be contrary to na∣ture, we ever feare that e∣vill will come, which wee have deserved, and wee shall not have that benefit, which wee are unworthy of, though God by his word and seales give us great securitie to the con∣trary. And this I note the maine errour, that we mea∣sure Gods goodnesse by some worthinesse in us, whereas his truth should be set against all in us whatsoever. Although I doubt not but that there be divers measures of faith in divers men, and in one and the same at divers times, yet there is no faith without some certaintie, and none with all, but the best faith hath feare and
doubting, when we looke upon our vile unworthi∣nesse. 18. Faith to our spiri∣tuall life is in many things Faith like unto fire in sundrie particulars like to fire in the naturall, then which what is more necessarie, for without it, what comfort can wee have? It is it which make∣eth our prayers, and all our Christian endeavours acceptable. As fire will goe out, so faith, therefore it must be daily repaired as the Levites holy fire, which else will be hardly recovered. The way is, to How its to be kept. lay on matter enough, oft to renew the fire, this is by oft meditation on Gods goodnesse promised and performed. 19. The way to get
faith, (whether yet none or but weake) is this, that knowing what true faith is (namely to know by Gods The vvay to get faith word that God is our Fa∣ther in Christ) 1. We ex∣amine whether we have a∣ny, 1. and then how weake: which may be most sound∣ly knowne by causes and effects, among all, the pur∣ging of the heart by faith the surest. 2. Finding either 2. no faith or weake, deepely weigh the great miserie of want of faith, and benefit of true faith, as whereby all grace, and whatsoever is to be desired, without it none, that this may breede an insatiable desire of faith, and daily encrease of the same. 3. Being thus 3. desirous of faith, but ha∣ving
no abilitie to get it, (it being the gift of God) runne to Gods word, and see there to whom God promiseth to give it, where you shall finde, God heares the desires of the poore, Psal. 10. 17. and satisfieth the hungrie with good things, and bids us aske and we shall receive, whereupon all that feele a true desire of faith may take hold even upon Gods word, that hee will give them faith, which is in∣deed a beginning of faith. 4. Hereby they must bee moved to use these two 4. meanes, prayer, and labour to get true saving faith, they must pray to God to worke it in them by his word and spirit, medita∣ting
on Gods mercie in free offering Christ to all sinners, and on his truth in bestowing Christ on all that come to Christ with a true heart in assurance of faith; both which being continued, will certainely obtaine faith in the time and measure which God seeth most meet. 20. Its without questi∣on many be deceived whe∣ther they be in the faith, The surest proofe of faith is by the causes and effects thereof. most presume, some few mistrust. The surest proofe is by the causes and effects both joyned, otherwise no certainty: under causes we comprehend all works of Gods Spirit, by which he leades men by faith, which The causes principally be these three, 1. True humiliation. 2. Ear∣nest
desire of Christ. 3. True beleeving in him: in all which many be de∣ceived with shadowes in stead of substance, or at best with tasts for full fee∣ding. The best evidence we can thinke of that all those be sound bee these; The tryall of our hu∣miliation. for humiliation, if a man carry about with him a true feeling of his wretch∣ednesse. Rom. 7. 24. For The tryall of our de∣sire of Christ. his desire of Christ, if hee be not full, but having ta∣sted, hunger more after Christ. For his drawing The try all of dravv∣ing to Christ. to Christ by the spirit, if af∣ter all stormes to draw him from beleefe, he yet finds Gods word and spirit causing him to rest on The ef∣fects. Gods faithfulnesse. Now for the effects which bee
many, the principall is the receiving of the Spirit, not as a stranger to doe a work and so away, but as an in∣habitant to dwell for ever, which spirit is as the sap which comes from the vine Christ to the faith∣full the branches, this spi∣rit compared to fire hath two effects, light and heat, joy and love, comfort and conscience: many times when the fire is covered there appeares no light, but if you come neere there will be some heate; So is it with weake belee∣vers, they have still some love, though joy be cover∣ed, not felt: as in the causes so in these effects many be deceived, with false fire in both. There be comforta∣ble
notes of soundnesse in Comfort∣able notes of a sound heart. both, which though a de∣ceived person will dreame to bee in himselfe, yet where they bee indeed it will not be hard to finde, and therein wee may rest quietly. 1. One speciall 1. marke of a sound heart is a feare of being deceived, which breeds care to search well our selves, and to be glad to be tryed by God and men. 2. Upon 2. sight of our selves that we have some grace, that wee have a sight also of our po∣vertie; a mourning for it, and meane judgeing of our selves with better estee∣ming and love of those, which have more grace, and an hunger after more. 3. In our whole life to ap∣prove 3.
prove our selves to God more then unto men. 4. Not to rest in the deed, but to have more care of 4. the right manner how we doe any thing. 5. To 5. make conscience to be the same in secret by our selves, which we be before others. 6. To make con∣science 6. of leaving our dea∣rest sinnes, and doing such duties as the flesh most shunnes. 21. This is the exceed∣ing A speciall point of Gods mercie. mercy of God, with encrease of temptation to encrease our faith, as with decrease of faith, to de∣crease also the temptati∣on. 22. Experience shew∣eth that we prove our Hovv to prove vve have saith. selves to have faith, when
we mourne for want of it and thirst after it: and then our faith may be least when we seeme to have most, for then we least feare and suspect our selves, and so are in grea∣test danger, lying open to Satans temptations; this is an excellent comfort for such as are grieved through want of faith, which groweth partly through feeling of the word and humble thankes, and by humbling our selves before God. 23. Though some∣times we feele small or no A reverend estimation of Gods mercies to be-retained faith in us, yet we must re∣taine a reverend estimati∣on of Gods mercie, and most vile account of our sinnes, and wretchednesse,
for to him that thinks no∣thing more vile then his sinne, nothing so pretious A svveet comfort. as Gods mercie, assuredly there is no sinne, but is pardonable. 24. When God affli∣cteth our mindes, if wee In afflicti∣on of minde vvhat is to be done. have received knowledge, then must wee bee thank∣full for it, and pray for faith, and though we have no feeling, yet must wee waite for it, and that long time, for in the end God will surely send it to those that waite for it, which cannot bee without great faith, for the greatest faith is, where there is least fee∣ling; The grea∣test faith is vvhere there is least fee∣ling. for it is more easie in glorious feelings to be∣leeve.
Falls. 1. No man can promise No man but may fall, they soonest that think least of it. unto himselfe but he may fall foullie, and be so sore shaken from his comfort; which soonest befals them that least thinke of it, therefore feare, watch, pray alwayes. 2. Seeing the Lord in these our dayes exerciseth his displeasure in so grie∣vous manner upon many who have seemed long sincere professors, that many are given up to adul∣terie and other grievous sinnes, yea even to Aposta∣sie, What use to make of the falls of others. and sundrie to mad∣nesse, and so to wofull ends, it ought to be an ear∣nest admonition to us all to looke to our state, that wee deceive not our
selves, nor provoke God to humble us so low being his. 3. Seeing the deare children of God, Noah, He that standeth is to take heed lest he fall. Moses, Ezekiah, and ma∣ny other excellent men did fall in their later dayes, every Christian ought to use all meanes, most care∣fully, and be admonished hereby, lest he in like man∣der fall. 4. There is no man so good, but that the Lord Even the best have some slips, the vvorse some goodnesse. sometimes letteth him slip, that he may be hum∣bled; nor so evill, but that sometimes the Lord con∣vaies goodnesse into him, that his condemnation The elect hardly fall tvvice into one grosse sinne. may be the juster. 5. It hardly falleth out, that a Christian effectually
called and of sound know∣ledge should fall twice in∣to one grosse sinne. Familiaritie. 1. The familiaritie Familiari∣tie vvith sinne hovv dangerous. with sinne bringeth pu∣nishment of sinne; for this ought to feare us, that if the wicked which be with∣out the tuition of God, and stand onely upon his long-suffering, and every Fellovv∣ship vvith the ungod∣ly hovv fearefull. minute of an houre lye o∣pen and subject to Gods curse and vengeance, bee our companions, that when they are punished, we shall not escape. 2. Wee may have fa∣miliarity with some, in With vvhat sort of persons and hovv farre vve are to con∣verse. whom though there be no great love of religion, yet there is no misliking of re∣ligion, nor love of heresies,
yet must our acquaintance be in outward things, and we be warie lest theirs draw us from our familia∣rity with God. Fasts. 1. Wee must not come Hypocrisie is to be a∣voided in fasting. to fast untill the Trumpet be blowne, the bell bee rung, but we must fall downe at the trumpet of Gods word, at the bell of our guiltie conscience, for without this private exer∣cise we are but hypocrites in publique fasts. 2. By fasting though we have not obtained all Benefits by fasting. our desires, yet have wee had some mitigation of those evills which have beene laid upon us; and if no reformation, yet conti∣nuance of the Gospell, and
especially to our selves a recoverie of our losse in grace. Feare. 1. Feare and mistrust Difference betvveene feare and presumpti∣on. of our false hearts is paine∣full, but safe, presumption of our care to be good, is pleasant but dangerous. 2. The children of God How pro∣fitable to feare even those things vvhich ne∣ver come to passe. often feare those things, which never come topasse, the wch is very profitable, for thereby God gives us to see our hearts, as if the things feared came to passe indeed, and hereby wee have experience of his graces, and of our owne corruptions, and hereby we are prepared to suffer the like when they come, which will not so much af∣flict us when they were be∣fore
feared, so that we are not to account those fri∣volous feares which have not their event, but to re∣gard the use of them seeing that by these the Lord humbling his children be∣fore hand, keepeth many Those feares vvhich have not their e∣vents not to be ac∣counted triviall. times the plague away which was feared, and on the other side, hee often both more suddenly and more violently bringeth punishment upon those who never feared them: yet herein we must be∣ware of the other extream immoderate feare, which We are to feare though not immo∣derately. rather hinders faith then beates downe securitie, and the meane is to bee embraced, that is, to feare and forethinke of evill to come, not of necessitie to
fall upon us, because either God could not or would not deliver us, but ac∣knowledging our just de∣sert thereof doe humbly submit our selves to Gods hand resting in his father∣ly love, that as he is able so he is most willing, even then to succour us, when we most feare, for as a wise father doth the Lord make his hand heavier in corre∣cting according to the stubbornenesse of his childe. Feasts. At such meetings wee ought to consider the What use to be made of feasts. bountifulnesse of God to wards us in comparison of many of his deare Saints, neither when wee are fed must we kick against our
owner, Lord and master, but be more thankfull and obedient, considering we partake of those and all o∣ther blessings in the right of Christ for the comfort∣ing of our hearts. Feeling. Wee must not cease to pray against want of fee∣ling, Want of feeling to be prayed against. but stay ourselves by faith on Christ till he send feeling, seeing that God maketh the sense of sinne by degrees; they are to be suspected which are much moved with every little Note. sinne. Fellowship with the wicked. 1. The nature of the wicked is, that there growes their love, where Where and why the ungod∣ly love or hate. they be not gainesaid, and reproved for sinne, and
where they bee admoni∣shed there groweth their hatred. 2. Great inconvenien∣ces Affinitie vvith the vvicked dangerous. follow the joyning of our selves in affinitie with the vvicked, as appeareth by Iehosaphat who made affinitie with Ahab. 3. The friendship of the wicked is such, that to The friendship of the vvic∣ked deceit∣full. save themselves they will endanger their friend, so did Ahab with Iehosaphat. 2 Chron. 18. 29. The Flesh. Its our great corruption that wee so much savour The flesh is to bee beaten dovvne, the motions of the spi∣rit to bee entertai∣ned. the flesh; to which we are not debtors, wherein wee injure our selves, and in sa∣voring the flesh quēch the Spirit, whereas otherwise in daily beating downe the
flesh, that is, all motions of sinne, we provide much for our safety and comfort and so kindle with much encrease the Spirit in us. Flock. Being demanded of the welfare of those commit∣ted The dutie of mini∣sters to∣vvards their flocks to our charge, its good to take occasion to pray for them, to bee thankfull for them, and to examine our hearts, what meanes we use present and absent for them. Friends. 1. A common fault it is A fault in friends meeting. in friends meeting, so to reioyce therein, that the spirituall fruit in edifying Hovv to have com∣fort of our friends. one another is lost. 2. The best way to have
comfort of our friends is to pray continually and earnestly for them. Gift. 1. A Gift of thankfulnesse What gift may bee received. after our labour may be received. 2. When we bestow a∣ny Upon the event of spirituall blessings upon any, hovv to be∣have our selves. spirituall gift upon any we must watch what suc∣cesse it hath, and to bee comforted when our tra∣vaile findeth a blessing, and to be humbled when it wanteth. Gods favour. Whence it commeth to passe that vvee are more affected vvith mans favour then Gods A sore evill it is in our nature that we are so much affected with the favour of mortall men who may pleasure or annoy us; and
make so small reckoning of Gods favour wherein is life (Psal. 63. 3.) as in his anger, death, (Psal. 2. 12.) which commeth to passe especially by not conside∣ring those particulars, for then should wee labour more to get in and to keepe our selves in Gods favour then in any mans. Gods goodnesse. To thinke oftand deep∣ly To medi∣tate on Gods goodnesse how profi∣table it is. on Gods goodnesse to us will stirre up in us faith and love. Gods Glory. 1. Its a matter much to be bewayled of us that whereas the honour of God ought to be the most precious treasure in our eyes, and above all desired, it is so horribly defaced in
the world, and lightly re∣garded Christians are to bee humbled for their light e∣steeme of Gods glo∣rie. even of Gods chil∣dren, who doe not so burn in zeale after it as were meet. It shall be therefore highly needfull for us deeply to weigh our sinne, to feare and shame us, that we poore wretches should more greedily seeke our selves then the honour of God, which should be so in request with us, that if the Lord should grant us, but one thing at request, it should be that one thing which above all wee de∣sire. 2. When we think that our chiefest care is to glo∣rifie In glorifi∣ing God vve seeke our ovvne glory. God, wee indeede seeke our owne glory. 3. It cannot be expres∣sed  Gods glo∣ry still to be aimed at. how little conscience
is made to make God glo∣rious in the world, and therefore in all our spee∣ches of God wee must as well for manner, as mat∣ter, yea and to such end, so behave our selves as may most further the same. 4. God is glorified both in private and pub∣lique, Hovv to knovv when God is glorified when wee doe ac∣knowledge his goodnesse, confesse our sinnes, seeke of him all good things, and so exercise our selves in his word, prayer, and the like, wherein if there be a willing minde to please God, it shall be accepted, though accompanied with many wants. This is much more when it is in the great congregation so as
to excite others. And here∣in this is a great encou∣ragement, An encou∣ragement to glorifie God. that in those we doe feast the Lord, who is more delighted in our poore service which is presented in faith, then we can bee in the best graces he bestowes upon us, which is his love and praise, but our great blame: yet this should exceeding∣ly move us to bring the Lord the fattest of our flock, and as to be hum∣bled wee have no better, so to be comforted that be∣ing in truth, the same shall be accepted. Gods Mercie. It is not with the Lord God in shewing mercie is farre un∣like unto man. as it is with men, who for one displeasure will not remember the former o∣bedience
of their servants, but cast them off, such is his mercie that for one sin or offence he will not cast us off. Gods patience and long-suffering. 1. Its exceeding neces∣sarie often to remember, The use to be made of Gods long-suffe∣ring. why the Lord hath reser∣ved us, and given us a lon∣ger time of repentance, even that we may labour to make such gaine hereof as the Lord would, in ma∣king us fitter for the Lord, wherein we must thinke how short this time is. 2. If we play with our owne affections, sinne in Hovv dan∣gerous it is to play vvith our affections. the end from sport will spurre us to confusion, for though wee are given to flatter and presume of our
selves that being twice or thrice spared we dare sin againe, yet we must know Serò sed se∣riò. that the Lord will recom∣pence his long tarrying with wrath. Gods Providence. 1. An excellent pra∣ctise of Christianitie it is Gods pro∣vidence in every thing is duely to be vveigh∣ed. for every Christian duely to weigh the wise provi∣dence of God, as towards others, so especially in himselfe and those that appertaine to him, both in his blessings, and chastise∣ments; that in every of thē we may see the end of all Gods workes, and so make that right use of them, for which God hath sent them, registring the speciall: by which practise a good Christian shall not
onely be able readily to see the proper end of all Gods dealings, but with all have plentifull store of heaven∣ly matter at any time fit both to humble him and raise him up. 2. The providence of God may be highly regar∣ded Gods pro∣vidence to be obser∣ved in the speeches of our ene∣mies. even in the abrupt speeches of our enemies, which to a diligent obser∣ver will bring their profit, though presently none be seene, as Pharoahs to Iosia. Gods Will. The secret things are for the Lord; the revealed Secret things are for the Lord: the revealed for us. belong to us. In the con∣version of a sinner this is most manifest, for herein we are to looke to Gods revealed will, in which we shall see how hee would
have all men saved, and hath prepared a remedie, and freely offered it, and invites all to receive it, which makes much to set out Gods mercie so pro∣claimed in the Scriptures as to make all to beleeve, which is so comfortable to the elect, and which shall make all refusers un∣excusable. Godly. The godly are in many things like children. 1. As Wherein the godly are like children. sucklings they feele un∣quietnesse in the want of the milke of the word, are 1. contented and quieted with it, yea and desire to lie at it. 2. As weaned 2. children (though natural∣ly corrupted) not so much to be devisers of sinne; as
to sinne by imitation, as it were violently drawne unto it. 3. Being growne 3. to mans state to leave childishnesse both in knowledge and manners. Againe, as children bee 4. brought to good and with∣held from evill, either be∣ing wonne with faire words, or allured with tri∣fling benefits, or awed with a check, or feared with a frowning looke, or stilled by seeing another beaten before them, or quieted by the rod, so must Gods children, else its to be feared they are no chil∣dren or babes in Christ, but more carnall then spi∣rituall, or degenerated. And further, though they 5. bee most liberall children
which are easily reclaimed with faire meanes and more moved with promi∣ses to serve God then drawne by threats, yet are they children also, which not profiting so much by Gods wayes, are reclaimed by his corrections. Godlinesse. 1. Whereas every thing There must be a grovvth in godlinesse. hath his time of growing, and his growing in time, its most unreasonable that any godlinesse should bee so straitned, that no growing is to be looked for in it, yea also its a grosse errour that in knowledge In know∣ledge of the truth there must be no stay. of the truth there may be a stay and rest, in true zeale too great a fervencie, in holinesse of life too great precisenesse, when
as our knowledge shall al∣wayes be in part, our zeale too cold, our conversati∣on too much corrupted, be we never so precise. 2. This is a good com∣fort to any Christian heart There is to be no li∣king of our estate but in the practise of godlinesse. never to be quiet or liking his state when hee feeles not some readinesse and cheerefulnesse in the pra∣ctises of godlinesse. 3. That we may be fur∣thered That vve may be furthered in godli∣nesse vvhat things vvee are to con∣sider. in the practise of pietie, consider wee these particulars. 1. That the enjoying of earthly trea∣sures is uncertaine and dangerous, the dealing 1. with them great hinde∣rances, the great delight most hurtfull. 2. That the 2. unchangeable purpose of a godly life is a continuall
consolation. 3. That the bold reprehension of sin 3. in others is a notable bri∣dle to our selves. 4. That the daily use of all holy ex∣ercises, 4. prayer, meditati∣on, reading, conference, are the onely nurses of a Christian life, and of much comfort and assurance of Gods favour to our salva∣tion. 5. That seeing the 5. Lord is at hand wee must not be weary of this course, but labour so to hold out to the end, that we may be found thus oc∣cupied. 6. That the daily 6. consideration and use of these will make our bat∣tell against sinne more ea∣sie and fruitfull, for our very hearts will be better kept in order then other∣wise.
7. That if we well 7. behold what exceeding comfort and joy through the assurance of salvation we finde in this godly life, and what heavinesse in the neglect thereof, its reason sufficient to perswade us to hold on to the end, yea this present sense and fur∣ther hope of the unspeak∣able reward to come makes Christs yoke easie. 4. He hath most profi∣ted who spends most time Who pro∣fiteth most in godli∣nesse. in this practise of godli∣nesse, denying himselfe, and taking no thought to satisfie his carnall minde. 5. Except we keepe this in the purpose of our Hovv ne∣cessary it is to have a resolute purpose to practise pi∣etie. hearts, and resolutely bind our selves hereto, it can∣not bee wee should stand
fast: but many things, as the rarenesse of this course in others, and our owne dulnesse, will beat us from it, and sore shake us. 6. We have great need The Apo∣stafie of o∣thers must avvaken us to bevvare. to take heed of leaving off seeing so many fearefull examples, who harkening to the world, seeking themselves, and waxing weary of this strait way and practise of repentance have given over their di∣ligence in teaching, fer∣vencie in exhorting, zeale in prayer, painfulnesse in private instructing, and readinesse in conference for the edifying of others in meetings, and daily me∣ditation, lamenting their owne and other mens sins, earnest desire of forgive∣nesse,
daily purpose of a∣mendment, meeknesse, pa∣tience, liberalitie, great rejoycing in God, with earnest thanksgiving and the like. The oft perusing of those will awaken us, when we are fallen asleep. Gospell. 1. The letter of the The bare historie of the Gospel not appli∣ed by faith hovv burt∣full it is. Gospell, that is, the bare historie thereof being re∣ceived without the Spirit thereof, that is, the true use thereof applyed unto us by faith, doth no lesse kill then the Law, for what comfort can it bring to a wounded conscience, to know Christ dyed, &c. nay it woundeth them more if by faith they ap∣ply it not to themselves. 2. Nothing more The Gos∣pel strange to Reason.
strange to reason, then the Gospell of salvation by Christ. Grace with the growth therein. 1. This may be justly The meanes considered greater grovvth in grace might have beene got then is complained of by many good ministers and people of our times, that exceed∣ing much more grace of wisedome and strength to every duty and experience for guiding others, might have beene obtained un∣der so long peace, and ma¦ny helpes, had they not trifled out much time un∣profitably, and beene as sloathfull in paines taking as affraid to bee ill occu∣pied. 2. Its our shame and ought to bee our griefe, that we having had so ma∣ny
helps above others, are so farre behinde them, that hardly we can follow them, whom we should have gone before, for what is it but our owne sin that Why there is so little grovvth of grace a∣mongst us. we are not as patterns for others to follow. A princi∣pall cause hereof is this, our too great respect of all earthly things which must needs hinder this godly proceeding, as also that wee are not capable of such a lifting up being too much conceited for the lit∣tle grace we have, and not humbled sufficiently with our many wants. 3. Considering with my selfe what the cause should be why almost all Christians doe very little grow since their first cal∣ling
though they use ordi∣narily the exercises of re∣ligion, and many of them dwell under a profitable ministerie; mee thinkes this may be said, that ei∣ther Most Christians use not a full but an half dyet, or else by some ill meanes hinder the same. they use not a full, but an halfe dyet, or else by some ill meanes hinder the same. There is no Christian who useth not some meanes whereby he maintaines life; and by Gods blessing on his ordi∣nance all holy meanes have their profit, therefore the more is our sinne, in not using all whereby we might bee fat and flouri∣shing in Christianitie. But Simil. as it fareth with crasie bo∣dies, they must have a dy∣et prescribed, and rules to order their whole life, else
can they not long hold out but weaknesse and disea∣ses will oppresse them, whereas otherwise by pre∣cise keeping their dyet in all points they be much preserved, and freed from much griefe and paine. So for all the world it is with our soules, the best where∣of is so crasie that without a good direction precisely followed, long health and peace cannot bee held, but our lives will be filled with many griefes and troubles. And if these be not felt at first, the longer they fester inward, they will cost the more paine and griefe be∣fore they bee cured. It shall be our wisedome therefore never to rest till we have a good direction
fit to preserve our soules Christians must seeke and keepe an holy dy∣et and di∣rection for their lives. in peace, and good estate, and then precisely to keep it in all parts, lest the neg∣lect of one marre another and so wee much hinder our selves. At least this Christians must not be as men sold to their appe∣tite. care must be had, that wee doe not as men sold to their appetite, who to please their tast will leave that which is wholesome, and take that which is poyson to their nature, who therein for a short pleasure bring long and te∣dious paine, which makes repent too late: when this yet is more, that some bee so farre spent that they having once or twice bro∣ken their dyet and finding no present paine, doe wil∣fully proceede, saying, As
good bee sicke for some∣thing as for nothing; and in the end cast off utterly all care, and so bring upon themselves incurable dis∣eases, horrible paines, and certaine death. That this former advice may be the more profitable, that is, that wee may see what good cause wee (who bee What things vvee are to con∣sider that vve may keepe an holy dyet, and dire∣ction for our lives. Gods children) have to seeke after and precisely keepe an holy dyet and direction for our lives, these things are most needfull to be thought on▪ 1. How crasie and feeble soules we have, how sel∣dome 1. in any good temper, how soon distempered, how hardly recovered to any good plight, all which may be seene by looking
backe into our lives, and considering how our lives have beene much out of frame, seldome a good stomack, ever weake unto any good duty, and ever some diseases breaking out upon us, some sores e∣ver running, never long without paine, without some deadly palsies be∣numming our senses, ever in feare of death and such like. 2. How unpleasant 2. an estate this is, and little to be desired, is duely to be weighed, that hereby wee Our emp∣tinesse in grace, bar∣rennesse in good vvorkes, many and strong cor∣ruptions too too palpable. may be much more quic∣kened to seeke the remdie aforesaid. 4. How empty of Gods grace we be, and how full of noysome thoughts and lusts, how negligent and
unprofitable in all heaven∣ly exercises, may wee our selves perceive; as in like manner our barrennesse in all good workes, that few are moved to blesse us and God for us, doth appeare unto others; as likewise our many and strong cor∣ruptions no lesse to be seen in our profession, then spots in our face, such as our apparant negligence and drowsinesse in all holy duties, our overmuch lightnesse and mirth, our vaine talke, pride, cove∣tousnesse, frowardnesse, hastinesse, impatience, and such like. 5. A principall cause of the little growth of most A princi∣pall cause of the lit∣tle grovvth in grace. Christians doe I finde to be this that whereas all the
strength of a Christian commeth from his food Christ, and this food is re∣ceived by faith only, insuch sort that the morestrongly we beleeve, the more wee receive Christ, be nouri∣shed by him, and so on the contrary: yet few they be who so much as know how to edifie themselves in their most holy faith, more then to heare and pray, which are found in∣sufficient, as if a man in a ditch should cry for helpe and use no other meanes, or pray for meate and seek none, and how then can they resume the shield of faith as the Christian Sol∣dier is exhorted, yet many take a wrong way which brings little helpe, namely
to encrease their faith by repentance, whereas there is no sound repentance which comes not from faith, and therefore rather No sound repentance which comes not from faith. we must by our faith en∣crease our repentance, which as the fruit shall ju∣stifie the tree good. The onely right way that I can The onely right way to encrease faith. conceive of to encrease faith is to remember, and duely weigh all Gods pro∣mises generall and particu∣lar, that beholding what the God of truth in the word of truth doth say un∣to us, we may give credit unto it, and so be assured of receiving whatsoever he hath promised; which cannot but singularly com∣fort a Christian, and so en∣courage him to all cheere∣full
obedience. This be∣ing so, the chiefe cause I speake of, of our little growth in Christianitie is this, that of all matters in the Scriptures, Gods pro∣mises are least remembred Of all matters in the Scrip∣tures Gods promises are novv least regar∣ded. and regarded in our pri∣vate meditations or con∣ferences, yea I may say in our publique ministerie; whereas these above all other as the nurses of our faith, and so of all Christi∣anity, are daily to be me∣ditated on and dealt with: and for this cause I doe commend it to every true Christian as a singular meanes of bettering his whole course, that hee la∣bour by all meanes to have in memory store of Gods promises generall and par∣ticular,
that whatsoever Store of Gods pro∣mises to be had in memorie, about eve∣ry particu∣lar duty. he take in hand, to heare, read, pray, conferre, fast, give almes, admonish, cor∣rect, exhort, and the like, yea also in all his outward and earthly affaires, that, I say, before he set on any of these, to lay before him Gods promises, that so he may doe all in faith, and therefore with com∣fort of Gods blessing ther∣in: the practise whereof what change it will bring let experience shew, sure I am it will be great. 6. Forasmuch as wee know but in part, and be∣leeve in part, and there∣fore even they who are re∣generate must grow up in Christ, therefore it is a du∣ty belonging to them also,
as well as to the unrege∣nerate, Even the regenerate must daily desire to be further partakers of Christ. daily to desire more and more to be par∣takers of Christ, that they may be more cured. 7. That which even What vvee are to strive a∣gainst. the best are to strive a∣gainst, be vaine wandrings of the minde about need∣lesse matters, and a sloath∣full neglect of good medi∣tations, and other private exercises the nourishers of all grace. 8. The earnest panting The ear∣nest pan∣ting after grace com∣pared to the breath of the bo∣dy. and desire after grace is fit∣ly compared unto the breath of the naturall bo∣die, which is alwayes in him that hath life, though weaker at one time then another, yea sometimes in a swoune seeming quite gone.
9. All graces are like to Graces like to ten∣der plants. tender plants, whereof many will so goe into the ground, that all their life is in the roote, which in time will spring out again; and others, if they be not cherished, and have the sunne to shine on them, wither. 10. We pray oft for many graces but either Meanes to obtaine and en∣crease grace. know not or use not the fit meanes to obtaine and encrease the same, as 1. For knowledge to read, heare, 1. studie and conferre. 2. For 2. having God in due re∣membrance, to stirre up our mindes often to think of him in all things. 3. To 3. meditate on Gods great∣nesse and glory for reve∣rence. 4. On his promises 4.
for faith. 5. On his pow∣er 5. and truth for trust and hope. 6. On his Wise∣dome 6. and Righteousnesse for patience. 7. On his 7. love to us for love. 8. On 8. his glory for zeale. 9. On 9. his truth and justice for feare. 11. Our growth in Grovvth in grace vvherein it chiefely appeareth. grace doth in nothing more shew it selfe then in our continuall care to please God in all things, for they that seldomest looke to their wayes how they please God, shew they least love God: and Note. they be forwardest, and may have most rejoycing who most care to please him, wherein as many be ignorant how to please God, so even of them the
fewer have such regard as were meet. 12. A great enemy of our growth in grace is a An enemie of grovvth in grace. light regard of our disease, as in the bodily, if wee thinke it small we looke not for helpe, but if wee Simil. feare it is deadly wee use all meanes for recoverie. 13. There can be small joy to any of their life if Nothing harder then to get grace. they gaine not grace, yet nothing harder: Its so contrary to nature and hath so many hinderances, yet there be meanes which well used wee shall surely grow, else not, but indeed either wee use the meanes too seldome, or too slight∣ly, a speciall gift of God it is to keepe a constant de∣light in them.
14. Its not enough for the comfort of a Christian that he is perswaded he is new borne, but he must see that hee grow up in Christ, and be encreased in It is more then appa∣rent that vvho so grovveth not in grace is not in Christ. grace, for its a sore token he is not in Christ, who growes not, but is well contented, for they that have tasted how sweet the Lord is, cannot but desire more, howbeit this is very hard and rarely seen; ther∣fore few true Christians. As all trades some more Simil. some lesse bee not easily learned to become skilfull in, so that we allow seven yeares to be apprentise thereto, so much more the Christian trade wherein Among Christians many bot∣chers. we see many botchers, few cunning to make the wed∣ding
garment meet, wher∣in to grow is not seene of most who looke not after it. The Scriptures oft summe all to these two In vvhat particulars our grovvth must ap∣peare. heads, faith and love: more particularly. 1. Our growth must be in cleerer sight of our owne vilenesse and 1. herein specially what most hinders, which cannot be but by a tracing out the wayes of our hearts and lives, and to this end to take the glasse of the Law, and not as blinde, but ha∣ving the light of know∣ledge to examine our selves, and that particularly in every one, so shall wee see matter more to hum∣ble us, and drive us to Christ. 2. Spreade before 2. us, and deeply and often
meditate on Gods promi∣ses to heale the wounds of the Law, and to comfort us, that wee may rest on God, for this life and that to come. 3. In thanks & o∣bediēce 3. studying to please God in all things both to know and doe his will. 15. Its a common and just complaint of many true Christians, that often∣times they see their whole course is far out of frame and such as yeelds them small comfort, though they be well thought of by their neighbours, which as they grieve at, so they have many purposes to do Most see∣ing thei vvant of grace yet profit but a little therein. better, but in the end these come to nothing, and they never the better, and so go on from yeare to yeare
with little growth, much lesse, such as their profiting might appeare to others: which is especially to bee observed of us Ministers: casting with our selves what might be the best re∣medie hereof, we searched what might be the causes The cau∣ses hereof. which chiefely hinder the profiting of such, who saw and sorrowed for their wants, and purposed a bet∣ter course, which wee found these three, besides that common, that men see not in particular their chiefe defects. 1. That 1. being thus prickt and wounded wee did suffer this to close up, and quick∣ly let this purpose die, and so we fell to our old course againe, and so the longer
the worser. 2. That wee 2. neglect or carelesly use the meanes, whereby our course might be better, and grace encreased; as specially, private prayer, reading, meditatiō. 3. That we harbor some master sin 3. which robbes us of all our gaine, and keepes backe Gods grace and blessing from us. The remedie Remedies. then is, 1. To keepe the 1. wound open by thinking oft what will be the feare∣full end of this course, con∣tinuall uncōfortablenesse, and some foule fall. 2. While the wound is o∣pen 2. to ply carefully all good meanes to cure our soules, and to performe our holy purposes. 3. To 3. search out what speciall
sinne spoiles us, and to strive most to keepe it downe. 16. We have so lost our time, and neglected the We are like to die beg∣gers. meanes that we are like to die beggers, and never at∣taine to such grace as o∣thers doe, and we might: the principall use whereof is, to keepe downe our pride, and quicken prayer. 17. Its an excellent care of a good Christian Our after fruits must exceed our first. that his after fruits of the Spirit exceede the former, that he may answer to the good opinion conceived of him. 18. The care for in∣ward graces and obtaine∣ing What the care for in∣vvard gra∣ces vvok∣eth. of them will breede a godly neglect of outward commodities.
19 Many be barren in Why ma∣ny be so barren in grace. grace, because they be bar∣ren in prayer. 20. Knowledge, Faith, What gra∣ces do not alvvayes succeede one ano∣ther. feeling, joy, and practise doe not alwayes succede one another. 21. The graces of God Gods gra∣ces are the svveetest in our new birth. are sweetest in our new∣birth, because wee fall a∣gaine somewhat to the flesh, otherwise it is not so, and its the worke of Gods Spirit, when and in what measure; although in respect of our selves, that wee differ from the world, that they thinke that their present plea∣sures are sweetest, we that the present feelings of the Spirit, alwayes least, whereas on the other side we thinke our present
temptations and corrupti∣ons ever greatest, though in both wee may be decei∣ved. Griefe. 1. If we will truly la∣ment the sinnes of others, Hovv vve may la∣ment the sinnes of others. we must first be touched for our owne, and as tou∣ching others so to lament as the sinne requireth, and with love not contempt of the person, and pray for him. 2. When we have no The vvant of feare or griefe hovv dangerous. feare or griefe, wee can hardly profit in any godli∣nesse. 3. In cares of extremi∣tie by bodily paines and The use to be made in cares of extremity. griefes, and feares of the minde, we must make this use, to trie our hearts, wherein particularly wee
have deserved this cha∣stisement, and so to hum∣ble our selves: or having no such particular accusa∣tion, to prepare our selves for the Lords triall; who forewarneth us of his comming to us, or that he will passe by us, and there∣fore wee must arme our selves especially with prai∣er, the effect whereof is exceeding great: but wee must take heede in such cases, lest we make hast to end our prayer, as desirous to bee rid out of it, and so commit our selves to God.
The Heart. 1. ITs vaine to controule The heart chiefely to be con∣trouled. the outward senses without rebuke of the heart. 2. The Lord is best The Lord best plea∣sed vvith the heart. pleased with their intents which prepare their hearts to seeke him. 3. A true token of an hard heart, when the con∣sideration A signe of an hard heart. of all Gods mer∣cies cannot bend us to du∣ty. 4. Hardnesse of heart is the sorest plague, com∣mon, An hard heart hovv dangerous it is. infectious and dead∣ly, if it breake not, or stop up againe: our remedie is to take the opportunitie The Re∣medie thereof. of this time and helps we
have, to deale more effe∣ctually then before, to search our sinne, mourne for it, seeke to God in Christ by prayer of faith for pardon and amend∣ment, and then shall wee with more boldnesse and comfort of speeding pray for the poore sheepe that so perish. Helpe. Then is the fittest time The fittest time for God to helpe. for God to helpe, when all hope of helpe is gone, for this most sets out Gods glory and nurtures our faith in resting upon him who is above all meanes. Hereticks and Heresies. 1. Wee must humble our selves to see hereticks What use to make of the practi∣ses of here∣ticks. doe more for vaineglory and for their sect, then we
will doe for Gods glory and for his truth. 2. As there were in the bookes of the fathers dis∣persed The ground of heresie. sentences, which as a seede did lurke in them, and by an evill spirit being gathered together did make an heresie, so in the writings of others. For the family of love hath drawn their sects out of writers new and olde: As the Gospell first beganne in Heresie novv to be feared. simple men and after came to the more learned sort, so heresie beginning now in the simple people, may for so little love of the truth, invade the best lear∣ned, and a lying spirit may as soone through Gods judgements fall upon 400. learned men (such as A∣habs
priests may bee thought) as on the com∣mon Israelites. An Holy life. 1. Considering what the Scriptures in sundry Such are not in Christ vvhich are alive unto sin, dead unto God. places witnesse, of all those that be the members of Christ, namely that they be dead and buried unto sinne, but alive to God, I cannot but wonder how any can so securely assure themselves to be in Christ, who be so living to sinne, that they serve it; so dead to God, that they are farre off from all obedience. 2. A principall hinde∣rance Presump∣tion an hinderance to an holy life. to an holy life, is a presuming of Gods father∣ly affection that hee will spare us, whereof this may be the remedie, to have The Re∣medie.
oft before us the terror of his judgement, to nourish a continuall feare of pro∣voking his anger, a nurse of an holy life. 3. The commodities of a godly life be such as will The com∣modities of a godly life induce∣ments thereunto. enforce any, that knowes them, thereto, namely li∣berty, tranquillitie, plea∣sure, and such like; where∣of whosoever truly tasteth he will thinke no paines too much to bestow ther∣in. Hope. 1. True waiting must be 1. Outward aswell as Foure pro∣perties of true hope. inward. 2. On the word, for many waite rather for hope of some profit then for Gods glory. 3. Con∣tinuall, though God defer long. 4. Without weari∣nesse
and vehemently. 2. Wee are not to bee without hope of any that Hope of others how long to be con∣tinued. hath sometimes shewed effectuall workes of Gods childe, till all be blotted out. Humiliation. 1. Among many frail∣ties of our nature remai∣ning in Gods children, A grievous frailtie in travailing about some du∣ties to for∣get and neglect o∣thers. this is a very dangerous and grievous one, that when wee have by much travaile gotten strength to one duty, wee forget or neglect another as need∣full as the former, where∣by our comfort is much a∣bated, and we are or ought to be much humbled, which in measure the Why the Lord thus exerciseth his Saints. Lord leaveth in his dear∣est Saints, to exercise them
in true humilitie for their wants, in faith to depend upon him for grace, and in prayer to seek it from him continually. 2. Such ought to bee humbled after an especiall manner, which having through Gods blessing on Christians must not be content vvith the doing of some du∣ties but grovv in al. their travailes in Christia∣nity, attained unto some graces and conscience of discharge of duty in some things, specially, common and ordinary, such as pri∣vate prayer, conscionable dealing with men, and the like, doe so content them∣selves with these testimo∣nies of their faith, that they enquire not after o∣thers to grow up into full holinesse in the feare of God, whence it commeth
to passe, that haply they are very zealous, yet very Note. much wanting in love, ve∣ry just dealers, but hard hearted, having little mer∣cy or liberalitie, not so for∣ward in some, as backward in other duties. 3. Wee cannot obtain Hovv to obtaine Gods spe∣ciall mer∣cies. Gods mercies in speciall measure, unlesse we use to humble our selves in speci∣all meanes. 4. Though danger At vvhat time dan∣ger vvork∣eth most. worke in a man much, yet it never prevaileth more then when it commeth with the word of God, which may both give a more lively and cleere sight of sinne, and shew us the mercies of God with∣all, to deliver us from our evills, the profit whereof
is so great, that we pre∣vaile The pro∣fit of hu∣miliation. more by humbling our Soules, then by all chastisements of the Lord whatsoever, for Iebosapbat was more humbled by the speech of Iehn the Seer, then hee was being com∣passed with an host of ene∣mies. 2 Chron. 19. 2. 5. This fruit of hum∣bling our selves is to bee An effect or fruit of humiliati∣on. looked for, even to enter upon a farre better course of Christianitie, to bee more like the faithfull in former ages, in comfort of faith, in mortification, in love, in zeale, that so wee may shine as lights in this darke world. 6. To be touched with A note of true humi∣liation. the sense of sinne in parti∣cular is a note of true hu∣miliation.
7. This is a note of a man truly humbled, when he is readie to shame him∣selfe that God may be glo∣rified. Humilitie. A true tryall of humi∣litie is this, to be content A true tri∣all of hu∣militie. to be taught of our infe∣riours, and admonished of our faults. Hypocrisie. Its hypocrisie, in pub∣lick Hypocrisie in disprai∣sing ones selfe. to dispraise ones selfe, seeking thereby a secret praise. Ignorance. 1. ITs to be lamented that after so long preaching Palpable ignorance in these times. of the Gospell, the most, yea many true Christians,
are yet so ignorant of, and therefore so much want∣ing in the practise of many speciall duties, and indeed so farre off from that strait course not onely which God requires, but the faithfull in times past and some too now a dayes doe carefully and constantly walke in: for example, to goe to the publick assem∣blies Hovv to goe, and come from the house of God. as to a feast, with such hunger, and carefull trim∣ming of our soules, as wee use for our bodies, and to come from them so cheer∣fully, as men refreshed with good cheere. Hovv to vvorke on the igno∣rant, by setting be∣fore them the joyes of heaven, and paines of hell. 2. By oft proofe this is found a chiefe meanes, to pierce the hard skin of the heart of the ignorant sort to set before them the
joyes of heaven and paines of hell, as forcibly as may be, and then shewing that they when they die (which is like to be soo∣ner then they be aware of) shall goe into one of these, to aske them what war∣rant they have, God will have mercy on them, and so to strip them of all vain confidence, to teach them that they can never have the least hope, that God will save them, till they feele such a feare of hell, and desire of heaven, as moves them above all to seeke how to be saved, and therefore so long as they goe on as they have done, with no more care for their soules, they can have no hope of mercie.
Things Indifferent. 1. Whatsoever is nei∣ther Why at sometimes they may be done, at sometimes not. forbidden nor com∣manded in the word, may sometimes bee done for maintenance of love, and sometimes be undone for avoiding of superstition. 2. Where the Scrip∣tures give generall rules, the Church may give par∣ticulars; From ge∣nerall rules particulars may bee dravvne. keeping order, decencie, and edification: so that hereby a man of authority may have his assistant a Chaplaine, and the father in Baptisme may have an helper to witnesse and promise for his childe, and afterwards to helpe him in his educa∣tion, being such a necessary dutie of love; and gloria patri may be used to shew
our Church an enemy to Arrianisme, so we may to avoide Anabaptisme have witnesses to testifie to the Church that we are Chri∣stianly baptised. Infirmities. 1. Its to bee laboured What the sense of our vvants ought to vvorke in us. after that the sense of our infirmities & many wants may abase us before God, and bring us neerer to him. 2. It were not possible The fight of our selves a meanes of perseve∣rance. for us to continue in a good course, if God did not give us to see our selves, and so abased to come to him. 3. Particular infirmi∣ties How par∣ticular in∣firmities are no hin∣derances. doe not hinder the preparing of our hearts for the Lord, if we have a true love of his word, as
Iehosaphat had, and Heze∣kiah. 4. This will teach us Hovv to speak cha∣ritably of others in∣firmities. to speake charitably of o∣thers infirmities, when as wee remember the like may befall us, and to bee often teaching it to others and to remember the rea∣son of the thing, if wee would remember the thing it selfe. 5. Gods children cover many infirmities under Difference betvveene the godly and un∣godly a∣bout the infirmities of others. one good gift in another, the wicked contrarily bu∣ry good gifts in another under one infirmitie, and that a small one. Ioy. 1. Wee reade in Scrip∣ture of two cheif causes of Tvvo chiefe cau∣ses of joy. rejoycing for a Christian, One that hee is by faith 1.
made Gods childe with∣out any righteousnesse of his owne: the other, that he hath received the grace 2. of Gods spirit, to leade an holy life; either of which alone can give no sound rejoycing, but both must goe together. Rom. 5. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Gal. 6. 14. 2. No Christian pro∣fessor Comfort in the re∣membrāce of Christs second comming. can have any sound comfort of his faith, if hee finde no such matter in the remembrance of Christs comming as doth rejoyce his heart, and so in some measure stirre up in him a longing after his appearance; for howsoe∣ver a true faith may bee without some other ef∣fects, yet this being the ve∣ry principall of all, cannot
be wanting, the want True faith cannot bee vvithout this effect. whereof shewing the want of faith is the cause of that little profiting, and so of that little comfort which is to bee found in many, whereas if this were more laboured for, and so more attained to, it would soone cause a great change in any mans profession, and here∣by indeed the face of our profession would be even almost renewed, the alte∣ration would be so great in all respects publick and private. 3. There is no well or∣dered course in Christiani∣tie, Godly sor∣row and joy fit compani∣ons. where godly sorrow and joy be not continuall companions, for severed wee runne into some ex∣tremitie.
4. Whatsoever is the The mat∣ter of joy and tháks∣giving one matter of true joy ought to bee a matter of thanks∣giving to the Lord. 5. This is much to bee lamented, that even a∣mong Many vvant de∣light in Gods ser∣vice. such as make some good profession, very few finde that comfort in the Lord as to serve him with delight and so rejoyce in their portion, as might draw others to desire the like. This comes to passe The cause. by our security, content∣ing our selves with our course of living without open reproach, and our slothsulnesse loath to straine our selves any fur∣ther. The remedie must The reme∣die. be by considering better our state how short wee come and be wanting as in
many duties, so in many comforts, and finde not that full contentment in the Lord for this life, and that to come, which others do, and so leese the sweet, and have the sowre of our profession. Iudge. 1. Its not safe to judge of our selves or others for Not safe to judge of one action one action, but to waite Gods leasure in revealing the truth. 2. For the most part hard judging and false is The effect of hard judging. the fountain of all breaches betweene Christians. Iudgements. 1. The Lord will spare his judgements in them in whom he seeth a true love In vvhom God vvill spare his judgemēts of true religion, for they that love religion, will
heare, and hearing the word will not lie long in any knowne sinne. 2. Its the greatest A great judgement to thrive in sinne. judgement that can bee to thrive in sinne. 3. Let the wicked re∣bell Gods judgemēts shall seise upon the vvicked. as they will, and think how by their subtilties they may escape Gods threatened judgements for a while, yet they shall be pursued from farre, and shall tast the heavie hand of God both fearefully and wonderfully, as came to passe in Ahad. 2 Chron. 18. 33. 4. In denouncing Gods judgements against any, Hovv vvee are to bee affected in denounce∣ing Gods judgemēts we ought to be so affected that we earnestly pray for them, that they may bee delivered from them.
5. The carefull behol∣ding What pro∣fit to make of Gods judgemēts on others. of Gods judgements on others is very profita∣ble, as whereby observing the causes thereof, we may warily avoide them, lest the like fall on us. 6. The not observing of Gods judgements ma∣keth Not to observe them, hovv hurtfull. so little either to feare them, or love his mercies. 7. Who so maketh not conscience to walke up∣rightly, Not to make con∣science of our vvayes hovv dan∣gerous. I will not free him from povertie, from sicknesse, from heresie, for as well can and will the Lord punish the minde as the body.
Knowledge. KNowledge must goe Obedience must fol∣lovv upon it. before obedience, obe∣eience must follow know∣ledge apace. Law. 1. THe Law is often taken for the morall Law of The Lavv; Gods pre∣cepts, judg∣ments, or righteous∣nesse hovv taken. God, his precepts for the ceremoniall, his judge∣ments or righteousnesse for the sanctions of the Law, whether the Lord either accomplish his pro∣mises to his children, or executeth his wrath on his enemies. The prea∣ching of the Lavv necessarie. 2. In these dayes offe∣curity,
the preaching of the Law is the neerest way to draw men to Christ out of themselves. Learning. The greatest Scholars have often most unstable Defects in the greatest Scholars. mindes, fullest of doubt∣ing, and least staid in that they know, and not able to keepe themselves from foule fallings, or being fallen to comfort them∣selves or others. There∣fore the greatest Divinity What is the chiefest divinitie. is in teaching or learning the word of God as the word of God, comparing spirituall things with spi∣rituall To doe good unto others is the end of all duties, vvithout vvhich all our profes∣sion is vaine. things. Love. I. All our travaile in Religion, to know God, to beleeve in him, to love
and feare him, and all our prayers, exercises in the word, and the like, are re∣ferred to this, to doe all good to our neighbour in our severall callings, agree∣able to that, He that lo∣veth another hath fulfilled the Law. Rom. 13. 8. and Pure religion and undefi∣led before God and the Father, is to visit the fa∣therlesse, &c. Iames 1. 27. Therefore as we are to bee carefull of all those duties we owe to ourselves, so to others, good or bad: for all zeale in Gods service, and profession of our love to God is vaine, unlesse it make us carefull for the salvation and bodily pre∣servation of our neigh∣bour.
2. There are no stron∣ger Hovv to live in love and peace. meanes to make man and wife, or two brethren or sisters living together, in peace and love, then to joyne together often in prayer and christian con∣ference. 3. By musing upon that which often the Scriptures∣doe The ex∣cellencie of love. teach us concerning love, that it is the fulfilling of the Law, and, to give all we have to the poore without love is nothing, and especially, that when our faith and hope shall cease, love shall remaine & most flourish in the life to come, I doe grow to an admiration of the excel∣lencie thereof, the sense whereof I most feele, when as by some good
meanes (as some sweet conference) my affection is enlarged to any of Gods Saints, me thinkes I tast of the happinesse to come, then which, what more delectable? How great therefore is our folly and sinne, who provide no Note. better for our selves by encreasing this pleasure. 4. The Lord doth of∣ten Love dravveth love, as ha∣tred doth hatred. so work that the good affection wee beare to o∣thers doth breed the like love in them to us, and so the contrary, they of whom we thinke hardly, have in like manner an heart burning against us. 5. Wee must beware Those are to be lo∣ved vvhom God lo∣veth. that we never further sin, but if we love God, wee must love them whom
God loveth, hate them whom God hateth, Psal. 15. 3. and 139. 21, 22. how dare they then in whom are some good things, hand over head be friends with Gods ene∣mies? Prov. 29. 27. The Lords day. 1. Seeing by the ap∣pointment of the holy The Chri∣stian Sab∣bath, a memoriall of Christs resurrectiō Ghost the Apostles did change the Jewish Sab∣bath on the seaventh day, unto the next day, for the memoriall of the Re∣surrection, therefore wee are bound especially on that day to keepe a me∣moriall of Christs resur∣rection, with thankes unto Hovv to be upheld in a con∣scionable sanctifica∣tion of the Sabbath. God for the same. 2. There be two things specially needfull to bee
much every Lords day in our mindes to uphold us in a conscionable sanctifi∣cation thereof. 1. The gaine to be gotten thereby, which is glory to God, grace to our selves and others. 2. The sweetnesse of the duty, to be all day suck∣ing hony. Magistrate. A Magistrate having a A Magi∣strate may conceale a fault. thing privately tolde him may upon some occa∣sion keepe it close. Man the most ex∣cellent creature doth most dishonour God, Gods ju∣stice here∣in. Man. It seemeth to many men a wonder that man in the whole frame of his soule and body excelling
all the creatures upon earth, and in most won∣derfull manner expressing the image of his Creator should yet in highest mea∣sure dishonour him, and be thereby most loath∣some unto him, yet this is most just with the Lord seeing hee preferred man by creation above all earthly creatures, for his rebellion to take away all grace from him, for wher∣as he was most able above all other earthly creatures to glorifie his maker, his sinne must be the greater, and by Gods justice his punishment answerable for so wilfull disobedience and this commonly is seen among men, the more ex∣cellent naturall gifts any
man hath, if they bee not Naturall gifts not sanctified make the possessor thereof more odi∣ous. sanctified, the viler that man is in Gods sight above others, and his sinne more grievous: for armed ini∣quity is more dangerous then naked. Note. Marriage. Such as finde them∣selves When to submit ones selfe unto this condition. unfit for this condi∣tion are to use all lawfull meanes, and that a good while, and so not prevai∣ling to submit themselves to Gods ordinance. Meanes. 1. There is a corrup∣tion Why ma∣ny are more dull vvhen they have most meanes. of nature which ma∣keth us most dull when we have most meanes, which ariseth from hence, that when wee have the meanes publickly, wee e∣steeme lesse of them then
when wee wanted them, using the private meanes, likewise more sparingly, yea because wee put too much confidence in the outward, the preaching of the word, not so earnestly seeking the inward and principall, which is the blessing of Gods most ho∣ly Spirit. 2. Its not safe to tie the working of Gods Spirit to Gods Spi∣rit not to. be tyed to any one meane. any one particular meane, seeing all must be used. Meditations. 1. Christians must of∣ten meditate and consider Vpon vvhat things Christians are to me∣ditate. what blessings and what afflictions they have in private and in common, and how they undergoe both, and what use they make of them, likewise, to
what corruptions they be most carryed, and what meanes they use against them, and what profit they finde by them, also how constant or unsetled they be in a good course, and what be causes of ei∣ther. 2. What infinit store of heavenly matter is to be meditated on, seeing Most are unskillfull in the art of medita∣tion. every doctrine in the Scripture containes more then ever we can suffici∣ently consider, and yet so unexpert are most profes∣sors in this exercise of me∣ditation, that they are empty of any fit matter to meditate on. A principall The cause hereof. cause whereof is, they sa∣vour the things of the flesh, and very little the
things of the Spirit. 3. Those things wee heare and read are other When the things vve heare or read be∣come our ovvne. mens, untill by applying them unto our selves by meditation, they bee our owne. 4. Matters fittest for daily meditation bee such What things bee fittest for for daily meditatiō, as every man in his condi∣tion hath daily most need of, as to humble or breede sorrow in us, to comfort us, to awake us being a∣sleepe, and when we think our selves senselesse or be∣nummed, to soften our hardnesse, to pull us backe from any evill way, to weaken any corruption, to strengthen such graces as be weakest in us, to weane us from the love of this world, to teach us a sober
use of our prosperitie, to arme us against & uphold us in adversitie, and such like. 5. Meditation is a stu∣dy to get grace, whereby What me∣ditation it. upon all occasions wee make some good use of all that comes to our minde, whereof the frequentest use shewes the most hea∣venly soule, as contrarily the neglect thereof the carnall. 6. Wee are to meditate at set times, and on speci∣all The oft∣ner vvee meditate the better. occasions, the oftner the better, but hard to doe it well. 7. To have our medi∣tation Hovv to meditate on the vvord. tyed to the word wee must occupie it upon some particular matter, and reverently consider
that wee as it were draw neere the Lords privie chamber. 8. To reade, and not to meditate▪ is unfruitfull, Reading, meditatiō, and prayer must ac∣company one ano∣ther. to meditate and not reade is dangerous for error, to reade and meditate with∣out prayer is hurtfull. Memorie. Whereas many com∣plaine of ill memorie in good things, thinking thereby to cover many Hovv to remember good things. wants, this is found the on∣ly remedie, that wee must first reforme our hearts, and bring them to affect such heavenly doctrines, and then valuing them as they be, they would aswell remember, as a worldly Simil. man hearing of a good bargaine, whereby hee is
assured he may have great gaine, will hardly forget the same, yet hereto let this be added, an hiding of Gods word, and treasu∣ring of it up in our hearts, which oftrecounting with our selves and others, the same shall not be forgot∣ten. Mercies. 1. In speaking of any of Gods mercies towards At vvhat time vvee are to speake of Gods mer∣cies, and vvhat then vve are to think upō. us, its profitable to thinke upon our sinnes, lest wee be too proud, and robbe God of his glory; and also a fit opportunity in respect of others must be chosen, lest the same bee not be∣leeved, and so edifie not. 2. Of all the mercies of God this is a principal, not to be left without some
favourable exercise of Favoura∣bly to bee exercised in consci∣ence is a principall mercie. conscience, (though it bee grievous to the flesh) ther∣by to be drawne neerer to God, if for Paul it were so necessary, how much more for us? Ministers or Preachers. 1. Its a matter whereof we that are Gods ministers Many in teaching others doe not teach themselves may justly complaine, that in teaching others we doe not so carefully teach our selves, but too often binde heavy burthens upon o∣thers, which we our selves will not set our hands un∣to, urging the people to many excellent practises of Christianity, and not so carefully urging our selves to the practise of the same, that wee might by experience commend
the excellencie of such heavenly medicines, and so perswade by our pra∣ctise as well as doctrine, which is in our dayes most necessary, seeing men look most to our lives. A chiefe The chiefe cause here of. cause of this evill is, that through our corruption we deale with the word as merchants doe with their wares, they seeke after the best wares, not to use them themselves, but to utter them to others, so we seek out most heavenly instru∣ctions not to use our selves, but to commend to others. The remedie The Re∣medies. whereof is, when wee first finde out some precious matter which we like of, then to make use of it our selves, and as it were trie
the medicine on our selves so shall we better com∣mend it. 2. To content our selves with preaching pro∣fitably to others, and not to practise those things Not to practise vvhat vvee preach hovv dan∣gerous it is our selves, is very dange∣rous, and cannot be free from hypocrisie, and must needs breede hardnesse, and so a very bad course, the end whereof is mise∣rable and wofull. In any hand therefore wee are to be disquieted with such an Wee must be tron∣hled hereat estate, else no amend∣ment: and it must feare us that we be not disquieted, when as we heare Gods children professe that they have no longer peace, then they thēselves be ready to every Christian duty, and Note.
have some delight there∣in: and therefore we must The Re∣medie. by all meanes in such an estate before said, deny our pleasures, and provoke our selves to humiliation till God reforme us (this being indeed a just cause of fasting) and generally not to rest in any exercise of religion whereby the heart is not bettered. 3. Wee should so e∣steeme the benefit of Hovv vvee are to e∣steeme the preaching of the Gospell. preaching the Gospell, that wee should redeeme it with our losse, travailes, griefe, as S. Paul, 2 Thess. 3. 8. and therefore be farre from refusing to preach to those that would, but can∣not releeve us for want of Hovv vvee may de∣light in our mini∣sterie. living. 4. That we may be oc∣cupied
in this high service of the ministerie with the greater delight, and so re∣joyce therein, wee are to remember that its a most high honour to be admit∣ted and used of God as his instruments in saving soules; that no worke is more profitable; that here∣unto the Lord himselfe called us, not we intruded our selves; that the Lord in some sort blesseth our labours, bestowing upon us not a few encourage∣ments therein. 5. The externall mini∣sterie must proclaime sal∣vation Difference betvveene the exter∣nall mini∣sterie and invvard vvork of the Spirit. by Christ to all without exception, and compell all, but its the in∣ward operation of the Spi∣rit, to draw and incline a∣ny▪
one to apply by faith the generall to himselfe. 6. They that teach not Who are unfit tea∣chers. themselves cannot teach others 7. Where the people To vvhom the Lord sendeth carefull or carelesse teachers. heartily desire by prayer the ministery of the word, the Lord will send them faithfull ministers, and will multiply his graces in them▪ but if the people be carelesse, they shall have a minister which for abilitie either cannot, or for affe∣ction will not deliver the truth unto them. 8. Although the Lord In beget∣ting or en∣creasing faith Gods vvisedome is not to be tyed to the ordina∣ry meanes. hath promised a speciall blessing to the publick mi∣nisterie of his word, yet we must not tye his wise∣dome to the ordinarie meanes either of beget∣ting
or encreasing our faith; but if any shall at any time have more effectuall feelings by private confe∣rence, let him neither con∣temne nor neglect the publick ministerie, but with all holy and humble thankfulnesse yeelde this soveraignty to the Lord, that hee is to dispose his gifts, when, to whom, by whom, and where it plea∣seth him. 9. It is not to be doub∣ted but that God hath par∣doned Hovv to knovv vvhether the Lord hath par∣doned the sinne of rah en∣tance into the mini∣sterie. the sinne of rash en∣trance into the ministerie, unmeet through want of gifts, when as he blesseth the minister both with a∣ble gifts and a pure minde, and also giveth a blessing thereby unto his people.
Therefore though one have no assurance for his first calling, yet from hence may he gather that God now accepteth there∣of. 10. A minister must be Wherein a Pastor must re∣semble a plovvman. like a wise tills-man, who having sowen his feede, long after lookes for the fruit of his labour. 11. Two things espe∣cially The truest triall of doctrines. may warrant both the speakers and the hea∣rers of their doctrine; If their calling be good and godly, and if the generall course of their doctrine be sound and pure, Ier. 16. 17. 12. When there is no Who they are that shall be sa∣ved, vvho not. vision the people perish, those then onely to whom the feete of them which bring glad tidings of sal∣vation
bee precious, shall be saved, others that neg∣lect them, neglect salvatiō. 13. In bringing men to God, first shew them that there is certaine sal∣vation An order in bring∣ing men to God. for them if they will, then that there is a way thereto, which is by the fight of sinne, where∣in they must bee humbled as low as may be. 14. A minister com∣ming in a new place ought first to preach the truth, therby to win credit in the What a minister is first to preach vvhen he commeth to a place. consciences of the people, then to envey against cor∣ruptions, which may breede man▪ hurts to him∣selfe and others. 15. In examining a mans conscience a mini∣ster Hovv to deale vvith a mans conscience is thus to proceede; by
the law to try whether he hath a knowledge, feeling and misliking of his sins, or not: whether he hath a∣ny feare of Gods judge∣ments for sinne, or faith in his promises: whether by particular applying of these things to himselfe he can shew any effects by prayers, Sacraments, new birth and repentance. 16. Its a greater thing in a Pastor to deale wisely Whercin the skill of a minister doth most appeare. and comfortably with an afflicted soule, and sound∣ly and discreetly to meete with an heretick, then to preach learnedly. 17. Its a fault of our time that too hastie tryall Too hasty tryall of a mans gifts hurtfull. is made of a mans gifts in the ministerie to the great hurt of the Church.
Mirth. Wee must bee merry in the Spirit, not in the flesh. Mistrust. What mirth is requisite. In mistrust, its good to set before us Gods wayes What course to take in mi∣strust and presumpti∣on. upon others; in our pre∣sumption Gods judge∣ments. Mortification. Its very profitable to quicken us in mortificati∣on to set our olde sinnes Hovv to be quick∣ned to mortifica∣tion. often before us, and to search the bottome of our corruptions in day sinnes, night sins &c. that shaming our selves we may be hum∣bled, and seeing the height length, and depth of sinne, wee may the neerer com∣prehend the same mea∣sures of Gods mercies to us in Christ.
Motions. 1. When good moti∣ons Good mo∣tions are to be dravvne in∣to practise. are stirred up in us, its good as soone as may bee to draw them to practise lest either we forget them or want opportunity to doe them; and for helpe of memory to set them down in writing. 2. The cause of much Weaknesse in body and minde vvhence it commeth. weaknesse in minde and body comes not from Sa∣tan alwayes, but from our selves in wandering after the motions of the flesh. A Good Name. THese be two effects of Favour and a good name tvvo effects of godlinesse. godlinesse, and notably maintaine one another, fa∣vour and a good name,
which bee better then riches, as at all times, and in all persons may be seen, without which all gifts helpe little. 2. Wee ought in no case to hurt the good Our bre∣threns good name not to bee empaired. name of our brethren, as whereby he is more wron¦ged then by the losse of Note. goods. 3. Wee ought to bee most carefull by all good Wee must be carefull to main∣taine our good names. meanes to maintaine our owne good name, and therefore learne how it may be gotten and preser∣ved, as also if we be discre∣dited what profit to make thereof. 4. Seeing a good name ariseth of a good life, with∣out Whence a good name ariseth. this to be well report∣ed of, is a fierce punish∣ment
of God, being a great Hurtfull to be vvell reported of unde∣servedly. hardening of the heart in sinne and hinderance from repentance. 5. The first step to a good name is to avoide The first step to a good name. carefully and continually all evill outward and in∣ward, and especially wher∣unto wee bee by nature most inclineable: for as one Simil. dead flie corrupteth an whole boxe of oyntment, so doth some one sinne of∣ten crack the credit of a man of good report before. Gods children are especi∣ally Why the godly must care∣fully avoid evill. to be carefull herein, because of the hatred of the world, who will com∣mend their owne though never so prophane, if there be but any naturall gift, but contrariwise if any of Note.
Gods children be never so full of grace, if hee have but one infirmitie or bee once overtaken with some sinne, the world will count him a wicked man, and thereby take occasion to speake evill of their pro∣fession. As open, so secret Even the corrupti∣ons of the heart doe bring us out of Gods fa∣vour. sinnes and corruptions of the heart doe bring out of favour with God, who will soone detect us, and make our secret sinnes come to light, as he often hath, for hee can make his dumbe creatures reveale them: or our friends to fall out with us, and so reveale them, to whom before we made them knowne: or our owne mouth to con∣fesse them, either at una∣wares, or in sleepe by
dreames, or in sicknesse by raving, or in frenfie to vo∣mit out thine owne shame, or else the torment of thy evil conscience shall wring it out, yea if all these should, faile the Lord is a∣ble to raise a strong suspi∣tion in the hearts of others that thou art such a one, and therby discredit thee: as this is a good meanes to provide for a good name, so is it a good rule of all godlinesse to be affraid of secret evills, yea in heart and thought. A second step of procuring and kee∣ping The se∣cond step to a good name. a good name is to have a godly jealousie o∣ver all our doings that they give no occasion of suspicion of evill, though we doe not that which is
simply evill, procuring things honest, following and seeking after things of good report, so also to be plentifull in good workes, one or two being insuffi∣cient, our light must shine before men. Mat. 5. 6. In doing good, wee must looke that it be with In doing good what is to bee lookt unto a sincere affection, and 2. with discretion: the want of eithertakes away the credit of well-doing by Gods just punishment; so that a simple soule shall see the shifts wherewith the wise worldlings bleare mens eyes. 7. When we are ill re∣ported What vvee are to doe when vvee are ill re∣ported of for well doing. of for well doing its good first before wee cleare our selves, to exa∣mine our hearts in what
manner we did it, and finding wickednesse there∣in, to be humbled for it be∣fore the Lord, and receive it as Gods correction to a∣mend us: if we finde our heart upright, then let us learne that God tryeth us whether we will leave do∣ing well for ill report, and therefore with patience to endure this triall, and com∣mend our innocencie un∣to him who maintaines good and honest hearts. 8. They which are so past shame that they care Who do little pro∣fit by the magistrate. not for the Church disci∣pline for their open sinnes, little profit by the Magi∣strate. 9 Many that are put to Why men are sor∣rowfull be∣ing put to openshame open shame are sorowfull therefore, but not aright,
for it is not because they sinne against God: others are sorrowfull for their sin which wrought them shame, but the devill be∣witcheth them that their sinne is not so great, and many doe worse; and this shame will not continue long, prove a wonder but of nine dayes continuance, whereby they be hindered from repentance, and though at the first they without dissembling pro∣mised amendment, yet neglecting the meanes to further their repentance, thus bewitched they fall to their sinnes againe. They that will profit by What they are to doe vvho vvould profit by open dis∣credit. such discredit, are to labour that as their faces blush before men, so their soules
may be confounded before the Lord, that being hum∣bled by▪ godly sorrow, it may please God to raise them up. Now to try godly sorrow these be two rules, 1. If we can with conten∣ted mindes take the pu∣nishment Tvvo rules vvhereby to try god∣ly sorrow. as correction from the Lord, and yet mourne for our sinne, and that in such manner, as giving place to Gods ju∣stice in punishing, we can labour for forgivenesse of sinnes. And 2. if when we can conceale our sinne, yet wee freely with Da∣vid confesse it: when a sin is committed, yet so close∣ly as none can probably suspect him, the offendant may conceale his sinne, if it can be done without a∣nother
sinne, but if an oath be lawfully required, the truth must be told. Nurcerie for the Church. It were an happy nur∣cerie A minister to traine up some tovvard Scholar in his house. for the Church if e∣very grounded Pastor would traine up in life, learning, doctrine, disci∣pline, some toward Scho∣lar to make him more fit for the Church as Moses did Ioshua, Elias Elisha, Ieremie Baruch, Christ his disciples, Paul Timothie. Offences. IN private offences a Private of∣fences must not hinder pri∣vate pray∣s. man may goe to his pri∣vate prayers before he be reconciled, till opportuni∣tie be had.
Parents. 1. WHen children have What Pa∣rents are to doe a∣bout their childrens infirmities infirmities their parents are to see whether they have not received such sinnes from them, if they have, they are rather to pray for their children, then too much to correct them, lest they persecute their owne sinnes in their children. 2. The Lord often in The im∣moderate love of pa∣rents to their chil∣dren pu∣nished. his children correcteth the immoderate love of pa∣rents to their children, for naturall causes, as Abra∣ham with Ismael, Isaac with Esau, David with Absolom and Adoniah; so of husbands to their wives.
3. If a maide may not Contracts not to be vvithout the pa∣rents con∣sent. performe her vow to the Lord without her fathers consent, much lesse her contract to man. Patience. 1. In greatest troubles there is no greater ease Patience an ease in trouble. then patience and suffe∣rance: as a great cause of madnesse is impatiency of minde, or Gods sudden wrath for sinne against conscience. 2. Patience then pos∣sesseth the soule when our When pa∣tience pos∣sesseth the soule. outward wants are there∣by supplyed. Peace and Ioy. 1. Its not to bee mar∣velled though so few at∣taine Why so fevv re∣joyc in Gods love to the joy in the holy Ghost, and to such sweet rejoycings in Gods love
which is the height of our happinesse here, so that the more this is felt and kept, the more heavenly is the life and death. 1. The worser sort have no knowledge nor care whe∣ther God like or dislike their wayes, but blindlie hope all is well till evill come; and some of these though they feare, God is angry with them, yet shake it off and forget it, at least flightly appease him. 2. A second sort be grieved hereat, and this takes away their joy as it ought, but seldome come they to sound comfort and lesse rejoycing, though feare∣full to offend. 3. A better sort be warned by their harmes, and so more wise∣ly
keepe their peace, not willingly angering God by leaving undone their duty or presuming to doe contrary, but indeede to please God, those usually walke with much peace, and can come boldly in Gods presence, and so sometimes finde a glory∣ing in the Lord, and exul∣tation in the Spirit, best of all. The way then to maintaine our peace and How to maintaine our peace and so re∣joyce. so rejoyce, is to consider how we please God: if not, then 1. not to be quiet, but mourne, 2. not to languish in sorrow, but seeke re∣conciliation. 3. to be cha∣ry in maintaining peace, which in time will breede rejoycing, for which la∣bour we by due medita∣tion
on Gods love: for in∣firmities ought not to breake our peace, so as there be a true bewailing and striving against them, but presumptuous sinnes; and God much more will beare with many faults where there is a care to to doe better. 2. Although the love Gods love the origi∣nall of our salvation, yet the grace of Christ doth first assure us thereof. of God bee the originall cause of our salvation, yet in respect of us the grace of Christ is the first to worke assurance thereof in our hearts; for this cause in blessing the people that is set in the first place (The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,) which they first conceive to be the begin∣ning of their blessing.
To Please God. 1. Its a common and a sore evill, that there is so Little care or labour to please God. little care whether God be pleased or not, and there∣fore so little labour to please him, without which there is no fruit or com∣fort of prayer. 2. That we may please God, there must bee first Three things re∣quired in those that vvould please God an endeavour to pray ac∣cording to his will. 2. when we doe best, yet to dislike our workes as unworthy the Lord. 3. a beleefe that God wil pardon our wants and accept us in Christs worthinesse; not one of many thus please God, most few in prayer. 3. The true meanes to What things joyne us to God. please God, is true religi∣on, & a true heart in religiō
which joyne us to God, for if either our heart bee un∣cleane, which is abomina∣ble before God, or religi∣on be corrupted, which is loathsome in his sight, we cannot please the Lord, how glorious soever wee bee in the sight of the world. 4. Who so would please Obedience required in those that would please God God must both in deede, and manner of doing en∣deavour to obey him. 5. The chiefest thing that God is pleased with, is What thing God is most pleased vvith. to be truly religious, to love the truth with single∣nesse of heart and a prepa∣red minde, to be obedient to it: without the which though a man could live an Angels life in outward shew, yet by how much
the more it is praised of the world, by so much it is the more abominable in the sight of God. Poore. 1. For releeving beg∣gars at the doore or by the Hovv farre and vvhat sort of beggars are to be re∣leeved. high way side, I iudge this a good course, seeing the law hath well provided who should bee releeved and who not, for many great damages to the land by releeving such, and therefore hath set a penal∣tie on such releevers, ther∣fore to releeve such as bee allowed by law in a godly discretion according to their necessitie, unlesse we can on some good ground avouch them to be coun∣terfeits, and then as wee may to see them punished:
as for the other not licen∣ced, not to releeve them, except wee bee assured of their present necessitie, which is also by law ex∣cepted. 2. In our lawfull labours The tenth to be given to the poore. whatsoever wee get, its good to give the tenth to the poore. Poperie. 1. Many thinke it reli∣gion Not e∣nough to leave po∣perie and stand on faith vvith∣out fuits. enough to leave po∣perie, and stand on faith without fruits, so hard is it for flesh and blood to admit a continuall strug∣ling, a going on forward. 2. The mysterie of ini∣quity The ground of Popery. began even streight upon the Apostles times; by this meanes, that holy men and the fathers of the Church were not so wary
in deliverie of the truth, but gave advantage to Sa∣tan, some one way, some another, whereby out of all their errours joyned to∣gether was at length raised up the Kingdome of Anti∣christ. Praise and dispraise. Its our corruption as well to praise some too Wee are neither to praise nor dis∣praise too much. much, especially such of whom we have received some good things, as to dispraise some too much, especially of whom wee have beene some way hurt. Prayer. 1. As it is dangerous when wee like well our Tvvo ex∣tremities to bee a∣voided a∣bout pray∣er. prayers to bee therefore perswaded God liketh them, seeing they have
their spots which not seen defile our prayers, so con∣trarily when wee dislike them. 2. How few prayers Fevv pray∣ers made in faith. are there made in faith? not one of many; for be∣sides all cold and carelesse prayers, even then when wee see and feele our wants and earnestly desire grace, yet hardly can wee be perswaded that God so loveth us, and liketh our prayers, that he is well pleased and will accept thereof: Its true, when we please our selves and At vvhat tim vvee thinke God is plesed vvith us, at vvhat time not. feele not our wants, wee easily rest, and say, God is with us, (which for the most part is either security or pride and presumption) but when we feele our un∣worthinesse
and have our conscience accusing us of many wants, then wee feare, the Lord regardeth us not, but abhorreth our service, which likewise for the most part is meere un∣beleefe, although I say not but in either of those there may lye covered some sparke of faith not seene: but in our best pray∣ers to see our wants, to abhorre them, and in our greatest defects to see Gods Spirit to comfort us therein, and so in both tru∣ly to bee perswaded that God will for the merit of Christ pardon our wants, and accept the worke of his Spirit, this is true faith, seldome seen in our pray∣ers.
3. Prayer is as the Prayer the Christians pulse. pulse shewing the state of the heart. If the spirituall life bee weake, such will our prayers bee, and con∣trarily, whosoever is very godly hath great life in prayer. 4. As a sicke body feels no relish in good meate The sick soule reli∣shes not prayer. and drink: so the sick soule in prayer, whereby, who so findeth sweet tast, com∣fort and strength, is in good case. 5. Wee often pray Though vve too of∣ten faile, yet is there a constant course to be kept in prayer. more for custome and company then drawne by our wants, yet its good to keepe a constant course, that as in meate one mor∣sell may get downe ano∣ther, so by praying wee may get more stomach to pray.
6. The unregenerate Difference betvveene the godlies and un∣godlies comming to God by prayer. may come to God in pray∣er, with knowledge that he is a mercifull God to his enemies, specially to all that seeke to him, and so may desire and sue with feare, for some favour; but the faithfull are to come as to their father with joy and comfort of favour. 7. The Lord our God tendering our good, hath among many meanes, Prayer commen∣ded unto us by ma∣ny argu∣ments. commended unto us pray∣er to be an helpe at hand in all our necessities, Phil. 4. 6. and because we by nature be altogether un∣apt to it, it being so hea∣venly and wee so earthly, he hath by all arguments commended it to us, as 1. from his owne precept,
Psal. 50. 15. Mat. 7. 7. 2. from its nature, a most heavenly worke of the Spirit. Ephes. 6. 3. that its a chiefe meanes of Gods glory. Psal. 50. last, 4. that its the most gaine∣full trade. Iames 5. 5. that it hath great promises. ibid. 6. that its most practised of the most godly, and may be had when all other meanes be taken away. 8. There be two com∣mon Two common evils about prayer. evills, either wee know not how to pray, or we want conscience to use our knowledge. 9. Prayer is a speaking What prai∣er is. to God in Spirit according to his will, or a crying of the heart to God, which sets out the matter and manner, not cold but fer∣vent.
10. The voice is but an The voice not of the nature of prayer. helpe sometimes, not of the nature of prayer, yea its more then a minding what we say or heare, for the heart must be occupi∣ed, else no prayer. 11. These three affe∣ctions must bee specially Three af∣fections to be occupi∣ed in pray∣er. occupied in prayer, joy in Gods mercies, sorrow for our sinnes and punishment thereof, desire of mercie. 12. Pure prayers are Prayer me∣lodious. sweet melodie. 13. As one man excells another in musick, so in In prayer one may excell ano∣ther. skilfull prayer. 14. There is a double gift in prayer, one of A double gift in Prayer, of speech of Spirit. speech effectuall for edifi∣cation of others, which so farre forth is to be labou∣red for, but this may be in
a reprobate. The other, in Spirit, whereby special∣ly our selves be inflamed, and so doe heate others with whom wee pray, which is rare and proper to the elect: this God likes. 15. As they who would Frequency bringeth skill in prayer. bee skilfull in any thing must bee much exercised therein, so in prayer. 16. Its a matter of sin∣gular Matter of comfort and terror in prayer. comfort to a true heart that God seeth our meaning Rom. 8. 27. as of terror, that God seeth our corruptions in prayer: both must breede conscience. 17. As its a rare mercie To pray in faith is hardly got and kept. to pray in faith, which God gives to none but to his children, and not al∣wayes to them, but when hee is well pleased with
them, so this is hardly got and kept, and therefore such as will enjoy it, must spare no cost for it, and be carefull not to displease God. 18. Its not meet in va∣riety of Gods dealings, to Prayer up∣on occasi∣on to hee varyed. have alwayes one forme of prayer, but upon occa∣sion to varie the same. 19. Repetitions in prayer are not unlawfull, Repetiti∣ons in Prayer not alvvayes unlavvfull. when as they arise upon some great sense of sinne, or our wants, or seeing our selves to have prayed before in fashion, would now desire to pray in truth, or if it bee through forgetfulnesse of what we prayed for before, else they are vaine. 20. To avoide tedious∣nesse
in prayer it is good How to a∣voide tedi∣ousnesse in Prayer. to pray briefely and often, as our Saviour did in the garden, yet as in long pray∣er we must take heede of custome, superstition and ambition, so in short of prophanenesse and care∣lessenesse. 21. If it come to passe that the Lord crosse our Why the Lord of∣ten cros∣seth our fervent, blesseth our cold and vveake prayers. fervent prayers, and blesse our cold and weake ones as oft he doth, it is not to quench our zeale, and fa∣vour our coldnesse, which is the way to heresie and prophannesse, but to teach that on the one side wee leane not too much to our prayers, as tying the Lord to them, and on the other side to heate our coldnesse in prayers, that seeing the
Lord heareth our cold prayers, how much more will he heare our fervent and faithfull prayers. Pride. 1. If God preferre us In prospe∣rity pride to be a∣voided. and lift us up, take wee great heede of pride, lest God cast us downe into some foule sinne or re∣proach. 2. The Lord hath suf∣fered many strong, pure, Why ma∣ny have fallen by vvomen. and wise men to have fal∣len by women, to punish their pride in his graces. Priviledges of the Saints. 1. Assurance of salvati∣on, Gods protection, a Ten pri∣viledges of the Saints. godly life, to be kept from reproachfull falls, to enjoy the helps to godli∣nesse, to delight in Chri∣stianity, to use prosperity
well, as also adversitie, to encrease in grace, perseve∣ring therein. 2. Its a sore evill that Most think not of, knovv, o glory in their pri∣viledges. we who perswade our selves to be heires of salva∣tion, doe so little thinke of, therfore so little know, therefore so little glory in our priviledges, and com∣fort our hearts in the ex∣pectation of them, and so by all good meanes hasten for the possession of them, the want of all which is no small cause of our so little profiting in godlinesse. 3. The Saints are free: Seaven o∣ther privi∣ledges. God is their father, loves them, will withhold no good thing from them; will save them, are prote∣cted by him, are taught to live godly.
4. They which bee in Divers ptiviledges out of the eight to the Ro∣manes. Christ are freed from con∣demnation being justified by him, Rom. 8. 1. They have Christs Spirit dwel∣ling in them, and guiding 1. them so to live as pleaseth 2. God, whereby their cor∣rupt nature is mortified, and a new nature quick∣ned in them. ibid. 9. By the same Spirit they bee 3. boldened to call God their sweet father, ibid. 15. be∣ing sure they be his chil∣dren, and therefore co∣heires 4. with Christ, that suffering with him, they may be glorified also. ibid. 17. They be taught also by the same Spirit to sigh 5. waiting for their adoption even their full glory. ibid. 23. and truly hoping for 6.
is with patience to abide it. ibid. 25. likewise they 7. be taught so fervently and faithfully to pray as God will accept thereof. ibid. 26 8. Howsoever God dealeth with them, and whatsoe∣ver befalleth them, God disposeth it so, that its bet∣ter so then otherwise, which comes to passe by the eternall determinati∣on of the Lord according∣ly effecting the same in e∣very degree. ibid. 28. Profession and Professors. 1. Foure sorts there are Foure sorts of professors. of Professors, 1. false bre∣thren, great professors but 1. grosse hypocrites, know∣ing they dissemble. 2. such 2. as are choaked with world∣ly cares of honour, riches, and the like. 3. such as are 3.
forward in Christian exer∣cises, but neglect the pra∣ctice of godlinesse. 4. which so heare, that they doe un∣derstand, 4. and that doe they practise in their words, workes, thoughts. 2. If we will have joy in our profession, the word Hovv to rejoyce in our pro∣fession. must winne ground daily in us, in subduing sinne, even in the roote of the heart, as well as in the branches, otherwise wee doe onely draw nigh with our lips. 3. This seemeth a sound difference betweene true Difference betvveene true and false pro∣fessors. and false professors, the true preferring grace be∣fore all vanities, and thin∣king them that have most, most happie, ever com∣plaine of their spirituall
povertie, thirsting and la∣bouring for grace more and more. The false, they rest in that little grace they thinke they have, and are drawne to the earnest pursuit of vanitie. Promises. Promises properly ap∣pertaine Difference betvveene promises and threat∣nings. to the renewed part, threatnings to the unrenewed. Punishment of sinne. When our sinnes pro∣ceede What sort of sinnes the Lord doth espe∣cially pu∣nish. of particular and not of generall defects, if we offend of infirmity and not of presumption, the Lord will not punish so straitly in temporal things for the particular sinne bringeth not wrath, but the being in that sin, and not repenting for it, which
drawing in other sinnes withall, may draw wrath from the Lord, so that one sinner is said to bee spared, five punished, if for his particular sinnes he being admonished shall be humbled as David by Na∣than, 2 Sam. 12. Iehosaphat by Iehu. 2 Chron. 19. Or being afflicted shall profit thereby, because in this case he seeketh not to draw other sinnes, but la∣boureth to put away that one sinne punished, when notwithstanding admoni∣tions for mercie, and threatnings for judge∣ments, hee maketh a way for the Lords indignation: so that we may comfort Comfort against particular offences. our selves for particular offences, if in the generall
course of our life wee fol∣low the Lord: neither have the wicked here any liber∣ty to nourish sin secretly, who use to sinne by de∣grees: but when they pre∣sume Gods judgemēts on the vvicked. to lye still in one sin, thinking that for it they shall not be punished, it is the judgement of God to suffer them to fall from one sinne to many, so from little sinnes to grosse of∣fences. Reconciliation. 1. IN reconciliation ma∣king, this is the best way Hovv ene∣mies may become friends. that either party weigh∣ing their owne sin (which shall most hurt them) doe chiefely accuse themselves
and excuse the other, and withall doe professe they will no more so offend, but will love, though they should not bee loved a∣gaine. 2. Its in vaine to speak unto God for others, un∣lesse Hovv needfull reconcilia∣tion vvith God is. wee our selves bee reconciled unto him through Christ. Redemption. Unlesse a man see him∣selfe even utterly lost, un∣able any wayes else to bee By vvhat meanes a man may pri demption. delivered, he never priseth redemption, whereof this is the power, profit, and praise, that when all helps faile, and all creatures bee against us, yet a full ran∣some is given to our hands, and perfect restitu∣tion beyond all hope.
Regeneration. In regeneration or dy∣ing The tryall of the heart in re∣generation unto sinne, wee then come to the tryall of our hearts, when wee come at those things wherein ei∣ther nature or custome doth breede delight. The Regenerate and unre∣generate. It often falleth out by the wise providence of Hard to discerne betvveene the rege∣nerate and unregene∣rate. God, that the unregene∣rate be in outward appea∣rance so like the regene∣rate that they cannot bee discerned one from the o∣ther, these falling so low in sinne, those rising so high in obedience: which the Lord so disposeth for Gods ends herein▪ the good of his children that they should never bee so contented with their
measure as to cease their travaile for increase and so to waxe secure, but ra∣ther that they might here∣by bee stirred up to make their calling and election more sure, and so worke out their salvation in feare and trembling. In conside∣ration hereof we must not We must not be dis∣maid at the falls of others. bee dismayed when as we heare and see such to fall away, of whom we have thought very well, for the foundation of God remai∣neth sure; neither must we be disquieted for that be∣fore-hand wee cannot de∣scry such, who deceive themselves, but charita∣bly judge the best, yet wisely tarrying till the Lord shall descry them. Notwithstanding this is
evident by the Scriptures and experience, that there be certaine notes and markes so proper to Gods children, that every childe of God may bee led to see them in himselfe, and no unregenerate person can in truth have, howsoever many of them doe fondly dreame they have them, and so deceive themselves who for the most part may by wise dealing with them be cleerely convin∣ced in their owne consci∣ences, though through pride they will not con∣fesse it. These markes we speake of, are of divers measures in Gods children according to their growth in Christ: wee must take the least measure of them
(in this question) lest in seeking to shut out the un∣regenerate, we also shut out many of Gods truely begotten children though young and weake, and yet on the other side, lest in Tvvo markes vvhereby the regene∣rate may discerne th they are regene∣rate, name∣ly from the causes of their new birth and pro∣per effects thereof. letting in the one wee ad∣mit the other, wee must take such as be most speci∣all though rarely to bee found in professors. Of this sort there be two, the causes of our new birth, and the proper effects thereof: the causes bee more certaine, the effects more apparent proofes thereof. The causes of Regeneration be these and in this order. God the Fa∣ther of all the regenerate The causes of regene∣ration. when he will ordinarily beget any sinner and child
of wrath to become his childe, doth of his owne mercy freely send his word and holy Spirit to effect the same, 1. Working in 1. him the sight of his mise∣ry and sound griefe of heart for the same, which breeds a fervent desire to be delivered. 2. The know∣ledge 2. of the remedie with a like desire of obtaining the same. 3. A sound 3. knowledge that God hath given them this remedy, and therewith a certaine perswasion it is theirs, which they receiving are delivered from their mi∣serie, and so made Gods children, being now new The ef∣fects of re∣generation borne. The effects of this new birth be these. 1. A speciall joy of heart in the 1.
benefit received. 2. An 2. unfained love of God the sole Author of so great a benefit. 3. Which breeds for the time past a deepe 3. displeasure for dealing so wickedly with so merci∣full a father. 4. For the 4. time to come an earnest desire and care to please God, with 5. True obe∣dience to his holy word, 5. even of meere love. So also 6. A conscionable use of all such meanes as bee 6. knowne fit to further this obedience. 7. A godly sorrow in the sight of our 7. inabilitie to please God; and a longing desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: all which are in their measure in every re∣generate person, and doe
at least in some measure grow more and more till he be dissolved. Now if Not any one of the preceding effects must be vvanting. any unregenerate shall fondly dreame all these to be in him (for if he be ut∣terly wanting in any of them, then thereby hee may be convinced to bee unregenerate) he is as nar∣rowly by his life to be searched as may be, and a thousand to one hee shall be convinced, but if such cannot descry himselfe, nor be by others; let him hold his comfort so long as he can, till it shall bee manifest he deceived him∣selfe. If yet any shall think Their e∣state is not good vvhose ve∣ry life shevves the contrary. himselfe in good estate, when as his life shewes the contrary, then is it to be avouched to him that
he utterly deceives him∣selfe, imagining that to be in him which is not, even as it is with an hungry man, in his dreame hee thinkes he eateth, and when he awakes his soule is empty, Isay. 29. 7. even so this worldling rockt a∣sleepe, Simil. with his present peace, thinkes himselfe in good case, but when he is awaked by Gods judge∣ments, then he findeth himselfe most miserable, such were mny of the Church of Laodicea, which said they were rich, &c. and knew not they were wretched. Rev. 3. 17. Againe, me thinkes it fa∣reth Simil. with these men, as it is with many in some dan∣gerous disease which hath
deprived them of the sense of their paine and weak∣nesse, who therefore say, they be well, and feare no∣thing; so these being dead∣ly sicke in soule have no sense thereof, and thinke themselves in a good e∣state: or as it is with one that is drunke; They have striken me, but I was not sicke▪ Prov. 23. 35. So these, drunken with the world, feele not the wounds of sinne, see not their owne misery. Remembrance of good. 1. Seeing there is no action of our life for which Upon eve∣y occasi∣on vvee must have some good matter in store to be remēbred. we have not larned at some time or other some profitable direction for the same, its much to bee endeavoured that such
matter may be present with us as is fittest for the time, otherwise much danger must needes en∣sue. 2. The best meanes to remember the word is to Hovv to remember the vvord best. be truly touched with it, either in griefe or joy; for they leave strongest im∣pression. Renewing. Its an happy thing to redeeme the renewing of Hovv to redeeme the renevv∣ing of our inner man the inner man with the decay of the outward. Repentance. A Godly Physitian ha∣ving Hovv a godly phy∣sitian brought his disea∣sed pati∣ents to a sight of their sins. patients grievously tormented, willed them first to be reconciled to God before they sought his helpe, which they neg∣lecting, and hee knowing
them open sinners, dismis∣sed them, saying, The Lord having laid his rod upon you, I dare not take it off you without the shew of some fruits of re∣pentance, which they do∣ing were healed. Reports. 1. Men by ill reports What use to make of ill reports. raised of them must learne to be forewarned lest they fall into such a sinne, and thankfully must receive the correction, that wher∣as God might have made them suffer for ill, he doth rather for well-doing. 2. This is Gods great Gods mer∣cie that ill reports are sometimes raised a∣gainst us. mercy, that when men have evill thoughts, God doth cause them to be e∣vill spoken of for the act, whereby they ought to
be moved to search their hearts, and finding it with∣in, though it never burst forth, they are to profit hereby to correct their hearts, and to be thankfull to God, that hath kept thē by this meanes from the act, which otherwise might have broke forth to their discredit. 3. God by false reports doth often correct us for Why God letteth false re∣ports be raised a∣gainst us. sinne long agoe commit∣ted and yet not fully re∣pented, or for some con∣trary corruption, or gene∣rally he would have us see and amend some sinne we saw not before. Reproofe. Reproofe doth not alvvayes profit for the pre∣sent. 1. It falleth out often that some, grudging at re∣prehension, profit after∣ward
when their choller is past: others, receiving it well, after neglect it. 2. At a table its good for them whose duty it is, Hovv to reprove sin at table. so to rebuke sinne that it may be reformed, rather than the person shamed, without there be necessary cause so to doe. 3. No reprehension What to be obser∣ved in re∣proving. must bee but upon good ground, & according to a mans calling, with care not to discredit our brother, and prayer unto God for a blessing thereon. 4. For the most part A note of an unqui∣et spirit. its a note of an uncharita∣ble and unquiet Spirit in those that governe, to ad∣monish, rebuke, or chide as wee call it by ironies, questions, and scoffes.
Riches. The love of riches or The abuse and use of riches. earthly things, hinders us in good things, but the use of them furthers us there∣in. Sacrament. I. A Pastor may not debar any from the Sacra∣ment Whē a Pa∣stor is not to debarre therefrom. for a secret offence though being admonished he repent not. 2. The Sacraments of Difference betvveene ours and the Jevves Sacramēts. the Jews were obligations to binde them; of Christi∣ans, to absolve them. Saints. In comparing our selves In compa∣ring our selves vvith. Gods Saints how to be affected. with Gods Saints we must not despaire in our weak∣nesse, because wee bee not
like them, nor presume to be like them. Salvation. Even of those that have knowledge and sense of Divers sorts of people de∣ceived a∣bout their salvation: vvith the remedies to be used herein. their miserie, and of Christ the onely remedie, yea of Gods large and free offer of salvation unto them, and faithfull pro∣mise to save them if they will come to him, not a few never bee saved, for that not beleeving if they goe not, or goe amisse, not as Heb. 10. 22. but some ignorantly, some fainedly, some doubtingly, some prophanely, some not constantly, and therefore have no answer or a deni∣all and an heavie answer; who can have no comfort. But besides these, even
such as have in their per∣swasion a gratious answer from God that he will save them, which they shall finde by the inward com∣fort it brings them, are to looke whether this be not a lying Spirit, wherewith thousands bee beguiled, one sort taking their com∣fort and building their perswasion that God will save them only and chief∣ly on this, that their lives be amended; which as it may be true, so it may bee false, & is no good ground of our perswasion, but at the best a prop: whereas the true Spirit teacheth us to build all our perswasion on Gods goodnesse freely offered and faithfully to be performed, of both
which wee are assured by the Gospell the word of truth, the onely ground of our assurance. But further seeing how many bee be∣guiled having a good ground, but building loos∣ly thereon, this is to bee tryed by the effects of the true Spirit, whereof all (though many) may be re∣ferred to this one, a con∣scionable studie to please God in all things. Satans courses, subtiltie, temptations. 1. Our common ad∣versary Satan never cea∣sing Satans procee∣dings to dravv men and vvo∣men to de∣struction. to seeke our destructi∣on doth chiefely labour, 1. to rock us asleepe, and so quiet in securitie, that we may not see the state 1. of our soules. 2. if we be 2.
awakened and look about how it is with us, then through our privie pride he drawes us to think bet∣ter of our estate than it is, and by that meanes gets us asleepe. 3. If this prevaile not, but our infirmities & 3. many wants doe humble us, then doth he with all his power beate us downe to discourage us and wea∣ken our profession. In all which severall conditions, 1. Some doe wholly and Who are insnared by him, and yeelde unto them and vvho not. long lye, and either asleep see nothing, or are too wel pleased and jocond, or else altogether cast downe and uncomfortable. 2. A bet∣ter sort goeth through all these, sometimes asleepe, sometimes too much con∣tented and so fall asleepe
againe, sometimes oppres∣sed with griefe, and after a while either lifted up or fall asleepe againe, and thus they spend their dayes unconstantly, and therefore indeede with little sound rejoycing, and doe hereby lye open to many temptations on eve∣ry side. 3. A third sort, and indeede the best, through the strength of grace re∣ceived seldome fall asleep, so as they see not how they walke, neither be so lifted up as to forget their wants; nor so cast downe as to have no joy in the Spirit; but wisely consi∣dering what is the conditi∣on of Gods true children in this world, and watch∣ing over their hearts espe∣cially
doe rejoyce in trem∣bling, and goe on con∣stantly in their christian course, though with infir∣mity, yet rarely or never falling into any offensive trespasse or doubting of Gods favour. 2. Satan under a pre∣tence of Repentance, Satans policie driving some to be too strict, others too lavish in the use of Gods crea∣tures. brings many unto extream sadnesse and strictnesse in the use of Gods creatures, as under a pretence of law∣full libertie hee stirreth up others to excessive and un∣sanctified mirth, and an untemperate use of Gods creatures. 3. Wee must pray that the Lord give not out that Hovv farre vve are to pray unto God to re∣straine Sa∣tan. measure of leave to the devill to tempt us, which wee give out to sinne to
worke rebellion in us a∣gainst his majestie, but that God would make Sa∣tan a Surgeon to open our sinnes. 4. Its the policie of Sa∣tan to hide Gods present Satans po∣licie in hi∣ding Gods blessings setting be∣fore us our vvants. blessings upon us, that we may be unthankfull, and to set before us greater which we want, to make us mur∣mur against God. 5. Satan is most ready What vvee are most unvvilling to. to make us unwilling to that which shall bee most for Gods glory, and the good of his Church. 6. This is a common Satans po∣licie in hindering from the perfor∣mance of one duty by setting men on a∣nother. practice of Satan, where∣by hee much hindereth Gods children from many duties, even both by out∣ward object and inward temptation to draw them
to some other thing, (though lawfull) than at that time ought to be, and therein to hold them what he can whereby hee may keepe them from the du∣ty, and also accuse them of neglect of duty, and so at least disturbe their quiet, and make them unfit for other duties: it shall bee therefore high wisedome for every true Christian, both to discerne what is to be done in his time, and to watch straitly that hee The reme∣die. bee not any way pulled therefrom. But if he can∣not keep men from doing their duty, yet will he not His endea∣vour to corrupt men in do∣ing their duty. cease to corrupt thē in the manner of doing, either through hypocrisie or carelessenes, and so either
make thē cōtent thēselves with that which is naught worth before God, or else oppresse them with feare that they have not done their duty in such sort as they ought. The remedie The reme∣die. is manifest, To have speci∣all care over our hearts that they be sound and fer∣vent, humbling our selves in our wants, and comfor∣ting our hearts in the te∣stimonie of a good consci∣ence. 7. Through the subtle Faith and obedience joyntly to be urged. malice of Satan working on our corrupted nature it commeth to passe, that if faith be taught, most abuse it to libertie in sinne; if o∣bedience be urged, to put confidence therein for justification, they are
therefore joyntly to bee urged, yet faith as the in∣strumentall cause of justi∣fication, workes as the ef∣fects of the man justified. 8. Its a matter much to be bewailed as cause of A fault in most that they like and em∣brace Sa∣tans as∣saults. great danger to many a soul, that Satan our sworn enemie in every part of our life so annoying us, yet most, seldome or ne∣ver, see or avoid his assaults but rather like and em∣brace them. 9. Satan being a Spirit Satans fa∣miliarity vvith us. hath a very familiar though secret communion with our spirits. 10. Its safest in all temptations to keepe the Thecourse to be taken in every temptatiō. meane, neither to be quiet without griefe, for then Satan will account we bee
his without any paines, neither to be too unquiet as without comfort, for then Satan will be the prouder and bolder to take more paine to over∣come us. 11. As Satan tempting Adam, overcame him A compa∣rison be∣tvveene Sa∣tans temp∣ting of Christ and Adam. and all in him, so tempting Christ, as he could not o∣vercome him, so neither shall he us in him. 12. Satans temptati∣ons follow our affections: Satans temptati∣ons follovv our affe∣ctions. if wee lightly account of him hee bleares our eyes with Gods mrcies, if we be pricked with consci∣ence of sinne, then he la∣deth us with the judge∣ments of God making us as ready to aggravate our sinnes, as by the former to
extenuate them. 13 Subtilty, and vio∣lence Distincti∣ons be∣tvveene Sa∣tans and the fleshes temptati∣ons. are the chiefest di∣stinctions betweene the temptations of the devill, and of the flesh. 14. When Satan can∣not drive into security he Whom Sa∣tn cannot one vvay vanquish he seeketh to over∣come ano∣ther. laboureth to discourage that they may have no heart to good exercises, and so make small use of them, for as they who eate with ill stomacks have least strength by their meate; so nothing more hinders our profiting by good exercises than want of comfort in them. This policie of Satan many not Many hereby en∣snared. observing, doe of purpose discomfort themselves, thinking the same best, and so take corrasives for
cordials. The remedie Th reme∣die. hereof is this, that such as be hindered by discou∣ragement should in their meanest discharge of du∣ties feede on these com∣forts. 1. the nature of God so proclaimed and proved more tender, pittifull and ready to beare with, par∣don, and accept our least endeavours (in truth) than parents the frailties of their children. 2. that in our weakest duties▪ there is some conscience and fruit. The Scriptures. 1. Men that dig in mines for any treasure e∣ven The Scrip∣tres the veine of hevvenly treasure. for the hope of gaine labour sore before they finde any veine, and many times misse, but when
they finde the silver veine with what cheerefulnesse doe they labour? it makes them forget their paine though sore, and other∣wise tedious: now wee who studie the Scriptures are even in the veine of heavenly treasure, how much then should we bee encouraged? 2. The Scriptures bare∣ly read without particular Not e∣nough barely to read the Sriptures. looking into the severall doctrines contained there∣in is like a comming into a treasurie, wherein we see many costly things folded up, and some ends appea∣ring out, but when they be all uncovered then doth their glory more af∣fect us for the present, and leave a deeper impression
of their excellencie: so in the Scriptures by the par∣ticular view of the excel∣lent doctrines, our memo∣ry is more confirmed, be∣sides our present use ther∣of. 3. Its a most worthy A vvorthy travaile for Students in divinity travaile for Students in di∣vinity to referre all their studie first for the true sense of the Scripture, which onely will make a man a grounded Divine to teach, and confute all er∣rour; and secondly for the right use in himselfe and others for amendment of life and all godly duties. 4. Wee must redeeme Time to be redee∣med to read the Scriptures. time even from our ordi∣nary callings to read the holy Scriptures.
Selfe-love. This is a dangerous de∣ceit and bewrayes an un∣sound To ab∣stain from sin for by-respects dangerous. heart, that when our sinne is like to bee re∣proachfull to us, then wee can hold in for our credits sake, but in our private dealings there is no such stay: and indeed if it bee observed wee shall finde that this selfe-love is a greater cause of leaving much ill, and doing good than the true love of God which ariseth from a sound faith. The number of Seaven. The number of seaven is oft used in the Scrip∣tures, Why the number of seaven is often used in Scrip∣ture. for that God fore∣seeing mans unbeleefe provided many things to call him to the remem∣brance
of the creation, and so bring him to medita∣ting, beleeving, and tru∣sting in God. Sicknesse. Its most meete in the A necessa∣ry course to be taken about the providing a minister to instruct the infe∣cted. time of a contagious sick∣nesse that there be one Mi∣nister to teach the whole, and another to visite the sicke, and that by choice of the people: if people admonished will not take this order, a godly pastor may in wisedome to his power provide for both, speaking to the infected a farre off: if any danger come, he is free. Sinne. 1. As he that once could not abide to taste bitter or sowre things when hee was in health
may justly suspect that his stomack and body is out The tryall of a mans selfe by his love or ha∣tred of sin. of frame when he can well away therewith: so he that could not once abide any corruption of sinne in himselfe or others, and now can, is to feare his soule is sick; and therefore no man though never so godly otherwise, but is to suspect himselfe and to be grieved when he can passe over his infirmities, or see sinne in others without earnest griefe. 2. Hee that will profit in true repentance, must not by viewing the sinnes What must bee done of him that vvould profit in true repen∣tance. of others, whether prea∣chers or people, be drawne from sight of his owne in his particular calling of Magistrate, Minister, Pa∣rents,
&c. but must so see those, that first he cast out the beame out of his owne eye. 3. The Lord punisheth Sin not re∣pented, pu∣nished. every sinne not repented of, either in our selves or in our posterities. 4. The conscience of Consci∣ence of sin vvhat it breedeth in the godly. Gods graces, with the con∣science of sinne breedeth an hell in the hearts of Gods children: when wee are given to sinne wee are blinde even in the sight of our owne dangers and cu∣stome of sinne, which preach such iniquity unto Miserable to be given to sinne. us, that neither Gods judgements can terrifie us, nor his mercies move us. 5. Wee shall never Hovv sin may be left throughly leave sinne, un∣till we know and acknow∣ledge
sinne to bee sinne, and bee truly sorrowfull for the same. 6. This above many things is to be lamented in The ache of sin vvill be carryed to our graves. the lives of most profes∣sors, that by long custome in sinne it is so confirmed, that we shall carry the ach thereof to our grave, as bruised men in their youth. 7. Wee may comfort our selves for particular Hovv to comfort our selves for parti∣cular sins. sinnes, if being admonish∣ed wee bee humbled for them as David and Iehosa∣phat; but if being admoni∣shed we still lye in sinne, and so tye one sinne to a∣nother, then are wee to feare Gods wrath, for it is the generall falling into sinne, not one particular
which displeaseth God. 8. There is no sinne, The seede of every sinne is naturally in every man. whereof every man hath not the seed in himselfe which without the Lords mercie would in time breake out. 9. A good helpe to a∣voide sinne is to remem∣ber Hovv to a∣voide sin. what punishments we have felt for sinne, and what are threatned. 10. Though it be very Hovv to finde out our special sinne. hard to finde out our spe∣ciall and secret sinnes, yet by oft examining our selves, acquainting our selves with our owne e∣state, by often prayer that God would reveale them, by often hearing, reading, meditating the word, by marking the checks of our consciences and reproches
of our enemies we may be much helped therein. 11. Some sins against knowledge are of frailtie The kinds of sinne. and be remissible; others are not, being of a rebelli∣ous and finall obstinacie, which is not in those who feare it, and carefully a∣voide Who sin not of fi∣nall obsti∣nacie. it, rejoycing that its not in them. Slander. By well doing to stop the mouthes of slanderers Hovv to stop the mouthes of slande∣rers. is the onely remedie of all slanders. Sorrow for sinne. 1. It is observed that even of those that are Many are more grie∣ved at sin because of the danger of it, than othervvise. grieved for sinne the cause is in most, for the danger it brings them unto, and not for dishonouring of God whereby it comes to
passe that when they ga∣ther hope of deliverance from the danger, then the griefe and feare for sinne decayeth, which if it were otherwise would daily en∣crease: for the more wee are assured of Gods love the more we love him, and the more we love him the more we desire Gods ho∣nour, and therefore the more are we grieved with our sinne which offends him. This may be a most sufficient answere to that doubt which troubleth Why ma∣ny ae more grie∣ved at sin at first than after∣vvards. many, why divers of those that be true Christians were moved to feare sinne and be grieved at it more in the beginning than af∣ter. Hovv dan∣gerous to make light of finne. 2. There is no greater
bane of sound godlinesse than to favour and make light of our sinne, not be∣ing grieved thereat. 3. It is found by wofull experience that a princi∣pall Why most Christians are unvvil∣ling to lead the strict life of godli∣nesse. cause why many, who hope to be saved by Christ and be indeed true though weake Christians, are so sloathfull and unwilling to take any paines to lead the strait life of godlinesse, and to come under and pre∣cisely keepe the Christian dyet, namely that holy di∣rection that prescribeth how we are the whole day long and so all our life long to be well occupied: the cause I say hereof is manifest to be this, that they be little grieved with their diseased estate, and
feele not such smart of their sinnes as should make them never cease till they found some ease by this so∣veraigne dyet, which is proved so sufficient to re∣leeve and refresh a true Christian heart. This therefore above others is Griefe for sinne is to be labou∣red for. to be travailed in, that we may feele our sinne so bit∣ter and grievous unto us that we may never bee at Meanes to attaine the same. rest till wee come under this dyet and thereby also may be held to a constant keeping thereof. To this end these things are with all conscience continually to be thought on, 1. that our sinnes be most disho∣nourable to God, such as much offend him and grieve his holy Spirit
whereby wee are sealed. These if they be not grie∣vous unto us we may just∣ly 1. feare that either we bee bastards and no true chil∣dren, or at least that wee are fallen into a deadly se∣curity, which will hardly in long time be recovered, and will cost us much griefe and sorrow to be∣wayle our decay. 2. that 2. they bee very hurtfull to man, our selves and others, both good and bad; to our selves, as which hinder good things from us, earthly and spiritual, bring judgements temporall and eternall; to others, provo∣king Gods wrath on our Land, Church, Congrega∣tion, Familie, Kindred, Posteritie, offending the
godly, as whereby they are made sorrie; the wic∣ked, making them re∣proach our profession; the weake also being strength∣ned in sinne by ill exam∣ple. 4, It is a speciall sinne amongst most professors The hurt that pro∣sperity vvorkes in many pro∣fessors. that by reason of outward prosperity and peace they doe not walke humbly with God; so little griefe of heart or feare of God is any wayes to bee found: indeed sorrow is tedious and unwelcome, and ther∣fore except there be great cause and that outward, we put sorrow away and soone ease our selves of the hurthen, whereby it comes to passe that men being loosed as it were
from the Lords bands live securely, and serve God carelessely and spend their dayes in jollitie which is the bane of all godlinesse and enemie to all heaven∣ly rejoycing, whereas God gives grace to the humble, and hee will dwell with those that be of a contrite spirit. In regard hereof I judge it highly necessary for the most of us by all means to turne our laugh∣ter Occasions of carnall rejoycing must be shunned that vvee may truly grieve at sinne. into mourning and our joy into heavinesse, which that we may doe we are to put away and withdraw our selves from all occasi∣ons of carnall rejoycing, as pastimes, merry-meetings, bravery, belly-cheere, foo∣lish jesting, and other such companies as might make
the heart light and merry, & insteed hereof to occu∣pie our minde much upon our old and late sinnes, to see how farre wee come short in grace of others, and more short of that which God requires, and by the meanes which wee have we might attaine to, and herein particularly to deale so much as may be. Herewith to consider the Necessary considera∣tions pro∣voking to godly sor∣row. terrour of Gods wrath, heare how many wayes he may make our lives bitter unto us, by bodily and spi∣rituall plagues on our selves, or such as be neere us, our wives, children, parents, kindred, families, and acquaintance, and in the world to come the torments of hell how ex∣treame
and everlasting and easelesse, in what dan∣ger hereof wee bee who have so little or no faith at all, and so little pray to escape this endlesse woe; how God is angry with us and regards not our pray∣ers, and this is the more that we offend so mercifull a father. Besides these causes of griefe for our selves, this should grieve us for others, either the faithfull, their infirmities and grievous punishments of God upon the bodily and spirituall, deprived of the meanes of salvation, and the like; or the wicked that they live so prophan∣ly and licenciously perse∣cute the godly and cast a∣way their owne soules
whose care if we did pitty it would move to many teares and prayers for thē. In all these this ought to be chiefe, that the honour Note. of God, which is the most precious treasure that can be, is not onely so lightly esteemed, but defaced and contemned. 5. There is a double A double sorrovv for sinne. sorrow for sinne, one spe∣cially in respect of the pu∣nishment, which goeth before faith, and may bee in those who never come to faith, in whom it either weares away of it selfe, or is eased with a false faith; or if it continue, it drives to despaire; and this also remaines after faith, by reason of the weaknesse of faith, which is sometimes
more or lesse. The other sorrow for sinne ever fol∣lowes faith, which thus a∣riseth; that when we consi∣der Christs love to us (which breeds love in us to him with a desire and purpose to please him) then seeing how by our corrupt nature we faile, it cannot but grieve us ac∣cordingly; and this sorrow onely is a proofe of faith. 6. These bee two rules Tvvo rules to try god∣ly sorrovv. to trie godly sorrow, 1. if wee can with contented 1. mindes take the punish∣ment as correction from the Lord, and yet mourne for our sinne, and that in such manner, in giving place to Gods justice in punishing, wee can labour for forgivenes of our sins:
2. if when wee can con 2. ceale our sinne, yet wee with David freely con∣fesse it. 7. When many are more grieved with the Dange∣rous to grieve more at vvorldly things thē at sinne. losse of worldly credit, the motion whereof is sinne, than with the sense of their sinnes and losse of Gods glory, the Lord stri∣keth them with the want of that which is most pre∣cious to them, when they make no conscience of his honour, which is most pre∣cious unto him. 8. If we will truely la∣ment the sinnes of others, Hovv truly to lament the sins of others. we must first bee touched for our owne; and as tou∣ching others, so to lament as the sinne requireth, and with love, not contempt
of the person, and pray for him. 9. When we have cause of sorrow it is good not to Hovv long vve are to grieve. cast it off, till wee see the fruit thereof. 10. Heavenly sorrow it is, to talke of good things Kindes of heavenly sorrovv. which we want, or ill, which we have. 11. We cannot hearti∣ly be grieved for that sin Whence it is that vvee are not grieved at sinne in others. in others, whereof wee have made no great con∣science our selves. 12. That is a true god∣ly sorrow for sinne when no outward pleasure can True sor∣rovv for sinne hovv tryed. steale it away, nor conti∣nuance of time waste it, but onely Christ. 13. This ought to bee alwayes in Gods children The vvant of affecti∣on to any good to be grieved at. that in the want of affecti∣on
to any godly exercise when they should have it, that at least they should be grieved thereat. 14. Two notes there Tvvo notes of godly sor∣rovv. are of godly sorrow, 1. that it be for a just cause, and 2. a proportionable 1. measure to the cause: for 2. it is a subtle policie of Sa∣tan against tender consci∣ences, to urge them to a continuall sorrow, where∣by he may more prevaile in his accusation against them: for when they sor∣row so much for little of∣fences, hee will dismay them in their greater faults, or accuse them of hypocrisie in making no more account of great sins Its Satans policie to make us grieve con∣tinually. than of common infirmi∣ties: wee are then, to take
heed how wee give our selves to sorrow continu∣ally, especially seeing wee are commanded to rejoyce alwayes, and never to sor∣row alwayes, although there be a necessary time of sorrow: and moreover, this ought to be consider∣ed, that God will not ac∣count of men for one par∣ticular Note. defect, but according to his generall course and tenour of life. Soule and Body. 1. It were great wise∣dome and grace to bee More care is to bee had of the soule then of the bo∣dy. more carefull to feede and provide for our soules (which even a world can∣not ransome) than our bo∣dies, not feeding these till those be fed. 2. There is never any
corrupt action in the bo∣dy, The soule first fin∣neth. whereof there hath not beene first a corrupt motion and affection in the soule, so that the soule is the enemy of the body in using it to sinne, and not A prepo∣sterous course in most pro∣fessors. the contrary, as many falsely complaine, and therefore punish their bo∣dies and spare their soules, whereas wee ought rather to nourish the body as the friend to the soule for the exercise of repentance, of mortification and of san∣ctification. Spirituall decay. Its high wisdome when wee see any plague upon Upon the sight of a∣ny plague earthly or spirituall vvhat is to be done. us earthly or spirituall, as losse of our spirituall com∣fort and cheerefulnesse in well-doing, or wound of
conscience by sinne remit∣ted, then to turne to the Lord & crave help of him, both to shew us the cause and to teach us truely to remove it, that so hum∣bling our selves, wee may obtaine mercy and be free∣ed from the plague. Disquiet Spirit. A punished minde is a A disquiet spirit vvhat disquiet Spirit. Godly Strife. Seeing we are natural∣ly unwilling to any good What vve are to strive chiefely to doe. thing, it is good to strive to that thing which wee are most unwilling to doe. Students. This course have I by A necessa∣ry course to profit in learning and bee more and more fit∣ted for the ministerie. experience found profita∣ble, and resolved upon, namely to bee diligent in reading the holy Scrip∣tures,
and of them at the least every day foure chap∣ters; in like manner (for the encrease of my know∣ledge) to spend three houres in the forenoone in searching out the sense of the hardest places, as two in the afternoone in the searching out the pro∣prieties of the tongues, and other two in perusing the tracts and commenta∣ries of learned men; one in meditation and prayer; what time remaineth to spend the fame in brother∣ly conference. Suffering. They that will suffer great things in persecuti∣on Hovv to be fitted for great tryals. and that of Papists, must suffer smaller in peace and that of Protestants.
Selfe-suspition. He that can neglect the Who may justly sus∣pect that their state is bad. private meanes, and use them without any lively touch, and he that can heare the word without a∣ny check of his consci∣ence when the word re∣buketh his corruption, or he that hath his heart ac∣cusing him of sinne, and can bee merry, and follow the world, and passe over his sinne, is greatly to sus∣pect himselfe, and to deny comfort to his heart till God truly humble him. The best may accuse themselves, and this is Nate. comfortable, if wee truly judge our selves in this case.
Table-talke. SEeing all are anointed Every Christian is at table to move and fur∣ther good matters. with the same oyle and not the Minister alone, all men at a table are to move and further good matters with reverence and dis∣cretion. Teares. Howsoever wee please our selves with smal grace, Most are scantie in teares. yet if wee compare our selves with that wee see should be in us, and is in some, wee are exceeding short, as in this one thing, that so few teares come from us in any cause; we are too ready to excuse our selves hereby, that we are not so prone to weepe
as others, and yet for earth∣ly things wee can readily. What was it in Paul that drew so many teares con∣tinually Hovv vve may a∣bound therein. from him, but his tender love to God and his Saints? Let this be in us, so shall wee weepe. Temptations. 1. As it is a great com∣fort that no temptation What may comfort and hum∣ble us in temptati∣on. invade us, but that which taketh holde of the nature of man, so this ought to make us with profit hum∣ble our selves, that there is no temptation in any man which may not take hold on us in time. 2. Wee are never the further from temptation for misliking it, but the Hovv to prevent temptati∣ons. neerer, unlesse as in judge∣ment wee mislike it, so in
affection wee humble our soules in feare and prayer before the Lord, as know∣ing the same in time may invade us. 3. Satan in good causes Golden temptati∣ons. doth use golden tempta∣tions to allure the chil∣dren of God, as in prayer he affordeth meditation, in meditation prayer, in hearing almesgiving, in reading admonition, and still envyeth the good thing whereunto wee are called. 4. As there is a vicissi∣tude A vicissi∣tude of comforts and temp∣tations. of the meanes and comforts of our salvation, so is there of temptations, which being repelled will come againe. Temptati∣ons some∣times take avvay fee∣ling. 5. As some sicknesse takes away all sense of life,
so some temptation may take away the feeling of spirituall life. 6. In any grievous temptation wee must flee What course the Saints are to take in time of temptati∣on. to prayer, and to reading the word, that part there∣of which is fittest: and this not prevailing, to conferre with some faithfull bro∣ther, and bee diligent in these meanes: when if yet we prevaile not, then must we follow our callings di∣ligently, and with pati∣ence waite the Lords lei∣sure, not reasoning with our temptation, lest there∣by we be made dull or de∣sperate, neither yet whol∣ly contemning it as a tri∣fle, lest we fall into securi∣ty, and Satan overcome us without wrestling: for
if we feare it too much he overcomes us before wee fight. 7. All temptations come Whence temptati∣ons come. either of ignorance or want of feeling. 8. As Iacob left not stri∣ving Wee must not faint in tempta∣tion. though his thigh were loosed till he had the blessing, no more must we faint in our temptation, though we be humbled, till wee obtaine the victo∣rie. 9. As striving against our temptations they soon To strive against temptati∣ons hovv profitable, not to re∣sist them how dan∣gerous. depart, & for little paines we enjoy longer ease and quietnesse, so in not resi∣sting the temptation, the same encreaseth, and our little pleasure is paid with long griefe and bitter. 10. This is a sure expe∣riment
whether the sinne Hovv vve may knovv vvhether or not vvee shall yeeld to tempta∣tion. which often tempteth us shall prevaile or not; if the more we be tempted, the more we be grieved for it, strive against it, and la∣bour more for the contra∣ry vertue, it shall not long continue: but if the first comming of sin wrought this care and griefe, and the second waxed lesse, the it will prevaile, un∣lesse the former course be speedily repaired. Thankes. Such are meere mock∣ers of God, and deepe dis∣semblers, Thanksgi∣ving in vvords not accompa∣nied vvith obedience, discovers ypocrisie. which make great profession of thankes in words, but have little or no care by their lives in obedience to testifie the same.
Thoughts. 1. A man is not to spend his thoughts after Thoughts not to bee spent on the vvorld. the abundance of these earthly things, for the roving of the heart after the world is a wonderfull hinderance to a godly course. 2. It is found by many Why its found hard to keepe our thoughts on hea∣venly mat∣ters. true Christians a very hard thing to keepe their minds upon heavenly matters, the reason is manifest, that being by nature earthly, our mindes sinke downe thither as the stone down∣ward, and will not with∣out force bee carryed up∣ward. Our onely help must The Re∣medie. be, that wee doe acquaint our mindes to ascend up∣ward, that at length they may bee acquainted with
the path, and so as readily goe in it, as in the former. 3. A principall cause Whence it is that ma∣ny in their holy exer∣cises are troubled vvith by-thoughts. why so many be troubled in their holy exercises with by-thoughts is this, that they be not exercised at other times to governe their mindes in chasing a∣way vain & evil thoughts, and in holding their minds and hearts to good things, without which travaile I see not how the former disease can bee cured: on the other side, he that shall bestow good travaile this way, shall finde the yoke of Christ easie, and no te∣dious thing to live godly, but shall be freed from ma∣ny falls, reproches, sor∣rowes, and discourage∣ments, which many daily
meetwith, & be filled daily with such comforts, as ma∣ny professors seldome tast of though they would. Triall of a mans selfe. 1. Then may a Christi∣an At vvhat time a Christian may judge his state good. soundly judge his state good, when hee findes all heavenly matters a recre∣ation to him, and his earthly affaires his labour. 2. There is nothing more necessary than daily Hovv vve may cleer∣ly see our state vvhe∣ther good or bad. more and more to make sure our calling, which most professors be either ignorant of, or negligent in, deceiving themselves. Let every one therforedu∣ly examin himself in these points, whereby he shall cleerely see his state, as whether he be carelesse of his state towards God,
such not knowing or not regarding how it is, are most miserable; or care∣full, whether fearefull, (ei∣ther not knowing or not assured how to be saved, both dangerous and dam∣nable to such as die so, Rev. 21. 8.) or comforta∣ble, whether upon faith a∣lone, or workes alone, both deceitfull; or upon faith confirmed by works, which onely i sound: for tryall whereof, consider, what thou beleevest, that thou shalt bee saved by Christ, this onely justifi∣eth, the beleefe of nothing else: why thou beleevest, because thou knowing thy selfe miserable, and Christ as willing as able to ease thee laden comming to
him, doth therefore in heart come unto him, with assurance to be eased, see∣ing he promised. Whe∣ther thou have thy consci∣ence bearing thee record, and because the heart is deceitfull, if thou seest the effects hereof in the chāge of the heart, peace in God, love, feare, and the like, and both thy selfe and o∣thers may see thy course hereupon amended and daily bettered. 3. The soundest tryall whether we have received Hovv to try vvhe∣ther or not vve have received Christ. Christ is by our comfort and care, 1. such as finde neither, must bewaile their state, else no hope, 2. such as be in doubt must never give over till they finde those. 3. such as
finde those must encrease them, which will not bee easie; for prosperity and adversity will quench joy in the Spirit. Thus must wee seeke for comfort by removing all that may dis∣comfort, and using all meanes to maintaine it, as above all to thinke oft and deeply on Gods goodnesse to us, which will stirre up faith and love. 4. Its a godly wisedome A point of godly vvis∣dome. to suspect and try our wil∣lingnesse and unwilling∣nes to any thing▪ so strong and deceitfull are our affe∣ctions. 5. Many are altogether We are to looke as vvell to outvvard as invvard corrupti∣ons. looking to the outward corruptions, others to the inward, the meane be∣tweene both is best: as a
man is in tryall and temp∣tation, Note. such a one is hee. The Truth. 1. The best thing in us Why vve ought to love the truth. is to love the truth, and to hate heresies, and that not because the time doth so serve, as to praise, profit or preferre them that love the truth, though all the world loved heresies and hereticks; though all be a∣gainst us and love them. 2. As for the love of Want of love of the truth vvhereof it may make us affraid. the truth the Gospell pro∣ceeded from fishermen to be embraced of the more learned sort, so for want of love thereof its to bee fea∣red that heresie beginning in the simpler sort, will in∣fect the learned: and if God purpose to punish the blindenesse of our age, hee
can as well send an hereti∣call Spirit into 400 of our learned preachers as hee sent a lying Spirit in 400. Prophets. Time. 1. To have a watchfull eye over the expence of Hovv to vvalk vvith God all day long. our time that no part of it slip away without doing some good, and that espe∣cially which most apper∣taines to us, is a notable meanes to make us walke all the day long with God as the holy fathers did. 2. As the wicked will The time to be re∣deemed. dearely buy the time to commit iniquity, and that secretly which they dare not publiquely; so Gods children in the midst of sinners, if they want that strength to professe pub∣lickly,
yet ought they to redeeme all opportuni∣ties, for exercise of godli∣nesse, prayer, and fasting. Vertue. AS the right way is but Vertue is but one, the contra∣ries there unto ma∣ny. one, and by-wayes ma∣ny, so the vertue comman∣ded being one, the sinnes contrary thereto be many, which as its to bee seene in all other, so in true libe∣ralitie, and that kinde of goodnesse which pertaines to the goods of our neigh∣bour; The vertue requi∣red is that we have an ear∣nest desire that our neigh∣bour may have a benefit as well as our selves, and therefore that we procure
their good as our owne, but the contrary vices bee many, not easily seene, for our hearts bee deceitfull, for when we finde our selves indifferently voide of one sort of covetous∣nesse, wee imagine we are as free from all, when as it Note. is nothing so: for many in buying and selling can deale conscionably, and be worthy commendation who yet in free giving are very backward, who ther∣by may see their love to the world; others be frank enough in giving, and hard in buying and selling, too much seeking them∣selves, who may besides their covetousness suspect their hearts bee false, and moved to give for some
finister respect, as privie pride to be wel spoken of, or secret merit to please God thereby, or that their conscience could not else bee quiet but feare Gods displeasure, whereas the true root of this grace ought to be faith in Christ love to his needie mem∣bers, for which cause only Who they are that truly re∣leeve o∣thers. freely to relieve is in none but Gods deare children. Againe some are not so scraping in getting, as pine at their losses, and are mi∣serable in spending; others prodigall, be extreame in getting by hook or crook: so that this love of the world shewes it selfe in many things. Hovv farre visions are to be cre∣dited. Visions. There may bee visions
now, but extraordinarie, which must have no credit without the word, for Sa∣tan will twice or thrice shew the truth, that there∣by in weightier matters he may seduce. Warfare. HE that feels not his life a battle, and so feares Our life a vvarfare. his adversarie, and is grie∣ved with the wounds of sinne, can have small com∣fort in Christianitie. Watchfulnesse. 1. Watchfulnesse is a looking to our selves for What vvatchful∣nesse is. our soules health oft re∣quired, standing in avoi∣ding all hurtfull things, and procuring all good.
2. As security sets open The con∣trary ef∣fects of se∣curity and vvathful∣nesse. to all danger whereby many fall, as appeareth by the examples of David, Solomon and Peter, so through watchfulnesse are many upholden. 3. Watchfulnesse is ei∣ther The kinds of vvatch∣fulnesse. generall, which must be in every action, or spe∣ciall at set times, and up∣on speciall occasions. Wishes. Wee must bee carefull There is care to bee had therof. of our wishes, lest the Lord grant them, when we would not have them, as often falleth out. The word of God. 1. It is ever best to note The gene∣rall vertue of the vvord to be noted. the generall vertue of the word, and not to use ex∣ceptions, but upon parti∣cular and constraining ne∣cessitie.
2. The cause why wee Why vvee profit not in the vvord. profit not in the word is because wee pray not to have our hearts striken therewith. 3. Who so heares the The effect of carelesse hearing. word carelesly, no marvell though he have no de∣light therein. 4. The word of God of it selfe doth only as a light The vvord and spirit must goe together. reveale Gods will, and cannot work on the heart but that is onely the work of the Spirit, who by the word, lighteneth, hum∣bleth, feareth, comforteth, perswadeth. 5. This sore evill have I observed among many Why most profit not by hearing the vvord. diligent hearers of whom is to bee well hoped for some worke of grace in them, as a chiefe cause
why they heare much with little profit, and ther∣fore no growth can be seene in them, yea rather a decaying, namely that they content themselves with such a marking of that which is delivered, as that they can in any mea∣sure report what they heard, and approve there∣of, which as its necessary, so its insufficient and can little edifie the soule in sound godlinesse, and ther∣fore ought not to pacifie the conscience, whereas that onely hearing can soundly edifie and ought to pacifie, when as our hearts be delighted in the knowledge revealed or confirmed, and our con∣sciences pricked with the
sense of those sins whichbe rebuked, in such sort that we can at our most conve∣nient time turne aside and bewaile them and labour by prayer with the Lord for forgivenesse and pow∣er unto amendment, or o∣therwise bee drawne by hearing of our duties to dere and purpose to per∣forme them, and so make new covenants with the Lord hereof, wherein this care is so much the more necessarie, for that this fruitfull hearing is the The bene∣fit of fruit∣full hea∣ring. principall nurse of all Christianitie. Besides this there is another great dan∣ger, in that wee so soon let slip our hold, forget or neglect our purposes, and so soone waxe weary in
good courses. But its to be hoped that they who have in truth purposed Note. and begunne well shall be recovered from their falls, and quickened afresh by new instructions, which especially doth commend the necessity of continuall hearing or living under an ordinary ministerie. 6. As nothing more The vvord is food for the soule. concernes our bodily life then food, so for our spiri∣tuall life the word. 7. Our chiefe default A chiefe default in hearing. in hearing is that wee are not so affected with sor∣row or comfort, as that we be perswaded to leave the sinne, and doe the du∣ty spoken of. Whether vve are to goe to Churchon the vveek daies or not 8. Touching the hea∣ring of the word on the
weeke dayes, this may be resolved, that if our work be such as cannot at ano∣ther time be done, or bee for the present well omit∣ted, its lawfull for us to stay therefrom. A tryall whereof may bee had in this, if a man of honour, or great credit with us should require us at such times to come to him, whether wee would deny him or not, if we would not deny him, how can we with good conscience deny the Lord our pre∣sence in the congregati∣on? Worldly-mindednesse. Its a matter much to Worldly mindednes a common sinne a∣mong pro∣fessors. be lamented that among so many Professors we see so exceeding few, scarce
one of a thousand who hath apparantly over∣come the world by his faith, setting light by these things below, the heaven∣ly having wholly his heart Though it bee our desire to have our hearts with∣drawne herefrom, yet so weakly doe we labour the same, that with shame we may bewaile our want. Worldly-wisedome. Its the shame of our ho∣ly Gods chil∣dren not so vvise for their soules as are vvorldlings for their bodies. profession that the chil∣dren of the world are in their kinde wiser than the children of light. The wisedome of worldlings for this world is admira∣ble, how deepe a reach have they to see into their matters? how quick to spy out all advantages, to
forecast all doubts, to pre∣vent all that may crosse them, and to follow all op∣portunities to attain their desires, and to make all sure, O but how retchlesse and babish be most Chri∣stians for grace and happi∣nesse! Some securely defer all to God, taking no thought what shal become of them: others content themselves with bare shewes to have a name of Christianitie: others, with smal beginnings, as though every little were enough: most deceive themselves with foolish conceit their care is better then it is: few or none match the worldling in prying into the privy commoditie of Christianitie, and so valu∣ing
it aright, in deep reach to compasse these, in fore∣casting all doubts, and pre∣venting all impediments, taking and pursuing all occasions, sparing no cost, time, paines of attaining, and never give over till we be sure, and then with all watch and ward to hold fast that wee have gotten and daily to encrease the same. Young children. YOung children may be Instructi∣on of young children. taught things concer∣ning God.
Zeale. 1. SEeing the most zealous in time doe coole, its a Prayer to be kept from the sins of the time. most necessary prayer that God would keep us in our age from the sinnes of the time we live in. 2. We are to take heed that the love of mens per∣sons There must be both zeale and love in rebuking slack not our zeale in rebuking sin in them, and that our zeale against sin slack not our love to the person. 3. Its a godly zeale to Zeale to Gods glo∣ry wherein manifested Gods glory to feare every least thing in our brethren and yet in love to hope the best. FINIS.
