7798 99844861 9708
❧ A PROCLAMATION concernyng eatyng of vvhite meates, made the .III. day of February, the .XXXIII yere of the reygne of the kynges most royall maiesty. FOR AS MOCHE as by dyuers and sundry occasyons, as well hearryng, tynges, saltfysh, samond, stockfyshe, as other kindes of fyshe, ben this yere skaut, and also en∣hanced in price about the old rate and comen estimatiō of their valour: so that if the kynges louynge subiectes shulde be enforced onely to bye and prouyde hearrynge and other salte store of fysshe, for the necessary and sufficient sustentation and mayntenaunce of their housholdes and families, all this holy tyme of Lent, accordyng as they haue ben wont in times past to do, & shuld not be by some other conuenient meanes releued therin, the same myght and shuld vndoutedly redounde to their importable charge and detryment. And for as moche as his highnesse considereth, howe this kynde and maner of fastynge, that is to saye, to absteyne from mylke, butter, egges, chese, and all other white meates, is but a mere posytiue lawe of the Churche, and vsed by a custome within this realme, and of none other sorte or necessitie, but the same may be, vpon good con∣siderations and groundes, altered and dispensed with from tyme to tyme by the publike auctority of kinges and princes, whan so euer they shal perceiue the same to tende to the hurt and damage of their people. THE KYNGES hyghnesse therfore most graciousely consideryng and tenderyng the welth and cōmoditie of his people, hath thought good, for the consyderations aboue rehersed, to release and dispence with the sayde lawe and custome of absteynynge from white meates this holy time of Lent, And of his especial grace and mere motion gyueth and graunteth vnto al and singular his subiectes within this his realme of England, Wales, Cales, Guyes, Hammes, and in all other his graces do∣minions, free lyberty, faculty, and licence, to eate all maner of white meates, as mylke, egges, butter, chese, and suche lyke, durynge the tyme of this Lent, without any scruple or grudge of conscience: any lawe, constitution, vse, or custome to the contrary notwithstandynge. Wherin neuer the lesse his hyghnes exhorteth, and in the name of god requireth, all such his faythfull subiectes, as may, wol, or shall enioy this his sayd graunte or faculty, that they be in no wyse scruple or doubtefull therof, nor abuse or tourne the same in to a fleshly or carnall liberty: but rather endeuour them selfes to their pos∣sible powers with this libertie of eatynge of white meates, to obserue also that fast, whiche god most specially requireth of them: That is to say, to renounce the world and the deuyl, with al their pompes and workes, and also to subdewe and represse their carnal affections, and the corrupt workes of their flesshe, accordinge to their vowe and profession made at the font stone. For in these poyntes specially consisteth the very true and perfyt abstinence and fastinge of a Christen man. GOD SAVE THE KYNGE. ▸ ❧ Tho Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
