7895 99847273 12302
❧ A Proclamation for the Marchauntes Aduenturers. ELizabeth dei gratia Angliae, Fran∣ciae, & Hiberniae, Regina fidei defensor, &c. Maiori & vicecomiti∣bus Ciuitatis sue Londoniensis, salutem. Vobis mandamus quod statim visis presentibus in singulis locis, infra Ciuitatem predictam & Suburb, eiusdem, tam infra libertates quam extra, vbi magis expedire videritis ex parte nostra, solemniter & publicae proclamari fac. in haec verba. WHERE in the Parliament begonne and holden at Westminster, the first daye of March, in the seuenth yeare of the Raygne of our dearest brother Kyng Edward the Sixt, and there continued till the last day of the same month of March. It is there resited by one acte of Parliament, then & there made intituled an act reuiuing a Statute made in the xvii yeare of our most noble progenitor, king Edward the fourth, amongest other thinges it was then ordeyned and enacted by auctheritie of the same Parlya∣ment, that no person should cary or make to be caried out of this Realme or Wales, from no part of the same, any manner of moneye of the coigne of this Realme, nor money of the coine of other realmes, lādes, or Lordshippes, nor plate, vessell, bullion or Iuell of gold, garnished or vngarnished, or of Siluer withoute the kinges licence, but suche persons as be dispensed with in the statute made in the second yeare of our most noble progenitor king Henry the Sixte, and other diuerse Statutes made vpon paine of felonye. The which estatute and ordinance so made in the time of our said most noble progenitor King Edward the fourth, was made to endure from the feast of Easter in the xviii. yeare of the said King Edward the fourth, vnto thend of seauen yeares then next ensuing, which said estatute and ordinaunce so before rehearsed by aucthoritie of Parliament, holden in the fourth yere of the late king of famous memory, Henry the Se∣uenth, was confirmed & established to be good & effectuall from the feast of the purification of our Lady in the yeare of our lorde God a thousand foure hundreth, foure score and nine, to thend and terme of twenty yeares then next ensuinge, as by the same Statute also more plainely appeareth. And where also at the said Parliament holden at Westminster, in the Seuenth yeare of our said dearest brothers reigne, it is enacted by aucthoritie of Parliament, that the said estatute & ordinaunce before rehearsed, made in the xvii. yere of our most noble progenitor king Edward the fourth, and euery clause, article, sentence or proui∣sion therein conteined, is by authoritie thereof confirmed and enacted, to be good & effectuall from the first day of May then next ensuing, and to endure vnto thend of twenty yere then next following. As by the said act made in the seuenth yere of our sayd dearest brothers Raygne playnely appeareth. NEVERTHELES vpon good and reasonable considerations vs mouing, we be pleased and con∣tented, that from and after the publication of this our Proclamation, it shalbe lawfull vnto all notorious Marchauntes, and all and euery other person and personnes passing by our speciall lycence out of this realme, into any outwarde parties beyond the Seas, to carye with them for theyr reasonable costes and expenses, the somme of foure poundes of any money currant within this Realme, or vnder and not aboue, or any Rynges or Signettes of golde or Syluer vpon theyr fyngers, without anye losse of lyfe, landes or goodes, or any other payne, forfeyture, imprysonment, or penaltie to be to them or any of them for the same. The sayde estatutes or any other Statute, ordenaunce or lawe heretofore made to the contra∣rie in any wyse notwithstandyng. Et hoc sub periculo incumbenti nullatenus omittatis. Teste me ipsa apud Westminster primo die Maij. Anno Regni nostri primo. God saue the Quene. Imprinted at London by Richard Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Quenes Maiestie. Anno M. D. LIX. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
