7821 99845911 10842
¶ A Proclamation set furthe by the Kynge Maiestie, with thassent of his derest Uncle Edward Duke of Somerset  oyal person, and of his realme, dominions and subiectes Protector and others of his highnes moste honorable counsail, concernyng Testons. WHere as the Kynges Maiestie by thaduise of his moste dere vncle the lorde Protector & the rest of his highnes coūsail, for diuers great and vrgent cōs∣deracions, had cōmaunded that all maner of persones should bryng al coyne comonly called Testons, coyned with the face & stamp of his highnes most dere father the late kyng Henry the eight, before the feast of Christmas last past into the Tower of Lo∣don or other his Maiesties Myntes, to the intent the same might be exchaunged into Shillynges, Grotes or other kynde of monoyes: It hath so chaunsed that by reason aswel of the multitude of that coyne heretofore made in the tyme of thesayd late kyng his Maiesties father, as also by the great quantitie and foyson of the same coyne, counterfaited and brought into this realme, beyng currant, here, all thesayd Testons hath not be chaunged. And thervpon his highnes by thaduise afore∣sayd was pleased that thesayd Proclamacion should be enlarged vnto a lenger day, and so hath permitted and suffred thesayd coyne of Testons to be currant amonges his subiectes vntill the first of May last past, vpon trust that in that space vpon the cōsideracions in thesayd Proclamacion expressed, euery man for his part helping that waies, all maner of thesayd Testons of the stamp of thesayd late kyng of famous memory should haue been brought into the Myntes and exchaūged. In the whiche space yet many abusyng his highnes clemencie hath kept their Testons stil in their hā∣des, or otherwise vttered them, & fewer sithens that tyme til now of late haue been brought into his highnes Myntes. The whiche Testons if they should now remayne only mere bullion, should be great losse and hynderaūce to his Ma∣iesties subiectes: And if the same stay or Proclamacion should in any wise be released, it should be greatest losse & hyn∣deraunce to the realme, and a present occasion of cōtinual bringyng in more coūterfait Testons: Therfore the kynges Maiestie by thaduise of the lorde Protector and the rest of his highnes coūsail, straightly chargeth and commaundeth thesayd Proclamacion of disanullyng & criyng doune of thesayd Testons to be kept emonges al his louyng subiectes so that the same be neuer hereafter taken for currant or lawful money, but may lawfully be refused of any maner of per∣son: And yet neuertheles of his moste princely clemencie & liberalitie, his highnes by thaduise aforesayd is content that all suche summes of money as shalbe due to his Maiestie, aswell for the Relief graunted in the last sessions of the Par∣liament, as for all other rentes and debtes may be payed in good & lawful Testons of the stamp and coyne of his Ma∣iesties father at any tyme before the first of Iune next folowyng, and so receiued of his highnes Threasurers vntill the sayd first of Iune next folowyng onely, after the rate and value of xii. d. euery Teston. After whiche tyme his highnes pleasure is, that in no wise thesayd Testons be any more receiued of any his highnes officers of receipt, of or for that price. Neuertheles for the space and tyme of two monethes after, that is to say, vnto the ende and last day of Iuly next folowyng, his highnes is content that all good & lawful Testons at his Maiesties Myntes, shalbe receiued for bulli∣on after the rate of xii. d. the piece of any person who shall bryng them thether. And further that it shalbe lefull to any mā to buy any good and lawful Testons of he sayd coyne and stamp of the late kyng, and made in any of the Myntes within this realme of England, to that intent to bryng theim to the Myntes of any person not disposed to bryng them himselfe: So that he do buye them for no lesse price then after xi. d. ob. the piece and not vnder, vpon paine that whoso∣euer for his owne gredynes and lucre, shall buye any suche Testons for lesse value then after xi. d. ob. the piece, to the domage of the poore men, who would sell the same, shal forfaite therfore the Testons so bought and ten tymes the va∣lue of them, wherof one moytie to the kynges Maiestie, the other to the demaunder of the sayd forfaite, by bill, accion of debte or informacion in any of the kynges Maiesties courtes of Recorde, where no essoyne, proteccion nor wager of lawe shall serue or be allowed. And his highnes further is content that all his officers and ministers may receiue all suche good and lawful Testons, and so repay them againe vnto his highnes after thesayd price of xi. d. ob. the piece, duryng onely thesayd monethes of Iune and Iuly. In the whiche tyme for that price of xi. d. ob. the piece, they shall refuse no lawfull & good Testons of any his highnes subiectes. After the whiche last day of the moneth of Iuly next folowyng his highnes expresse will and pleasure by the aduise aforesayd is, that the coyne called Testons of his high∣nes father kyng Henry theightes stamp, shall neither be receiued of his highnes officers, no of none others, nor yet at the Myntes or exchaunge, as coyne or money of any valuacion but after suche sorte as plate or any other straunge bullyon is, or then shalbe, that is to say, accordyng to the rate of the standard, and the quantitie of fine siluer in them contayned, and none otherwise. Geuen at Grenewyche the xxii. day of May. M.ccccc.xlix. God saue the Kyng. Ex  Richardi Graftoni  impressoris. Cum  mprimendum sol.
