8011 99847538 12575
❧ By the Queene. THe Queenes Maiestie vpon very wayghtie and necessarie considerations, tendyng first to the honor of almyghtie God, and next to the suretie of her selfe and the whole state of her louyng subiectes of all degrees: hath with very good deliberation and ad∣uise of her counsell resolued to establishe her realmes, dominions, and subiectes in strength, aswell in ciuill as in martiall pollicie, and to the furtheraunce of some part of necessarie thynges belong∣yng to the state martiall. Her Maiestie geueth knowledge to all maner her subiectes, that by speciall persons of good trust, there shalbe particuler inquisitions made in all partes of the Realme, in what sort the statutes and lawes of the same are obserued, which are prouided for maintenaunce of the breede of horses, and for kepyng and hauyng in redy∣nesse and duely furnysshed for seruice of horses and geldynges, and of all maner of armour and weapons. And consequently vpon such inquisitions, her Maiestie also meaneth speedyly to haue parfite musters made of the same, and the errours and lackes which therin shalbe founde, to be by frequent musteryng and exercise amended and supplied. And because her Maiestie considereth, that the intermission of tyme hath bread some lacke of such furniture as by the lawes vpon great paynes are required: her Maiestie being not of a dispo∣sition to vse seueritie towardes her subiectes, in respect of the penalties alredy iustly due, but to haue all her people, as nowe the tyme requireth, to be in strength: chargeth and commaundeth all maner of persons of all estates, to prouide and furnyshe them selues, accordyng as by any law or statute, or by any other speciall tenure it shalbe founde to be due, of horses, geldynges, armour, and weapons, and of meete persons to serue therwith: so as the same may be fully redy before the first of April next, vpon such penalties as by the lawes shalbe by special commissions through all partes of the Realme founde due. Wherin her Maiestie meaneth, in consideration of this fauourable warnyng, not to spare or mittigate any maner of penaltie that shalbe due for any part of the tyme past. And thus much of her generall determination in the meane time her Ma∣iestie hath thought good to notifie by this her proclamation, not doubting but such other thinges as her Maiestie intendeth shortly hereafter to propounde to al her subiectes for a further strength∣nyng of themselues, shalbe well alowed, and duely executed, as tendyng principally to the bene∣fite of themselues, and to the honor and suretie of the Realme against all euentes. Gyuen at Hampton Court the thirde day of February. 1568. in the eleuenth yere of her Maiesties raigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde, by Richard Jugge and Iohn Cawood, printers to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
