A4181 99827577 31999
A safe and easy Method for supplying the want of Coin, and raising as many Millions as the Occasions of the Publick may require. Humbly offered to the considera∣tion of the present Parliament. With some Remarks upon the Bank of England, Dr. Chamberlain's Bank, the Land-Bank, so called, and the National Land-Bank. Ego certè reip. non deero; & quicquid acciderit, a quo mea cul∣pa absit, animo forti feram. Cic. Cornificio. IT cannot be denied, that the want of good Coin gave rise to the several Banks now on foot, by which many private Persons have enriched themselves, and more probably expect it, not without benefit to the Publick: It being evident, that e∣very Summ paid by Bill of Credit is in ef∣fect, for the time the Bills do pass, so much Money added to the Coin of the Kingdom. But it is to be presumed, that the Parlia∣ment will give a check to that endless en∣crease of Bills of Credit, which, upon the failure of any of the Banks to answer in Spe∣cie, when generally called for, may prove a greater mischief than that which they would remedy. If therefore a way can be found to sup∣ply the want of Coin by Credit, and that Credit to have so true a Foundation, that it shall certainly be made good in specie, and that within few years, which has not been pretended to by any Proposer of Banks, this may at the least deserve to be considered in Parliament: where what is crudely proposed may be maturely dige∣sted and improved, by the collective wis∣dom of the Nation. Wherefore it is proposed, 1. That a Fund of 500000l. per an. more or less, according to the Summ to be raised, be settled for eight Years, or if for a longer time, a less Fund; and this may be of such a nature, as may give general satisfaction: but to name a Fund which may be reje∣cted, might prejudice a Method applicable to any good Fund. 2. Let the Money arising by the Fund be paid into an Office, to be erected at Lon∣don, or within the Suburbs, to be called the Crown-Bank, or Publick-Bank: For which Office let there be as many Commissioners, or Directors, as the Parliament shall think fit; they to be intrusted to appoint Collectors, and other Officers, and to ascertain their Sallaries, and the like. 3. At that Bank let there be drawn on Vellom, or Parchment, or thick Paper, made there, and imprinted with Greek, Hebrew, or some other particular Characters, in a Mill for that pur∣pose, so many Bills from 5 l. to 100 l. sign∣ed by 5 Commissioners or Directors at the least, as shall make up as many Millions as are wanting: let each of these Tickets have its particular Number, and the Year expressed in which it is to be brought back into the Office, and there discharged: Let the pei∣ces of Vellom, or Parchment, or thick Paper, be cut in the middle of the Impression▪ and let that part which has the other half of the Impression be kept in the Office, having upon it the same Number with the other, and a Memorandum of the Summ contain∣ed in it, and be signed as the other. 4. Let all the Bills be current at the Val∣lues expressed in them, and immediately pass in all Payments as lawful Coin, and be
Assignable, and to be Lent out at Interest as Money. But if any Bill be not broughtThis to se∣cure the coming in of the Bills▪ yet they that are to come in last will be of like benefit with the first,  the last pass for Money, and may be disposed of, or put out at interest from the beginning. back into the Office in the Year appointed for it to come in, let it from thenceforth be wholly void: And after the Bills have been brought in, and the Money upon them paid, and the Account for that Year pass'd▪ let them be Cancelled. 5. Let the Mill where the Vellom, or Parch∣mnt, or thick Paper, is imprinted, be fram'd at the place where it is to be used. And let it be Capital for the same, or any other of that kind, to be found elsewhere at any time▪ or there unbroken after the whole Number of Bills making up the appointed Summ, together with the Counter-parts, have been once imprinted; or for any Persons to counterfeit any of the Bills, or the Impres∣sion on the Vellom, or Parchment, or Paper, or so to imprint more pieces of Parchment, or Vellom, or Paper, than the appointed num∣ber. 6. To prevent the confusion and uncer∣tainty of hurrying in all the Bills of each Year at the end of each Year; let the Bills of the Year be brought in at any time af∣ter the first six months; and if the money which should pay the same be not come into the Office, let the Commissioners or Di∣rectors, give Bills of Credit upon Vellom, or Parchment, or Paper, of another Impression, for so much money as every Bill carries, payable within six months at the farthest, with Interest at 4l. per Cent. till payment. And let it be Actionable, and highly Penal for them to refuse or neglect payment, if there be Cash for it, or not to give such Bills if Cash fail, or to imbezil the money, or to postpone Payments, or to employ it to any other use or purpose, than the pay∣ment of the Bills in the first place, next to the defraying the annual Charges of the Bank, and let the overplus be paid into the Exchequer. 7. In case the Fund shall be deficient in any Year, let what is wanting to clear the Bills and the Charges of the Office, be paid out of such money as shall be in the Ex∣chequer; and if it be not paid before the then next Parliament, let it be supplyed our of the next publick Tax. 8. Let the Commissioners or Directors at the end of every Year Account to the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, who are to transmit the Accompt to Parliament. If it be said, that these Bills being to come in within the year for which they are appointed, will not pass abroad in Fo∣reign Trade. If that were so, possibly it might be an Argument to recommend them, as Riches kept at home; the chief Topick against re∣gulating our Coin being the fear of en∣riching our Neighbours with it. However, this Objection would lie on∣ly against the Bills which are to come back within the first year, whereas there are e∣nough of others which may lie out some Years, long enough for traficking abroad with them, and making Returns, upon which the Money will be received in Spe∣cie. These Bills, if they were wholly kept within the Nation, as they in effect increase the money, will advance the home Manufactures, enable Traders to employ more hands, and so lower the in∣terest of money, that we may buy and sell as cheap as our Neighbours; and by con∣sequence turn the Ballance of Trade on our side, which is now against us, and therefore will bring mony and Bullion from Abroad. And this not being the on¦ly Coin we have, but an increase of it; there will be enough of Silver and Gold to send into foreign parts. If it be said that these Bills may be coun∣terfeited, or at least they who are at di∣stance from London cannot be assured of the contrary. There is as much security in these Bills as in any Deed, which may possibly be for∣ged; but Forgeries happen so rarely, that they work no interruption of business, and common Credit▪ The Hands of so many Commissioners be∣ing required, there can be no part of Eng∣land where the Hands of some of them will not be soon known. No true Bills can fail of being paid in Specie: And if the Publick should be char∣ged with some Counterfeits, the Loss will bring no sensible inconvenience; nor can it bear any proportion with the vast bene∣fit of such an encrease of the Wealth of the Nation, so seasonably applyed. No Objection will lie against these Bills▪ but what will be at least equal against those of the Bank of England, and all other Banks; which yet men are very ready to venture upon, with a much less certain
prospect of receiving Money for Bills of Credit, or what may yield money when they have occasion; which leads me to the consideration of the most promising of the other Banks. Of the Bank of England. The Bank of England has raised the King 1200000 l. and perhaps has saved him 200000 l. in the Remittances of money. This has a Fund of 100000 l. per An. for 12 years absolute, and for ever till redeemed by Parliament; which is in effect a perpetu∣ity, and if employed as above for 100 years, is worth 10 Millions. This Bank is said to have paid 1200000 l. in to the Exchequer in Money and Bills, before one Third of it was advanced by the Sub∣scribers: and to this day but 60 l. per Cent. is paid in; and yet that 60 l. sells for 100 l. notwithstanding large Dividends, and the loss perhaps of 200000 l. by the foreign Ex∣change, besides such Bills as they have pub∣lickly made known to have been counter∣feited, and all wherein they have concea∣led their Losses. This has been done by the help of Bills of Credit, though there could be no cer∣tainty but money might be called for fa∣ster than it came in: Nor is it certain, as it would be in the Crown-Bank, that the Cre∣dit shall not extend, not only beyond the Fund, as it has already, but farther than they can Answer in payments. Tho fo∣reign Merchants may take their Bills, be∣cause of their commerce here; it is visible that it has not yet obtained Credit with the Bank at Amsterdam; for if it had, it could not have lost so much by the Exchange; nor is it to be supposed that it ever will gain full Credit there, because of the extent of its Credit at home beyond the real Fund. Of Doctor Chamber∣lain's Bank. Doctor Chamberlain's Proposal as far as I can look into the Mystery, is this. IF a man makes over 150 l. per annum. for 150 Years, to secure the payment of 100 l. yearly into his Office, in money or his Bank Bills, for 100 Years; and also pays 1000 l. in Money at 4 payments, 400 l. at setling the Estate, 300 l. at the end of the first year, 200 l. at the end of the second 100 l. at the end of the third; he shall have Bills for 6000 l. including his own 1000 l. of which 1000 l. when he seals, 1100 l. at the end of the first year, 1200 l. at the end of the second, 1300 l. at the end of the third, 1400 l. at the end of the forth, besides 2000 l. in Bills, which with his 400 l. advanced shall immediately be paid to the Treasurer of the joint Stock in Trade, to which 600 l. must be added as it comes in, and the party must pay 5 . per cent. yearly for the whole 8000 l. for the charges of the Office; and if men will lend Money, he proposes for 1000 l. to pay 1400 l. in 4 years. Where its observable. 1. Whereas the Office pretends to but 5 . per cent. it is a full fifth of the whole value, for it is 2000 l. Bills to the parties 8000 . except his own 1000 l. and 'tis better than a third of what he receives to dispose of, should we admit that his bills will circu∣late. 2. He is so far from supposing that these Bills will ever be paid in Specie, that he makes no manner of provision for it, but allows the annuity, which is the fund for the Bills, to be paid in Bills: and so the Bills are to carry themselves from the Bank and to the Bank, without any Circulation or Profit. 3. The Circulation, if any, must be per∣formed at the very beginning by one upon seven and an half, 400 l. being all that is to be paid till the end of the first year to circulate the 1000 l. in Bills received by the party, and the 2000 l. in Bills put to the stock of Trade; unless what is acciden∣tal upon the coming in of Moneys lent, which in truth, clogg the Bank with 50 . per annum. loss for every 1000 l. and that money will be no more than is requi∣site to clear incumbrances upon Estates subscribed. And if any part of the 400 l. first brought in be employed in Trade, that, before pro∣fitable returns, leaves the less to circulate the Bills, and if half be employed in trade 1 l. must circulate 15 l. 4. If the Annuities were to be paid in Money, which would be very hard upon them who have the Bills dead by them; yet the distance of 100 years makes it ve∣ry questionable what 150 l. per annum shall hold out 100 l. per annum in all Events. 5. If this were practicable, it would be far from answering the great end which the Doctor does, or ought to propound, of lessning the burthen upon Land; for either men with encumbred Estates must not come
in, or if they do, they will greatly abate the possibility of circulating the Bills. Suppose a man of 150 l. per annum owes 1000 l. and takes up the 1000 l. which he must advance; or suppose only the first 400 l. be in Money, but for the rest he may bring the Bills he received from the Bank. In the first case, he has occasion for five times as much money as a man of a clear Estate brings to the Bank; if only the 400 l. be to be paid in mony, then indeed he will have occasion for less then 4 times as much as the other brings, but by the same rule there may never be more than the first 400 l for every 150 l. per annum. subscribed to circulate all the Bills. But if the man owe 1500 l. he is excluded from all benefit of this Bank. 6. The Lender will expect better security than can be found here. Shall he resort to his own money? That is lent out to subscri∣bers of Land. Shall he go to their Land? that is made over to answer the Annuities to the Bank in its Bills or Money: If in Bills they are never likely to yield money; if in Money, that must be laid out to purchase Bills, and they are to be cancelled; If to the Stock in Trade; that is first to answer the interest of 3000 l. to every subscriber of 150 l. per Ann. and let the Lender catch the rest where he can. It is needless here to object the want of sufficient certainty, that the Bills of Credit shall come in upon any other account than their lying dead; or that the Governours of this Bank shall not mismanage in several particulars, which might require parliamen∣tary provisions. Of the Land-Bank so called. The Linolns-Inn, Exeter-Exchange, Asgill Bank, or whatever Name you will give it, rather than that which it assumes of Land-Bank, has a Subscription of 500000 l. with which 4 expeditious Gentlemen who are Directors and slanding Council, pretend to pass so many real Securities as shall make to the Bank 30 l. per Cent. at 3 l. 10 s. per Cent. but as it is said 1 l. per Cent. more goes for the Writings, and Mr. Asgil and another have 5000 l. Credit in the Stock for the Inven∣tion; so that they and the Councel are sure to get well if the Bank should have no Credit beyond the Summ subscribed, in which case the Bank would not get 2 l. per Cnt. considering the Charges, the Time the Money must lie dead before Securities pass, and the 2 l. per Cent. upon their Bills, as long as they pass. However they propose to themselves to raise 30 l. per Cent. by Bills of Credit, upon the particular Estates convey∣ed to the Bank, which Bills are to carry 2 l. per Cent. interest from 6 months to 6 months, and to charge Men's Estates till 6 months notice for their coming in: yet if Landed-men could have money no where else at their Rate, and there were no flaws in their Settlement, they might not be much out in their reckoning. But I cannot see how they can ever lend to the value of their Subscription, because, There is an other Bank much better sounded, and with fairer pretentions to a Parliamentary Establishment, which will lend at 3 l. 10 d. per cent. and where the Borrower may clear his Estate when ever he pays his Money; nor is it improbable that the Bank of England, and such other Banks as are, or may be on foot, will so sink interest, that money will be common∣ly had elsewhere at the same rate, nay is al∣ready often let out at 4 l. per cent. vid. The printed Set∣tlement. The settlement empowers a servant of the Bank to charge any man's Estate in the name of the Trustees; they declare them∣selves chargeable only with willfull Fraud: how then shall a man be secured against the Servants, granting out double the due number of Bills, where all that receive them shall have a like claim to be satisfied out of the Estate? Their Bills of Credit being designed to charge the respective Estates, as long as the bills upon them are out, or till six months notice for their coming in; can any man be sure to have his Estate cleared till six months after the paying the mo∣ney which he owes? Or what ground of certainty is there, that six months notice shall be duely given for the discharging his Estate at the end of six months? If it be said the subscriptions and insurance Fund are their security, that the Bills shall never trouble them. 1. The Subscription Money all but 10000 l. for insurance must be suppo∣sed to be lent out in Mortgages, and no Estate can or ought to be a security that an other mans Estate shall be cleared upon bringing his Money. 2. Tho' they have acted a good while, it does not appear that the 10000 l. or any part of it is yet laid out, notwithstand∣ing their Covenant or Promise to purchase
with it a present Fund for insurance. 3. That Fund is to be farther supplied on∣ly with 10 s. per cent out of such interest as they shall receive; which, if the whole 500000 l. were let out, would be but 2500 l. per annum, and if but 100000 l. but 500 l. per annum, which must be charged with bad Bills as well as with the good ones lying out, and possibly with a charge yet more heavy from the defects of their settlement. Besides the Subscribers will certainly expect to be first serv'd with at least 2 per cent. before they will suffer any part of the profits of the Bank to be laid out for this purpose. 4. No security is equal to the actual clear∣ing an Estate, when the money due upon it is paid: and it will be impossible for many to raise the Money by the sale of any part of the Estate, or otherwise, unless the Estate can be assigned over absolutely clear at the time of payment. Their Bills not being intended to charge all the Estates conveyed to their Trustees, but only particular Estates respectively, some of which may fail; the apprehension which any man may justly have, that his Bill is charged upon such an Estate, must needs hinder the currency of their Bills. Will it not be a fatal Objection against their Bills, that he who has one may have mislayed it, or returns not from abroad till the six months expire, or might never have observed the Notice, and yet his Bill signifies no more than if it were charged upon a bad Title? And where shall he have his remedy? Shall he sue the Trustees? They declare before hand they will be answerable only for Willful Fraud. Shall he lay hold of the Fund for insurance? That is yet in the land of Promise, and where ever it is, will be loaded with clearing the Borrow∣ers Estate from Supernumerary or other bills lying out, and with making good bad Bills, besides this of paying Bills when the Estate on which they were charged is gone. Shall the Trustees be obliged to assign any one of the other Mortgages? They are to bear only their own burthen of Bills, and enough too, if their design could take. Suppose a Bill be charged, as far as it can be by their method upon a good Estate, shall the man who has the Bill reach this Estate by Law or Equity? I take it by neither: And that this may appear by a bare representation of the pro∣jected Settlement. vid. The printed Set∣tlement. The legal Estate is setled upon the present Trustees, and that by a new term not known in our Law, is to attend the equitable In∣terest, which is to vest in New Trustees to be chosen from time to time, and that by virtue of their Election, without any actu∣al transferr or assignment; and they to whom the equity was never transferred, are to charge an Estate to which they have no Title; and this not by their immediate act, but by their Servant receiving power from them, and that in and by the name which they assume without Authoriry, not being incorporated; and this charge is to be made barely by the Servant's reference to a Book where the Estate is entred, tho' that reference names not the party whose Estate they would charge, nor yet the E∣state, least the Bills upon that Estate should not pass. These bills not being per∣sonal charges; Whether the party that receives them be in as good a condition, as he that receives a Note from a Bankers man? Whether this perversion of the nature of Bills of Exchange, which hitherto have been personal, and now are turned upon Land (which can neither answer nor re∣ceive Letters of Advice, nor be out of countenance when bills are protested) be not an invention as new to the Lawyers, as to the Merchants? Suppose the Bank lend 10000 l. to a man, who after setling his Estate to the use of the Bank, according to this new contri∣vance, mortgages to an other who knows nothing of the first mortgage, for 10000 l. Bona Fide paid. Whether the second mortgagee shall not in equity compell the first Trustees to assign the legal Estate to him, and exclude the new Trustees from an Equity, which had been no otherwise vested in them than as above? And what regard in this case, would the Court of Chancery have to the intended charge upon the Estate, by that blind and inauthoritative reference to a Book of en∣tries? Or suppose the Trustees to whom the state was conveyed, and are likely to be disobliged by being voted out of the trust of the Equity, which is designed to govern the Legal Interest, should join with the
Mortgagor in assurances to others; who would be in the best condition those other persons or the Bank? Of the Na∣tional Land Bank. In such difficulties are these Gentlemen involv'd, by running in the Dark byond their Guide, Mr. Briscoe, who sometime be∣fore they set up had made a very rational Proposal, for turning all the Land of the Kingdom which shall be conveyed to Trustees for the use of the Bank, into a living Stock, and easing others of their excessive Loads; by bringing a million of money to circulate 4 millions of Bills, charged upon Land and Money, the whole Fund making good every Bill. Yet no Man's Land is to continue in longer than he pleases, but he may with∣draw it at any time, paying the money which he has taken up there, and his pro∣portion of loss if any has then happened. And whether he has occasion for money or no, he is to take up one Years Revenue of his Land, that the Bank may be the first Mortgagee, if after settling his Estate he should borrow elsewhere, and then take up money of the Bank. Indeed Mr. Neal has added to this, Bills for an other Years Revenue, to be lent the Bank as so much Cash: But I do not see how these Bills can yield more Credit than those which the Di∣rectors have power to charge upon the whole Fund, and consequently upon every parti∣cular Estate. But as the Bills are likely to be current to the value of the Fund, and all the Land mortgaged to the Bank, for so much as is borrowed becomes Fund, though not enti∣tuled to Profit and Loss; the Fund for making good the Bills, may extend as far as the Occasions of the Landed-men; and therefore the Bank's Bills may pass as far, with the help of such money as will flow into it. When the Values of the Lands and the Ti∣tles are ascertained, they cannot fail of be∣ing a Fund of Credit for 3 4ths of the va∣lue; and therefore he who subscribes 100 l. per Ann. is to have credit for 1500 l. and his share in the Bank accordingly, and yet shall receive the yearly Income, paying his proportion of loss, and such Money or Bills as he takes up; and as the Interest which himself pays is part of the profits in which he shares, it is highly probably that he cannot pay 2 l. per Cent. after the first year, and after that would receive more per Cent▪ than he had paid. On the other side, he that subscribes 1500 l. shall have equal Advantages with the subscriber of 100 l per An. and 3 l. per Cent. for the whole from his first payment, nor can his money be called in faster than at 10 quarterly payments: But if he chuse to pay faster, he may have Interest at 3 l. per Cent. for all above the payment then due; yet some of the present Directors lodge ma∣ny Thousands there without interest. And if we may conjecture by the en∣crease of Credit in the Bank of England, wch. has a much less, and less certain Fund, it is not to be thought that more than half the subscription-money need be called in, and then they will have 6 l. per Cent. certain besides their share in the profits. Though these payments may seem too slow to set the Bank in credit, especially after the Coin is regulated, and men will be less fond of Bills than they have been; yet such a Fund can never fail of com∣manding money where it is needfull; nor will men unnecessarily call for money, while they can have so good Bills; especi∣ally if this Bank were established by Ast of Parliament: in consequence of which it would soon become a Registry for most of the Lands in the Kingdom, and if it were made so for such as would voluntarily en∣ter their Lands and Incumbrances, or the Claims which they have; and were 100000l. per An▪ settled for 40 Years for 1600000 l. to the publick (whereas the Bank of Eng∣land has in effect a perpetuity for 1200000 l. it would make this Bank no mean Rival to that of Amsterdam; besides the raising Land to 40 Years purchase generally, and that in Bank to much more. Nor can it be thought that the Landed∣men, who must needs have the prevailing Interest in Parliament, can long neglect those Advantages, which would set them upon an equal bottom with the Traders and Usurers. The most weighty Objections which I have met with against this Bank are these two. That the subscribers of Money are not se∣cure, because the Landed-man may withdraw his Estate. But it is to be considered, That this ha∣zard is the same to every Landed-man that continues in, and besides, all bear their pro portions while they stay in, and pay at
their going out; and therefore are upon equal hazard▪ If I mistake not, the Monied-man may have Credit for 3 4ths of the value of his whole Sub∣scription, and extend that Credit in Bank bills; and if this use of his Stock would not for that time be like a With-drawing so much; yet if he should never be able to bring this back to the Bank, this might be worse than a Land∣man's with-drawing his Land. The Subscribers of Land either come with clear Estates, or owe Money upon them: In the first case the monied Man has great rea∣son to be thankful, that they give the Bank Credit for 2000 l. actually conveyed, and in effect brought in, to every 1500 l. subscri∣bed in mony when but a 10th. part is paid in, and possibly there may never be 4▪ 10ths more. And if any Landed men should with∣draw, the Benefit that is expected, and would be certain, when ever Estates to the value of 2 or 3 Millions were setled, would bring in e∣nough of clear Estates, when they saw the cer∣tainty of receiving their Revenue, and yet having large Interest, as if they had advanced 1500 l. for every 100 l. per Ann. If the Estates are encumbered, it must be under 3 4ths of the value, or they cannot be admitted into the Bank; but if all the Sub∣scribers of Land took up the 3 4ths, the mo∣nied Man's profit would be the greater, and such men the Bank is sure of till they can pay their money, and in the mean while it has their Estates as a Fund of Credit, not only for that money, but for the remaining 4th which the Land-Bank, so called, cannot pretend to, any farther than as a Security for the money borrowed upon the respective Estates. The other Objection is, what lies as well against the Bank of England, and the Land-Bank so called, which is the possibillity of bad Ti∣tles, and counterfeit Bills. But the loss upon either, or both, must be first out of the Profits, and if, Losses excepted, but 3 l. per Cent. were clear'd, that would be 150000 l. which no man can imagine should be loss'd in any year. And there is no doubt, but the reasonable expectation of a much grea∣ter gain, will induce numbers of prudent men to venture with clear Estates. Howe∣ver the Bank could stand without them, and no man who owes 1500 l. or 1000 l. upon 100 l. per An. can possibly be discouraged from such a method of lessening his burden; nor is it to be thought, but many would come in, if it were for no other end, but to set an ex∣ample for such a National Good, as has been wanted for many Ages. vid. The Letter from a Citizen concerning the Land-Bank. Indeed Objections have been published by some body concern'd in the Land Bank so call∣ed, which have so little in them, and so much mistake plain fact, that they hardly deserve notice, as, That Mr. Briscoe proposes 3 millions Fund, one in Money, two in Land. When the pro∣posal is for 5 millions, and but one in Mo∣ney. So that whereas the profit to the mo∣neyed man is supposed to be one 3d. besides his 3 l. per cent. it is but one 5 l. of the whole. He will have all the profit to the Subscri∣bers, to arise by taking running cash at 2 l. per cent. and letting it out at 3 l. upon which he raises a vain calculation how many milli∣ons at 1 l. per cent. clear profit must circulate to make 6l. per cent to the Subscribers. Not considering that this would be an Ob∣jection against their Bank; for if neither can extend its credit beyond the money in Bank, or advanced in Specie; it were to no purpose to pretend to a Bank of Credit. But suppose the million subscribed in mo∣ney should circulate but the single value of the original Fund, which is all as money to help circulation, this would turn to much better account than with reason can be ex∣pected in their Bank, as will appear by the next Objection. He says, the inequallity of Interest be∣tween the Land and Money Subscribers can admit of no reconciliation for 3 l. per cent. gain, raises the money'd man's Interest but to six, and yet makes the landed man borrow money for nothing. Whereas if this be done with half the sub∣scription money paid in, the mony'd man has at the rate of 12 l. per cent. and then he need not envy the landed man the advantage which is not gained by the money only, but ad∣vanced by the credit of the Land; which, as was before observed, is 2000 l. actually con∣veyed to 1500 l. subscribed, and but half that paid and perhaps much less, when yet, if I mistake not, the money'd man shall have cre∣dit to supply his occasions for three forths of his Subscription. It is urged that the Land Subscribers being the majority, the money must be disposed of at the will of the orrowers. But wherein they can prejudice the mo∣ney'd man, I cannot understand. Can they cal in the money too fast? This cannot be faster then at 10 quarterly pay∣ments,
whereas the landed man conveys his Estate at first, and the more money is called in, the more is supposed to be let out at in∣terest, which each shares in according to his proportion▪ Can it be thought the landed men will the rather encline to put the money out upon bad securities? that becomes a charge upon their own land, and whatever advanta∣ges they make to the Bank, redound to the others benefit; and they who have the largest stake there will be more concerned for im∣proving the stock, than they who may ven∣ture a little there, the better to raise the much greater interest which they have elsewhere: and yet no landed man, how much soever he has subscribed, can have▪  then 5 Votes. There is an other Objection, not to have been expected from one of that other Bank, which is the inconvenience and hazard that Mr. Briscoe's subscribers may meet with, by an unpresidented settlement of their Estates. But as I cannot find any President for their fanciful Settlement; neither can I apprehend any difficulty in settling an Estate upon Tru∣stees, to be subject to its proportion of Loss and Gain; nor can the fear of Loss reasonably deter, where the Gain is so probable and in∣viting. I must needs say it has not appeared to me, that ever any body before Mr. Briscoe propo∣sed a practicable Scheme for this, and yet Sir William Petty seems in the year 1682, to have had something of the like kind in view, when to the Question. Sir Will. Pe's quantu∣lum cu∣que con∣cerning Mo∣ney. What Remedy is there if we have too little money? He says. We must erect a Bank, which well com∣puted doth allmost double the effect of our coined money; and we have in England ma∣terials for a Bank which shall furnish stock enough to drive the Trade of the whole commercial World. The hint of so great a Man is not to be de∣spised at least shews, That Banks of Credit are vid. Mr. John Black∣well's Es∣say towards carrying on the War a∣gainst France. not to be lookt on as vain projects. In this belief I am farther confirmed, by perusing a Treatise now in my hands, wherein a Per∣son of great Judgment and Experience not only holds, That it is necessary at this time for the Parliament to appoint Bills of Credit, but that they may be effectual with only Par∣liamentary Security, without any particular present Fund. And if I am not much mistaken, it appears by what I have observed of other Banks, that the Crown Bank which I propose, to supply the present Exigencies, is lyable to no Objecti∣on, but what will fall upon the best of the others: and that all but the National Land Bank labour with Objections which cannot be urged against this. For the recommending of which it may be observed. 1. That here is an absolute certainty that the Credit shall never be stretched beyond its real and certain Fund, which shall yield in Specie all the Money for which it gives Credit. 2. Till the Money is paid by the publick, the Bills will be as Money, and passing as such from one to an other, are as capable of yielding interest: and consequently there will be no need of the Crowns, paying inte∣rest, when it at the very first pays Bills, which are current, not only because they shall in their time be paid in Money, but in the mean while are as true a Medium of Trade and Profit. This therefore in few years time would save the Nation some Millions as well as yeild Millions for the present occasion. 3. Whereas it will be some years before the benefit of the best of the other Banks can be diffused over the whole Nation; this may be in few weeks, as soon as the Bills can be finish∣ed, and delivered out. 4. If there be any apprehension that other Banks may be too powerful, or may be a means of ingrossing Commodities, and en∣hansing their Prizes; this has its certain li∣mits, and reaches no farther, than the neces∣sities of the publick require. 5. Forwardness to close with invitations to honest profit, may lead the Directors of other Banks to pass bad Titles, or what was fairly adventured may miscarry: But the Crown-Bank proposed is, in its nature, as firm and sta∣ble as the Foundations of this Monarchy; which can never be moved, but by such a Calamity as should leave us no visible means of conti∣nuing a protestant Nation, or free people. FINIS.
