a641 12305750 59243
Advice to a Parson: OR, The True ART of PREACHING, IN OPPOSITION TO Modern Practice, Written by A Person of Honour TO DR. S—, his late Chaplin; Made Publick, Chiefly, for the EDIFICATION of both UNIVERSITEIS. Printed in the Year, M.DC.XC.I.
THE ART OF Preaching, To a PARSON. Cant. I. STill you continue, Preaching, to Profess; Then pack your Labour'd Follies, to the Press: But, Parson, You'l at length be fain to own, 'Tis the most Irksome, Crabbed Trade in Town. What's Hardship? You reply, to Me, Inspir'd, To Natural Parts, who Science have acquir'd;
More luckily ne're did M— in the Hall, His Brother Serjeant Interrupting baul: My Graceful Person long has took at Court, Of which, the Fifty Chaplains All came short: My Postures, well-shap'd Hand, and sparkling Eye, Command Attention from the Laiety: My Voice strikes quite, to the Circumference Of all my Numerous, Thronging Audience. I speak pure English, and the Methods know, To handle a Discourse, and Vary too: Waller I Top, on Dryden I refine, Whose clever Style, more properly is Mine: More than Ben. Johnson, does to me belong, To make a Grammar for the English Tongue. I Rapin's Learned Volumes have read o're, Which makes me know my self an Orator: I, in his Pages, nothing have descry'd, What Nature had not in my self supply'd.
A Score of Chaplains, with less Sense than Me, Have leapt from Benefice to Prelacy. My Sermons do Expect the like Reward; In order To't next Sunday I'll be heard. Ere with the People, you being, I sue, That my Instructions may begin with you; And since, You're fixt, I am oblig'd to say, Your Ease will cheat you, You must Toyl all day. 'Twill be the last Thing I'll to you prescribe, T' Increase the Number of the Tiresome Tribe. No certain Maximes are laid down to Preach, Of Humane Science, 'tis above the reach: Heav'ns Master does alone the Secret know; And, where He pleases, does the Gift bestow. Your Air, your Voice, your Meen, have won you Fame, All these are Serviceable to Declaim: These helps set off an Actor on the Stage; With These, the Pleader does the Judge engage:
To these Endowments, Learning, and deep Sence, F — has the most ensuring Eloquence: By his neat Style, and Judgment most exact, Clears confus'd Causes, which thick Sculls protract; In Evidence, Prolixity declines, And Summs up their Ten Pages, in five Lines. These Qualities accomplish Trades profane, But on the Ministry, are Lost and Vain; In them the perfect Character is found, Where th' Art of pleasing does with Grace abound; 'Tis Preaching, where the Alarmed Soul betakes Its self to a New Life, Old Sins forsakes; For he no Sermon, who no Convert makes. In hardned Errours when 'twas prepossest, Its Ways are Chang'd, and by the Change finds Rest. Shew me, whence may this Prodigy proceed, Faith points out th' Author of the Mighty Deed;
He keeps that Soveraign Pow'r in his own hand, Gives Man Commission but to reprimand: From Exhortation is his Pow'rs Extent, To denounce Justice, and sure Punishment. What ever Doctrine from his Lips goes forth, Is down right Vanity, and nothing Worth, Unless to Heav'n he does his Thoughts resign, And all his meanings are become Divine, Wanting Credentials, Him the World will find, No Emissary to convert Mankind. This, Parson, Doctors needs must let you know; And Common Reason their Superiour too; You long t' appear in Publick; but beforehand, Consult Your self, Your self to Understand; Search if that Pulse, that Ardour Heav'n imparts, Which quickned Zeal in the First Christians Hearts? If so, Preach on in God Almighty's Name, Immortal War to Sin, and Vice proclaim,
That by Your Voice Triumphant over Sin, The load Men may grow weary to keep in, And to Repentance go in Crowds begin. If sordidly base interest be Your bait, Of You for Popular Applause do wait, Indifferent as the Faith to propagate: If You on God, fix your pretended Theme, Your Words regarding more Your self, than Him: Irreverent Impudence, in Church, to dare, That which the drooping Play house would not bare. Goodman a figure makes of a much better sort, Has better pleas'd, and less to answer for't. Who knows, You answer, if the fire Divine, Burn brighter in a Humane Brest than Mine: Or the Supream, whose Choice was always free For Healing Souls, has not allotted me? The Doubt will not perplex Us long I guess, If Parson, You'll ingeniously confess,
That since you have so narrowly descry'd, Our failings, Your own life you've rectify'd? If in the Holy Week, we should produce, Lent Preachers Preach't, which is not now in use, Their Sermons would back on Themselves Recoyl, And their Own Reasons their Own Nests defile. A Preacher, whose Deportment did Imply, A sense Internal of Divinity, Against Excess, and th' Ages Lux'ury spoke. That to the very Heart a Cit was struck, Strait goes home to his Wife, and says, I have Resolved to leave All, my Soul to save: All, says She! Yes, the Parson makes it out, There's no Salvation with above one Sute. I'll keep but One, though I've at present Two, Th' other to th' Prisoners, or the Poor shall go. Poor Spouse by All means would the Preacher see, If He'd persist, or cancel his Decree?
Attempts a Visit: To the Door being come, Demands, if Mr. Parson be at home: The saucy Foot-man snaps her up, and says; My Master can't dine for you now adays; Excuse me, Sir, till he has din'd, I'll wait: Then by my Troth, You'll tarry pretty late. I'll go, and come again; Sir, go or stay 'Tis the same Thing; for e're since Yesterday, T' My certain knowledge, He's engag'd to play. To morrow think you, he will be at home? Yes, but take care too Early not to come. To speak with him next Morning she repairs. Wait in the Hall, H'll quickly come down stairs: The Servant bids her. She desires to know Whither He may be stirring yet, or no? Yes, He's got up a little while ago. He's in his Wardrobe tumbling up and down, Changing his Cloaths just to ride out of Town.
Changing his Cloaths! Then I shall pack away! If he hath Two Suits, I have nought to say. A Narrative, her Tongue in full Carriere, Makes of his Wardrobe, Gaming, and good Cheer: By his example is the Cheat disclos'd, The Sermon on the Scrupulous Cit Impos'd: Such blighted Preaching to the ground must fall, Though We such Sermons edifying call; The bad Example, does unravel All. With Rhetorick adorning Holy Writ, In Vain Your Sermons play the Hypocrite: If me You'd move, let me see Fruits in Thee, Which by Your Words You seek to plant in me: Thus the Apostles Preacht, in Ages past, Their Holy Patterns shall for ever last; He drives another Road, and in the wrong, Whose Heart goes not togeather with his Tongue.
You know the means t' obtain th' Heav'nly Grace, Get T—to preach then in your Place; Him with attention hear, you'll soon discern From Him You'll best The Art of Preaching learn: No man has got the knack of speaking well, But can the proper Times for silence Tell. Three Years to Oxford Converse fix Your mind, To Lectures, and to Libraries confin'd: There from Chimaeras wean'd, vain fancies free, You may the Slightness of your Projects see; There Meek, Sincere, Devout, and Wiser grown, Your Nei'bors Faults; less censuring than your own, Of Vice, which you cry'd down without reproach, I'll then believe you don't on Heav'n encroach, But that you have divine unquestion'd Right: You, Sir, my Counsel, I perceive, does fright?
Three whole Years in a close Retirement stay: That's fine indeed, I'll not put off my Day, For I shall Preach as sure as I shall Pray, Who think You I to Preach my Course shall get? The Princess must be serv'd by— Besides You know my Word's already took, My Name is mark't down in the Vestry Book: How if in this more solemn Time of Lent, I failing, should my Parents discontent; And disoblige my Friends; who did not spare For my preferment, journeys, purse, or care: And now I'm in possession, I'll make bold, Since there are but few Richer, This to hold: To the Apostle-like, I don't pretend; But am an honest Man, and there's an End; Crowds by the Nose, my much Inferiours lead, And few the beaten paths of Virtue tread.
Since You'r determin'd on the Enterprise, Communicate but where the Motive lies; What makes the Gentry Flock about You thus? What's the device, You know no more than Us. You'll scarce presume upon Your own desert; That You must leave to Preachers more expert. To pack an Audience, You've more ways indeed' Only the Sleepers, Hearers do exceed. Of my Sharp Muse, I guess You are afraid, Lest of Your Gang, the Shifts should be betray'd, And on what score should plainly make appear, To preaching Man so often lends his Ear: On such a Subject so for Satyr fit, To Your cost, Parson, I could shew my Wit, On Your deep Art, though I with Malice fall, Your self believe not an Original: Most Mens successful Insufficiencies By Parties back't pass for Abilities;
Some Great Men ne're are wanting, to Protect: Dulness the very Parish would eject; To Hear their Pastor they would hardly Meet, Unless He did, in the Conclusion, Treat. After this Vice, the Gown has over-spread, Do You, t'increase the general Grievance, dread? Turn Preacher of the Times, get Friends enough; Nothing like Trusty Lads, to bring you off. How ill strives Modesty against the Mode? What's common grown, Men cautiously explode. —Should be, in my Opinion, prais'd; His Family He by this Method rais'd: For at Two thousand Pounds a Year they rate, Jewels apart, his visible Estate: Good Mortgages his ready Cash secur'd; Which, to scrape up, Eternal Toyls endur'd. Two Boys were only his Apparent Heirs, Whose Riches seemed, in Reversion, theirs.
Two thousand Pounds a Year to serve for Two, Now I think better on't, it will not do: I care not much my Capital to divide, My Youngest shall be from the Church supply'd; And shall with study, by his Trade in time, Or to a Bishoprick by Favour climb. But, Does the Bishoprick give Eloquence? Or Parts improve, or give us deeper Sense? 'Tis Heav'n exalts Us to that high Degree. If Heav'n call'd any Man, my Son is He: He must be Prelate, being last begot; For That, by Course of Nature, is his Lot. We'll for the Church Train up his Tender Age; He shall not be Defective, I engage: He shall have Parts, if Parts are so requir'd; And he shall Preach, if Preaching is desir'd.
The Day long-look't-for, did at last appear; The Kindred all the Novice flock to hear: But, Did you well remark their Panick Fear? To see him one Man's Air, One's Voice affect; And the stole Sermon best its self detect. What mean these Coaches rattling up and down? A New Rhinoceros arriv'd in Town? Sure, You can tell th'Occasion of this Throng! P—Preaches; You have known him long? Is it —Son, I swear, His Father's my good Friend; I must be There, Be but took Notice of my self to show; For Men to Sermons, as to Musters, go. However He comes by it, such a Crowd Puffs up the Preacher, makes him wondrous proud. One Half, if You perchance enquire, pretends To be Relations, and the Other, Friends.
If Company was Summon'd, on pretence To give raw, bashful Youth, just Confidence; If our Young Preacher Kind Applause, did move His Parts in Time, by Studies to Improve: This proves not only an Inceptor's Art; None fail for Proselytes, to do their Part. —Up and Down; He's oft at Windsor, oft about the Town. My prying Friend would know, what He can mean, To shew his grisly Face, and Carkass lean? Perhaps, He thinks, by's flattering Tongue, t'advance At Court, his most unflattering Countenance: Though, with a Cassock, He does not despair T'attempt the Favours of the Fickle Fair. Ladies, and Lords, (says He) on Sunday next, I'll at St. Giles's Preach, on such a Text. My Friend was There, found Him the very same, By Figure, Character, as well as Name.
Affected Language, and Conception vain, His Audience, long be spoke, did entertain. Of his Intrigues do You perceive the Drift? But list a while, I apprehend his Shift. This, Parson, This it was, that gave Offence: Does not his Anger justly this incense? That Holy Gospel has been used thus, Tradition has not yet informed Us. The Pious, Antient Preachers did not rove, From Parish-Church, to Parish-Church remove: In their own Provinces were only Heard; And in no Pulpit, but their Own, appear'd. Their Fame did o're the Universe extend, Their Christian Doctrine All did comprehend: With greatest Sinners were Acquainted best; With Those most Intimate, who most Confess't. Contrition did Acquaintance recommend; In Pray'r, and Study, only did contend.
Our Idle Drone with Sextons is in League, And with Church-Wardens, works for his Intrigue. But, let That pass; His Wants such Tools demand, Which may be ev'ry where got to his Hand: Let him to griping, sordid Vermin creep, With Them a sneaking Correspondence keep; That He a Velvet Cushion may procure: We shall be forc'd, this Grievance to endure. But to hear so much Stuff, so little Sense, Such gaudy Nothings, tip't with Impudence; His Morals, cover'd o're with Ising glass, All put together, for a Sermon pass: This is Abomination, Horror breeds, As ev'n the Sense of all our Faults exceeds. My angry Friend luggs out; and after, I, Finding him in the Right, for Company. You, Parson, who do only beat your Brain, Before Whom, When, Where, You shall Preach again;
Do You at my Comrade's Departure, wink: Or in his Anger, had He Wit, d'ye think? Cant. II. IF Self-Conceit get not the Upper-hand, Tell Us, If the True Style you understand, By which the Gospel is most Pow'rful made, That sinful Mortals may turn Retrograde. Can You Words apt for Promulgation choose? Rank them by Art, their Force they shall not lose. One thinks, he has the Elegance of Style, And can speak very well; when all this while, He with a Modish Phrase, Terms Quaint and Pat, Has garnish't a Discourse all over flat.
One to a Word an Epithete has tack't; For Eloquence this passes most Exact: One with stitch't Words, together edg'd with Rhime, Has both Sham-Style, Sham-Muse alike Sublime. The Genius of our Tongue, try to discern; Study the Force and Weight of Words to learn. At Modesty in all your Writings aim, Discourse Uneven does a Treatise shame. Be Noble; but forbear to Stain at all; And be undespicably Natural: For that Perfection is the most esteem'd, Which by You slighted and neglected seem'd. In a pure Style, from Affectation free, Maintain, with Elegance, Simplicity. Form to your self, in Reading Scripture, This, Which Nature never Painted yet amiss. By This from Nature, is distinguish't Art; This speaks to, and is answer'd from the Heart.
The Bible labour first to understand; Exact Composures your next Pains demand: For that Exactness, the True Preacher knows, 'Twixt Orators, and Scribes, the Difference shows. When Tully Lawless Anthony Arraign'd, Or against Verres bold Attempts, complain'd; His Method of Harranguing differ'd far From That, when Culprit Arm'd came to the Bar. Would You an Amorous Dialogue design, Make Lovers both on Wit and Tongue refine; Then imitate a French Romancer's Style: For such Exactness will a Sermon spoyl. For one harsh Word, good Thoughts wch. won't admit, But makes to Euphony subservient Wit. In Pulpit Set-Discourses breed Dislike; The Soul Divine Reflexions only strike. Far from hence Elegant Preachers I desire, Whose Cadence does like Jarring Jews-Harps tire:
This Musical Style does rock Me fast asleep. You must within some Rules and Limits keep; Not, ignorantly, Helps of Art decline, And talk without Connexion or Design. You to the Laws of Preaching are confin'd; And barr'd the making New Ones to your Mind. All Art to use, no Freedom is deny'd; The Business is, the Artifice to hide. Begin not with an Air, that does amaze, And make Me, big with Expectation, gaze: With eager Haste the World that Preacher flies, Who his Design, sorestalling, Magnifies: Says, 'Tis of vast Importance; and what's more, Some thing that's New, You never heard before. But 'tis not now a Thing stupendious, The Labouring Mountain should bring forth a Mouse; Or Men of Matter full, at Coming-up, Their Stocks exhausted, ere Conclusion, droop.
Himself the Prudent, ere he ventures, tries, And well examines his own faculties: Abstains from Manners haughty and absurd, And never promises, but keeps his word; Medlys of Sacred Stories, and profane, Take notice now, are much against the Grain: Yet One to be applauded has the luck, For his Exordium, who Cambyses took. Those sine Atchievements, from Historians cull'd, For Excellencies long the People gull'd. A Thousand Men like these are still cry'd up, Ev'n in the Pulpit we may find a Fop; At easy Rates pass Learned Men; I've heard, Works of this Nature swarm in Pauls-Church-Yard. And few so stupid are remaining yet, Who cannot Cart-loads on occasion get. Glitt'ring Exordiums so with some have wrought, That from the subject they have turn'd their thought.
Their flights too lofty, in the foremost place, The flatness of what follows must disgrace. Close to Your Subject Matter still provide, The whole Discourse is to its Subject ty'd. Th' Exordium ended, Heav'n assistance ask; You t'as much purpose may omit the task, As make t'a Saint an eloquent address: Upon Your Subject Your design express. A Subject chuse, You may begin and end; Yet promise not the Whole to comprehend. It often happens, when Your Hour is past, Much Substance to be Treated of does last; And You Your Spirits do but spend in Vain, When You'd a Weary'd Auditor detain. Keep to the Points which most material are, Which with Equality must diff'rence bear. Autithesis did often Them divide; But Jingling Words are now quite laid aside.
Solid and Flashy, are not coupled now, Sterling and Tinsel won't together go. Some Preacher may perhaps in Time contrive, Sermons may Christian's Liberty revive: The Gospel from strict Laws and Customes freed; For which ador'd Antiquity does plead. Division sure the Antients never knew, Nor ever pinch't Themselves, as we do now. Of Orators in Rome or Athens bred, It ne're so much as enter'd in the head: With Art their Subject, to divide, propos'd; The Members opposite, at first disclos'd. Each point in'ts proper place it self did shew; They without Coughing First from Second knew. The Subject should but one design include, Without Deviation be, or Pause pursu'd. Of Preachers, Unity's the Chiefest part, Who for One, must not Two Discourses start.
Thus long with the same Object entertain'd, Th' Impression stronger on the Soul remain'd. The People left the Orator Alarm'd, Tyrannick Fury instantly disarm'd. Strait Philip of his Army dispossest, And gave Greece, in an uproar, present Rest. But with Our Preacher, now, Invention fails; Division most exceedingly prevails; On which he so affectedly does go, That with his Points his Matter's changed too. All Your Points should one perfect Whole compose, Without Redundance, and Connected close. Your Genius I'le not curb; I'd gladly see, If 'tis Your Talent, a bare Homily. The Gospel-Truths to all Objectors, Solve, Which in Your mind at leisure did revolve. The Fathers thus to Preach were understood; Schollars most deep, but for the Common Good.
Blest were our Times, sh'd they such Preachers bring; A Race of Saints might from their Sermons spring. Promiscuously Them to hear would Crowd The Nobles, Gentry, and the Multitude. I'd quit my Pen, and bid my Art adieu, Which had however useless prov'd to You. I'th' front of Hearers for Instruction go, And at their Feet, my self would prostrate throw. Some no near Kin to Saints, the Pulpit mount; Of Those I mean to give some small Account: They're for my purpose; and perhaps, their Crimes May make my Verses proper for the Times. If they will not the Reader influence, There's little to be said in my defence. As I shall run Them o're, my Maxims mind; Shun ev'ry similary Phrase you find, Which on th' Analogy of Words but plays, And says the same Thing, varied, Twenty Ways.
Such tasteless-Plenty shews a Barren-Brain; But if with Ease You'd ev'ry Point retain, Unlade Your Cargo, Your great Mass of Words, Good Thought most clear Expression still affords. Want of Expression, want of Wit betrays, The Tongue our Understanding open lays: For when the Head conceives a Notion well, The Tongue as roundly does the Business tell. Your Stile and Matter care not to adorn; For We the Flourishes of Schollars scorn. To Rhetorick I never Fancy took; 'Tis in my Nature, it to over-look. Words are but Letters joyn'd, our Thoughts to vent; But when the placing gives the Ornament, The whole Discourse does but our mind amuse, And we for Flow'rs do Fruit expected loose. Let not the Passion of a Heart enrag'd, To be described be to Art engag'd.
Nature paints its own Agitations best, But does the Art of Varnishing detest: Forbear that useful Art to Vilifie, Which Orators t' improve in Schools, do try. So careless let it seem from You to fall, As if You had not Study'd it at all. All over full of Matter, solid, clear, Your Unaffected Sermon does appear. And be upon Your Guard, t' avoid the Cheat, Which has the Shadow of a fine Conceit; Wch. true Light does, with glimmering, counterfeit. To search the Truth, o're all the Scriptures range, Whose Natural Beauty loses by the Change. Composing, You must vary your Discourse; For some of Affectation, by meer Force, Will the same Method, the same Ways retain. — is an Example very plain:
For ev'ry Matter He alike does Treat; And He does still make Three Points, Opposite, With Three Divided, in their Station, meet. This Ʋniformity does tire me quite: So we a Painter's feeble Genius slight. If the same Fancy in all Pieces reigns, And but one Shadow serves for all Designs; Such Daubing every Coppier may know: But neater Strokes an Able Master show. He's still the same, but with Variety; Discern'd by none, but a Judicious Eye. Discourse Pathetick with the Glittering joyn; This will the Hearts of Auditors encline; And Men shall, unbespoke, themselves resign. Your Sermons their Fatigue shall take away, And make them, what they Tremble at, Obey. Of Times most proper, to Instruct take care; Speak boldly out, and no Transgression spare:
Your Arguments will not fail to Edifie, Back't both with Reason and Authority. Avoid the School-men's Language, Terms obscure; Such Pedantries no Audience can endure. Sometimes a Pedant, at a County-Feast, May Please: And I was told, among the rest, An Excellent Sermon—chanc'd to make; Which, for the very Plainness, would not Take. Against Him they excepted: But, says He, Be silent at a Feast? that cannot be. Next Time I doubt not, but to give Content. To keep his Word, was resolutely bent: And for his Subject, chose the Trinity. On which Mysterious Point He soar'd so high, On Words obscure an Emphasis He laid, So many Things about Subsistance said, That of Terms learned, He a Gibb'rish made.
He charm'd raw Heads, who nothing understood; Noise only ravishes the unthinking Crowd. The Learned, skilful on your Side to get: If You do aim, and please the Men of Wit, And would at City-Lectures Females please; For there are, doubtless, Critiques amongst These, As well as Greater Ladies, were They try'd, Can Sermons judge, and other Things beside; With neat Exactness ev'ry Thing express, We from Philosophy expect no less. When we Discourses find of different Hue, We wish the Author ne're his Horn-Book knew. Latin Quotations were long since belov'd; And to have One at least, is still approv'd: But quite to be Abolish'd, is their Fate; All but plain English, now, are out of Date. To Please the Ladies, present Custom has Brought Jesus Christ to speak the Modish Phrase;
Which to make Him speak, is as great Offence, As we t' use Scripture with Irreverence. Let your Discourse be Rev'rently Polite: You may, in Latin, Allegations cite; Quotations close, and shortest Merit praise; Variation will debase their Consecrated Phrase. If Latin be Your Text, no further seek; You must take other Measures for the Greek: Greek more does nauseat, does not well agree; It smells rank of the Ʋniversity. Whatever from Greek Fathers You alledge, To tell in English, You have Priviledge. Words, Parson, weigh not much; we Matter crave; Which pray dispose Your self, to let us have: For on his Words it is a Preacher's Charge, To bring our Minds to Comment and Enlarge. But This, in vain, He thinks to bring about, If Learning only serves to help him out.
The Author was no Fool, who did Rehearse First to's Maid-servant all his Works in Verse; A Critique, very ignorant, would endure, Rather than Publish but one Line, obscure. This makes You rally, very pleasant makes: He who Harangues in Publick undertakes, After our Author, must his Course direct, And should on Human Ignorance reflect. Some say, That —is Learn'd and deep; Others, What makes him such a Pudder keep? And though abandon'd, yet both Proud and Pert; Incessantly cries up his own Desert: Desertors He does Brutish Rabble style, And seems at their Stupidity to smile. It is not, if I know my self, my Lot To gratifie the Taste of ev'ry Sot; A Wiser Audience must for Me be got.
This bald Excuse to Fifty does belong; The Audience must be always in the Wrong. But, Parson, You're deceiv'd in this Dispute; For I can make You Your own self Confute, And shew, why You're of Hearers destitute. Resolve on Silence, and the Trade to quit, For Vulgar Ʋnderstandings if unfit. The Vulgar? No. Great Men shall be my Care. That is, according as They Sinners are: The Ʋseful Science is, as we are told, The Mystery of Deadly Sin t' unfold. The Sinner always Ignorance does plead; Your Learning serves for Him alone indeed. Each Passage pick, each Reason well deduce; Form Noble, Great Ideas to the Mind: These Hearers will, of ev'ry sort, produce; The Art They can't discern, their Hearts will find.
They ask not why or how a Work is Good? By Them 'tis Relish't, as 'tis Ʋnderstood. 'Tis Good, and They're Attentive; That's enough: With Them a Good Discourse ne're came ill off. But You, whose Wit, Train'd up in Sciences, Can well distinguish betwixt all Degrees: Confusion shun! We'd by Distinction see Better from Good; from Good, Mediocrity. All Orators, by Labour, are Refin'd. Imperfect Talents should not Pulpit mount; For less than Excellent, is of no Account. Your Genius to advance, Your Forces weigh; Ambition does an Orator betray. Of his First Sermon, He th' Opinion has, It does—surpass. Know Your self Better, and more Cautious be; To Your own Works, try to turn Enemy.
Much more Content Mediocrity does give, So we can call't our own, and Primitive, Than what from Greater Authors we derive. The shameful Scandal of no Genius shun; And try to shew Us something of Your Own. Give not the World occasion You to call, Ill Copy of a Good Original. From Best of Preachers do proceed the Worst, When They've to Imitate, their Talents forc't. Of late, the Pedants Trible is numerous grown, Who with Insipid Drafts have tir'd the Town: Whil'st One Those to Correct has done his Part, And skilfully has drawn the Perfect Heart. Who can but Imitate, can never Please; Theirs to Purloining, is the next Disease. Of them there is a Bold and Lazy Tribe, Who for their Own, Preach all they can Transcribe.
In England, there are many Hundred Men, Who owe their Eloquence to their Neighbour's Pen. How many hear we Preaching, Fifty Mile From London, that do dwell There all the while. Great Preachers ill Fate often does befall: Though—moves the Conscience at White-hall, The Gospel teaches, and Vice over-rules, He's less than Nothing in the Mouth of Fools. Parson, Your Sermon to Your Learning owe, And solid Sense on Your Discourse bestow. Some times You may, with Similies, enforce Your Reasons, and with History Your Discourse. Think not with over Delicacy blind, That This will argue Meanness of the Mind. Though These the Nicer sort, deluded, scorn; The Style sublime they frequently adorn. A Fable once well manag'd, did produce, Though Ratify'd, the Rupture of a Truce.
The Orator, who well his Art did know, Thought not he took his Simile too low. Parson, All's Admirable, could we find Prudence, and Zeal to Eloquence conjoyn'd. Preach You but well, All shall be Heard by Me; And Pardon'd, if I'm in an Ecstasie. To that Effect we should Aspire in vain, If the Conclusion don't the Point maintain. Learn to Conclude, if You would learn to Move; Forces, in th' End, united stronger prove. Your Matter You for Him should briefly close, Who does your Total Victory oppose. Then back your Strongest Arguments recall: But lest You into Tediousness should fall, Hints will do better. Repetitions shun; And do not your Prescribed Bounds out-run. Your Hearer make, with deep Regret, retire, Full of your Works, that fan Devotion's Fire:
Then with deep Silence, and with Eyes down-cast, To Voluntary Penitence in haste He runs, and blames the Time without it past: Incens'd, that He so long had trusted Fate, Death-bed Contrition to Anticipate; Lest it should seem Constrain'd, if come so late. By Meditation deep, on Faith may learn At what Expence, what Pains Men Bliss must earn. Then, shall he judge, justly become severe; Diversions, indiscreet, are bought too dear. To Hide-Park, and Balls, no Ogling Ladies trudge; Henceforth no Poet shall for Play-house drudge: No more shall Gamester's Precious Time be sold To flattering Hopes, and sacred Thirst of Gold. Nor Love on Youth more Miracles shall shew; Vaunting its Force, and Lover's Weakness too. 'Twill be by th'useless Christian understood, He's guilty of much Ill, who does no Good:
Who'll soon perceive, that Mispent Time will mount, To which he's bound to make a large Account. This Alteration in your Hearers make; At least, to bring't about, the Method take. The World is Confident, and Positive, Tho' we to Preach, with all our Forces strive, That this Stupendious Change will ne're arrive: And all your Fervency, and Zeal, is vain; For Man, Convinced, will Rebel again. Alike Your Sermons, and My Verses do; Yours are on Them, and Mine are lost on You. Cant. III.
AN Unconceited Writer I respect, Whose Pen is always eager to Correct. Your Sermons rigorous Correction need; This Place You think in Nobleness t' exceed. The Manner Charming, the Expression bold; Your Genius hatch't it; and you're pleas'd, I'm told: Which Twenty times, at least, You do Repeat; And still starts up some New, or fine Conceit. That flattering, blinding Pleasure apprehend; Publish it not, till view'd o're by your Friend: And closely watch the Gestures of Him too, Whether That Place delighted Him, or no:
If not, Retrench it; and, before his Eyes, Let your Dear Idol fall a Sacrifice. Of all Things, shun a Censurer's Disdains; Be Pliant, and deserve his useful Pains. But think him not your Friend, who cries Take Care; And for a Critique, of a Fool beware. You need a Censurer no further Trust, Than he Instructs You, and You find him Just: But when his Reasons have Convinced yours, The Truth Embrace, and its Resistless Pow'rs. Men blush not to give Reason the Right Hand; But at a Panegyrick, Trembling stand. Of those Impostures, the Rank Poyson fear; Praise pleases You, it plainly does appear: And You shall have from every one enough; Some to be kind, will Praise You, most to scoff. Your Enemies, like Friends, have Complaisance; And Both together joyn, your Faults t' enhance.
Once Benson Preach'd, (where I devoutly went) Bespoke his Congregation to Augment: Scarce had He whining, with a School-Boy's Tone, And quaking Limbs, his whole Exordium done, But Stammezs, Hesitates, and is quite out; Then for his Notes he searches all about: Which having, at a Time so fatal, lost, Says any Thing next that comes uppermost: Like Marriner, having his Compass lost, At all Adventures, up and down is tost. I was afflicted to perceive Him so; And when He Trembled, I did Tremble too. Half sunk, at last, his Treacherous Memory On the Plank casts Him off Eternity. There he Concludes: But, as I marcht away, Won't You, says One, t' Congratulate him, stay? I, out of Breath, to make Resistance strove; But was, by Force, into his Chamber drove:
There Benson lolling on a Couch, I found; Whom several soothing Coxcombs did surround: He kindly the Fool's Complements receiv'd; For All he swallow'd, None were disbeliev'd. Jesus, says One, the Sermon Curious was: Your Memory does all Mens else surpass. Another, in plain English, That is Good, Which to be so, by All is understood. Then, fauningly, Embracing him; My Dear, Says He, You out-do—I swear: Less Exact—Less Delicate; Less Elegant—and less Charming— The Good Man, 'midst his Glories, did not fail, With Modesty, his Memory to bewail; And 'bating the few Stumbles which He made, One of his Best the Sermon was, He said. Then I can't tell, Sir, what You Stumbling call; But, by my Faith, You Stumbled not at all:
He lies, that says You did. I swear again, You of your Mem'ry, without Cause, complain. Your Memory for once Defective grant? That but demonstrates, You no Wit do want. At that Discourse, Benson cheers up again; No longer can to Praise himself, contain: For soothing Words, which do afford Relief, He'll not pay back his Friends with Ʋnbelief. You might a Wager venture, chosen He Would for a Visitation-Sermon be. My self I into a Close Corner got; And Blush't, to see the Company did not. I by my sneaking, down-cast Look might pass, Of all that Gang, to be the only Ass, At last, broke loose, I wish't the Devil, and all Plagues might on Benson, and his Flatterers, fall. Self-Flattery all bewitches of That Trade; Ill Preacher's Blemishes are Publick made:
'Gainst Them, when Auditors in Judgment rise, Some Flatterer at a dead Lift supplies. Let such as These his Confidence maintain, He will to yield to Orators disdain; And will the World, Blind as Himself, perswade, Those follow Him He has Desertors made. These Shamms are ev'ry Day in London seen; Which, when I mention, I know who I mean: Names I shall spare, since Men themselves perswade They are Infallible in their own Trade. Wou'd you be sure t'know how your Sermons please? Closely observe the People's Visages: They the Intrinsick Value will Reveal; What charms their hearts, their eyes will ne'r conceal. Mark well those Places, where the Longing Town Their Ears, resigning to your Voice, bow down; Where, when their Bodies sixt, like Statues are, Their greedy Eyes their Heart's Delight declare.
This Proof alone suffices to maintain, These Points are Best, which most Attention gain; For when the Voice does Influence the Ear, The Heart an equal Influence does share: Yet You those Places, for the worst, condemn; And say, The rest have far more Wit than Them; Are better Turn'd, more Charming, more Polite. Let These the Rule to all your Sermons give; Those Carelesly are done, but Well, Sir, by your leave. If at the main End of your Trade you drive, On your Own Self to be a Critique strive: For Friends, where Kissing does by Favour go, Reject, and our Wise Author's Rule pursue. In Preaching, You must say, Vice I'll beat down, And level, with the Earth, its pow'rful Throne. What would be said by Paul, or Chrysostom, If They should Hearers to my Sermons come?
Did thus Hell's Spight to Them, confounded, yield? Was Paul Tryumphant thus in Mars his Field? Did Chrysostom the Miser thus perswade, When over to the Poor his Wealth he made? Those Noble Models keep before your Eyes; Their Works their Voices do Immortalize. In Reading Them, find out Their Pow'r Divine: From Him who Theirs bestow'd, obtain thou Thine. Do, as They did: Always before your Pray'r, The Subject you'll Proceed upon, declare. Then Heav'n Implore, You to Illuminate; And We'll Digest on what You Meditate. Take Time enough, and well Your self Prepare; But Rash, Extempore Sermons, pray forbear: Unless on some unlook't-for Exigent, You could a Congregation's Loss prevent; Concluding what Another had Begun, As if the Choice of Subject was your Own:
On the same Points, divided, to the last, Sequels deduce the Other had fore-cast; In that Case, You Extempore may Preach; But must not, otherwise, your Talent stretch. Count not the Time your Sermon making cost; Merit it be not on the Hearers lost. In all your Subjects, choose the Better Part; To choose discreetly, Reason, with your Heart: For what in Reason moves, and pleases You, By the same Reason, must please Others too. Hence the Designs of all your Sermons lay: On Different Theams choose an Indifferent Way: Here an Encomium, There a Mystery; Here Sinners must, by sharp Invectives, smart; All diffrently must be Toucht; yet All with Art. If to the Purpose, Morals you'd Exhort, Then study well the City, and the Court:
Do not a Merchant, like a Lord, disguise; Nor set on Subjects, Royal Qualities. Make Greedy Citizens for Riches yawn; Paint Lords Fantastick, and make Courtiers Fawn: Yet, Parson, have a care, while You Correct, Vices, lest We Philosophy detect, When We do pure Christianity expect. The Chair from Heathenish Vertues is exempt; And Nothing, in their Praise, should You attempt, Unless with True Religion burnish'd o're; And Christian turn, what Pagan was before. Let Them, at their Discretion, Justice teach; Humility You, with St. Paul, should Preach. From worthless Honesty alone, desist; And on the Just impose the Cross of Christ. Paint not Men but what they really are; Attack not Vices, which are very rare:
Those tricks are amongst Preachers common grown, Who set up Whimsies, but to pull 'em down. His Strokes all miss, and He, in vain, assaults; Of different People, paint the different Faults. Mind not the Fool, who o're the Country roves, Reforming Great Men's Tables, and their Train; Verrio's sine Ceelings, Gibbon's carv'd Alcoves; Names, which the Ign'rant Audience can't retain. In all your Drafts, let Nature coppy'd be; That We the Heart may, through the Picture, see: But too plain Colours, prudently forbear; Name not the Sinner in the Character. Let not the Pulpit Satyrs e're infest, For fear Damnation should attend the Jest. Shun Rhetorick, which Improvement does bereave, And does our Mind but just diverted, leave. Preaching thus—does the World content; Yet They return no Wiser, than They went.
All This is vain: 'Tis not a Preacher's Part, To Please the Mind, unless He Strike the Heart. Jumbled together, Pieces different, By blind Chance, into One of large Extent, The Sermon to our Senses does present: Where He should six his doubtful Mind, can't tell; Yet He's conceited, that He Preaches well. When one by one, the Frailties of the Heart, Mirth, Honour, Vanity, He does impart; At random, to his Sermons, All comes in: No Grounds, no Art, no Proofs, or very Thin. By Inference He Matters running o're, With too much Light but blinds my Eyes the more. When of Those, He presents, among the rest, I on that Object six, that Pleases best; Strait comes Another, which does drive That out: From This, to That, He wanders still about.
The Mind can hardly what He says, retain; The Heart grown tir'd, the Mind pursues in vain. Sometimes confines his Matter to a few; And what He blames, affected does pursue. Proud in his very Sermons to expose, That of the World the Ways, and Fashions knows; Jilts, and Intrigues, He sticks not to disclose. The Ordering of a Ball, exactly paints; In proper Terms to scandalize, acquaints. The Art to Please at Court, He does abridge; And likely too, to lay an Amorous Seige. Prophane Interpreter of Vile Intrigues, Blaming and Loving Vice, creates Colleagues. The Vice he would Explode, he makes belov'd; Or at his own Expence, is Laughter mov'd. In Preaching then, think of your latter End: For with such Crimes a Sinner may offend, Whose Ign'rance does a Preacher recommend.
Or if 'tis requisite, He should know All; Discretion will not Ev'ry thing let fall. Let Vices Image be so neatly wrought, It may disturb the Heart, not wound the Thought. Make not the Innocent Cheeks with Blushing glow, Of deadly Crimes only the Horrour show: Vice with Art Painted, is not much at best, The Loathsom Sight my Heart must needs detest. Paint it as fatal, foolish as you please: So you produce the Cure for the Disease. Most Wretched, Brutal, Infamous am I, The Sinner to th' Accuser can reply. You plainly read my Heart, and by 't are told, That in your Pictures, I that Heart behold. I am a sinner, Great and Greivous too; Why repeat you what I already know? Then pray no more the Argument renew? I know my Own Sins better far than you:
But 'twill not serve Our Miseries to confess. The Vertue Contrary must them redress. To grasp that Knowledg, bring my Clouded Mind, Of Sinners make my feet the new Road find. This from your Preaching is to Sinners due, Till They Instructed are, Depart not you: To Crimes add Counsel which described are, Just on the Wound the Plaister lay with care. Open, and close your Lips, make his Concerns, The Sinner at ill usage chafes and spurns; Him Gently Treat, Sick Men in Frenzy took, On their Physitians do as Ruffians look: But chiefly if for Church your Zealous rage, Makes you against Fanaticism engage: Let not the Whigg want of Respect resent, A Combatant should not grow insolent. Against Impostures Charity does Arm, Seeks to repell, but not to offer harm.
The Zealous Christian does from wrongs refrain, He blames the Sin, but would the Sinner gain, And with Respect in Lists Phanaticks entertain. All Men surprising Orators neglect, When They do Preach on what we least expect; They quite forget the Gospel for the Day, And from its Mistery hurry Us away. On Christmas Day the Birth should be your Theme, Then you think fittest Railing to condemn: When Heav'n its Ofspring did to th' Manger bring, Which Wonder through the Universe does ring. You only on the Subject silent are, Mankind against your Preaching will declare. Keep to the Mistery, and don't fly off: One Mist'ry has for One Sermon scope enough. Many have thus propos'd, but ere They'd done, Forgetting That, on something else did run.
This Parson to the People's a Rank Cheat; In you for Ignorance passes, not Deceit: The Greatness of the Myst'ry did you know, 'Twould make its Order and Conclusion too: The Thing Deep Meditation does demand, Which if the Preacher don't well understand, Leaving the Subjects which such pains would cost, And shifting where his Needs require him most; His Sermons nothing to the Purpose makes; His Voice like Thunder Church & Pulpit shakes, And a loud Noise the People Threatning makes: For all this Bustle you may yet remarque; As to their Faith They still are in the Dark. they could not tell, if ask't at th' End of Lent, What by True Christianity is meant: And They perhaps know not one Jot the more, What to think of the God which They Adore.
If on Faiths Misteries you Discourses hold, Make them some Great Important Truth unfold: Quote both the Scripture and the Fathers too; If needful, those Quotations we allow: In Trivial Things, speak Latin Ev'ry where, Your making Great St. Austin, I can't bear. Nor quoting Scripture much in Matters plain, Such Lectures, and their Praises, are but Vain. We aukward Palats and Cross Wits detect, Who think They Preach, if They can but collect. Ev'n in Collections too they're at a loss, Where Gold is plenty, They present you Dross: I smoke those Preachers, when I hear 'em first; Yet to the Fathers Doors they lay the worst Places of all their Sermons: When the Thought Is false, a Father to maintain't is brought; Says He, When we do find him Reason wrong, This does t' a Father, not to me, belong.
A Father,—Rouz'd then I depart with Rage, The Bishop with Remonstrance trye t' Engage, These false Purloiners may suspended Be, And thus the Fathers from the Scandal free. The Inte'rests of Condemned Faction quit, And to the Edicts of the Church submit. Well understand what you for Faith delare; Men are seduced often unaware: And for Positions, which the Church does hold, Zeal is broaching damn'd Opinions Bold. Yet Zeal does not for Ignorance atone, For Ignorance does seldom reign alone. But its lage Empire often does divide, With a Phanaticks more unruly Pride. Confounds the Truth, but for distinction sake, Thinks He does in a Schism a Conquest make. With false Zeal the Fanatick always Blind; Makes Fools to His Rebellious Boldness Kind.
No sooner can his Wire-drawn Thoughts unfold, But by the Crowd is for a Saint enroll'd, Worthy Restorer of the Gospels Light, He only the Old Discipline can set right. Friends, Strangers, Neuters, when his Name is up, Into the Church striving for places drop, Coaches do one anothers passage stop. The Church too little for the Crowd is made, And Auditors the Entry Barricade; Till he Phanatick is declar'd at last, And the Just Censure by the Bishop past: The Law does him due punishment enjoyn, To Newgate for his holding-forth confine: These are the Rocks on which these Preachers split, Whose Pride transcends their Modesty, and Wit. —to Gain Proselytes turns Presbyter, But for a Deanery does the Church prefer:
On this side now, on that side then did lean; At last he neither Preacher is, nor Dean. The Pulpit many several Dreamers knows, Who Their Wild Fancies would for Faith Impose: Other Interpreters so head-strong are, As to make Faith a Castle in the Air. Those strange Excesses argue self-conceit, Of Him whom grosly does self-flattery Cheat; Too stiff to doubt, and to believe too shy, On his own Judgment solely does rely. Adhere You to the Church, the surer Guide; And those Debates attempt not to decide, With which Her self forbears to have to do; This would be High Presumption sure in You: In Points hard to be clear'd, Your Faith Resign, And thank the Pow'rs, who those commands injoyn. Into the middle Path of Christians fall, 'Twixt doubting Nothing, and suspecting All:
For to what purpose in a doubtfull Thing, Should We a Scrupulous Soul disturbed bring? Since many Articles, and Points Made out, Do leave A Sinner Room enough to Doubt. Truth always Perseveres in being strict, The Gospel does a Rigid Life Inflict. In vain Man fishes for sort Pleasures there, Which thick set, We discover ev'ry where, Does only Crowns of Thorns, and Crosses bear. If wanting Innocence Man Heav'ns loss deplores, Repentance only that Great Loss restores. This Gospel-Oracle will prove too true, Sinners to Heav'n, but in this Road can go: Your Rigorous Maximes still support with Truth, Make Venial Sins, not Mortal in your Mouth: When with Grimace the Truth you over-act, I leave you, and do wish you more Exact.
Condemning the Luxurious, and Profuse, Wishing Brocades, and Points were less in use. Forbear the Mode with Anguish to Controul; And for a Ribband, Damn a Harmless Soul: Patches and Paint, let—talk about; But plunge Rich Mammon in a deeper doubt: To Him the Forlorn Mans Condition show, Wh' Oppress'd with Hunger, Empty to and fro; Life to maintain for Daily Bread does go. The Dismal Figure of an Alms-House Paint, Expiring Brethren's Groans, and dire complaint; Till of Attire Superfluous weary grown, The Wretches with Compunction does bemoan: Lays on his Pride the Cause of all Their Wrong, And owns what fed it did to them belong. This Prospect will Dead Nature Quicken best, And make him his vain Ornaments divest;
And then reflecting on Expences past, Shall send his Trimming to the Poor at last. To Truth stick always, as I did advise, Truth only in a Sermon Edifies: That here you Proofs from their true Meanings wrest, And there what's settled you with force contest; The sence of Plainest Passages distort, Your Reputation greatly suffers sor't. You Me, for Your Vain Eloquence must lose, And I Your Malice, or Defects, accuse. However, Novelties do Charm the Town, Severity with — best goes down. A Preacher that Damns with full pow'r may pass, For a Great Doctor, though a very Ass. Though in his Life, a Rake-Hell he appears, He will not fail of Zealous Followers: Some Preachers now there are, who've no pretence To Wit, or Parts, beside Bare Confidence;
Who only have the Gift of being frank, And please the World, just like a Mountebank. This Preacher merrily sends Souls to Hell; This on Sin rallies like an Infidel: Nothing amiss does to his Sermons come. Billinsgate Jests, or Stories of Tom Thumb; Does Figures without any meaning take, And does a Farce of Vice, and Vertue make: Mark how he on the Morals does Encroach, And for a Trivial Thing Mankind reproach: You'd think that only He was Sanctify'd, Heaven to Him only did its Will conside; That He alone the Gospel Understands, And has the Pow'r of Heaven in his Own Hands. Suppose the World thus after Him did run, What mighty Wonders have his Sermons done? The People ev'ry Thing in Time does tire, They into Our Apostles Life enquire.
If at His Neighbours Cost He should make sport, On him his Neighbour would the Jest retort: With the Dreads, and Ills, which Jesting brings; The World delights to Ridicule such Things: And if I should be hang'd, I cann't forbear T' insert a very Comick Passage here. One of that Class, by this Description known, Preach't pretty often very near the Town: His spleen did oft against those Sinners Vent, Who for their Ease to Church in Coaches went: Exclaim'd at Them, at least a Hundred times, Said a Coach was one of the Mortal Crimes. In his Friends Coach to Church his Reverence came; His Memory there was very much too Blame, His Friend so on a sudden to forget, Who did under his Nose a Hearer sit: Zeal often does the Memory betray. The Sermon ended, all strait march away;
The Friend forthwith into his Coach does step, Where the Good Preacher did attempt to leap; Putting him by, most gently with his hand, The Friend says, What's your Pleasure to command? My Place, the Preacher presently replies: Your Place, Sir? his Dear Friend surprized, cryes; What, shall I make you such a Sin commit? Troth, Sir, my Conscience will not suffer it; And since I cann't with safety put you to't, For my part, you must e'en march home on foot.
Cant. IV. FRom Flattery free those days thrice happy were, When without peril Men might be sincere: When Liberty all o're the World did Reign, When Hopes and Fears did not make Mortals Vain. Those Happy Days Wealth too soon chas'd away, Ambition, and Base Fear then came in Play: Then a Professed Cheat came first in Vogue, And Men would Compliment the Cringing Rogue. Truth was defy'd, and made the Jesters sport, Was buffeted from Pulpit and from Court: For that Excited by a Pungent Zeal, Disguis'd Delinquents ready to unveil.
Great Men were kept in awe of being bit; Yet Flattery found the Trick to stiffle it. The Timorous Pulpit has been very Nice, And mighty shy in Reprehending Vice. For a Sinners Honour stickles after Fate, His Memory in a Sermon Celebrate, Become in Praising Him Immoderate. Against Old Customes how dare I declaim? Out of Oblivions ashes rake some Great Mans Name: In that Deep Science—Imitate, And to your self a Fame, like His, Create. That Talent Heroes in request admire, Who sure of Praise in Quiet can expire; You tell me, Parson, on that Art I droll, I must your Lying Faculty Controul. Which makes you ev'n before the Altar dare, Notorious Sinners for Blest Saints declare.
That Flatt'ring Art to Poets then bequeath, Write no Great Mans Memoires just after Death. If his low merit leave no pledge beside, The Word of Partial Friends, or Kindreds Pride; The Publick first should his Memoires Proclaim, For you in vain Trace his Fore Fathers Fame, And Stile him Gallant, Liberal, and Brave; Titles, to which he no pretence could have; That Panegyrick which your heart does wrong, Damns both the Hero, & your flatt'ring Tongue. Give me a Hero with more than one Name, Equal with Mighty WILLIAM in Fame; Whose Fame by publick Acclamations Rais'd, The Commons first in Panegyrick prais'd; But rather of a Saint in Heaven make choice, One their Exalted by the Sacred voice, Whose suffering & repentance shall dispence On your Discourse, a Happier Influence, Give greater Lustre, to your Eloquence:
Then Stick not Panegyrick, to design; But to your Saint, you whole Discourse confine: Out of the Road of Common Places strike; None but the Hero, draw the Figure like, Praises and Morals are much better spar'd, Which any other Man than Ours regard: A Man in an Oration's much the same Thing, as a Picture in a Guilded Frame; Which taken off, and for a time laid by, Another will as well the place supply. The Preacher a Course little different Takes, And of one Panegyrick Fifty makes; There's scarce a Colledge, Alms-house, Hospital, But he can on occasion preach them all, Though he their Founders Lives, or Names don't know Two or Three Sermons will his Business do: Whilst, at the Court with vanity you Steer, That place where 100's have bin Ship-wrackt fear
Whom in that Dangerous Field we don't admire; Must, Blushing at his Rash Attempts, retire. 'Tis difficult that Ticklish Course to tread; Nought for your Voice, Air, Style, can Intercede: Your Words, or Actions, There All will be scann'd; And are, if not in Great Perfection, Damn'd. Sincerity, and Christian Vertues, There Very Unwelcome, and Uneasy, are. And yet the Orator no Good can do, Who's not both Censurer, and Christian too. Each Man for th' Image of his Vices looks; Whose Giddy Humour the Thing done, provokes: Then They in question, his Discretion call, For having, in Resemblance, pleas'd them All. Go in those Places Heav'n does You command; Appear Conducted by th' Almighty Hand: Confine your Wishes, and with Patience bear, To Preach to Them, who follow You to Hear.
Cook at Court Preaches, Hook in Country-Town; Which is the Best, in your Opinion? Cook makes us Sleep, we Weep when we hear Hook; Hook then we needs must judge worth Ten of Cook. If your Starrs prove Malignant, and unkind; If with Great Lords You no Reception find, Your wonted Importunity forbear; Trouble not Them, who have no Mind to Hear. For Propagation of the Faith, to show Your Ardent Zeal, an Emissary go. In Remote, untaught Desarts, raise your Voice; Do by Necess'ty, what One did by Choice. Your Talent useless, 'tis too long to keep; To tire the Town, and Lull the Court Asleep: Poor Sinners, who from Life's Refreshment stray, Might quench their thirst, with what you cast away. Parson, The Imputation's chiefly due, And Scandal of their Ignorance, to You.
Of You do I, for want of This, complain; You whom Heav'n form'd great Lords to entertain. On then, perform what Heaven for You decreed; With your enchanting Eloquence, proceed: 'Tis high Time; therefore, get into the Chair. Stay 'till I've Powder'd, and curl'd up my Hair, Took off my Beard, says He, I'le strait be There. O Parson, Who do You design to please With such Fantastick, Foppish Pains, as these? Is't possible so Worldly an Out-side Can be to Gospel-Truth so near Ally'd? Fasting, do your Plump, Ruddy Cheeks promote? Or Penitence, your Powder'd Hair denote? Happy is He, whom Nature, in the Chair, Freely Endow'd with a Delightful Air: 'Tis necessary thought but by a Fop; But there are Other Ways to be cry'd up.
It is not your Affected Air does move; But as the Sermon is, the Hearers prove. Neglect in Pulpit no beseeming Grace; Ascend, with Modesty, the Sacred Place: And, by your Venerable Carriage, show, That You the Reverence of your Function know. At your First Entry, be not over-loud; And Elevate your Subjects to the Clouds. Speak out with Force; What boots it You to cry? At last, You Passionate may, if justly, be. The People's Genius no Controulment bears: Words please the Great Ones Best, the People, Tears. To Please by Turns, their different Palates seek; Cry at St. Margets, at the Abby Speak. Manage your Voices, Force and Latitude, That without Pain, You may be understood. This shunning Slowness Gallops on Post-haste; The Other Jades, in fear to march too fast:
One I can't Follow, nor for T'other Stay; And Neither pleasing Me, I go my way. Too Fast their Sermons, or too Lagging go, When they'd by heart, say what by halv's they know. Their Mem'ry then falls from full Speed to Trot; What You'd say, should in Readiness be got: To be got Ready, well be Study'd must; Ev'n then You should your Memory distrust. 'Tis a great Blot, when in its Place too late, A Word arrives, that makes You Hesitate; And of a Natural Expression fail, We, in concern, Sweat, Tremble, and grow Pale. Without Book, Word for Word, your Sermon get; But let your Mem'ry to your Thought submit: Not to Constrain, or Bridle it, pretend; But Thought admit, and Words, when You can mend. Extempore with Repeated Words abounds; There Phrases never keep within their Bounds.
Words spoke at Random, have not half the Grace, As a Word ranked in its Proper Place: But Plain Discourse, of Order void, and Art, Is Better than a Startcht One, got by Heart. Manage your Fires; for some conceive they charm, When Toils and Travels their Chil'd Fancies warm: Defective of that Necessary Fire, Help from their Neighbour They for Need require. So under Heroes, Trembling Souldiers stand, Guessing the Battle to be near at hand; Their slumb'ring Valour by Degrees retrieve, When Unconcern'd Their Leader They percieve, And by his Looks, strikes Terror in his Foes: Then from the Field in Glorious Tryumph goes. Valour was never Judged by a Noise, Nor Eloquence beholding to a Voice. In vain to kindle Fires the Preacher tries, Which want of Zeal to his own Breast denies:
And tho' he strives with Warmth drawn up by Art, Seems Ice to me, and cannot warm my Heart. To put hard stress upon your Voice refrain, Nor t' incommode your Health, your Body strain: To Regular Motions let your Hand be brought, To shew Your Meaning, and express Your Thought. You'd swear, That into sinful Souls our Priest Would beat deep sorrow in with's doubled Fist: Be You more Wise, and let not your Address, Your frequent Posture-Practising confess. Nature does Guide the Hand, the Voice, the Eye, And suitable to the Discourse all Three. Upon That Subject One has Verses Writ; And you may read 'em o're, if you think fit. To all your faults be Rigorous as you can, I nam'd you Snipson, a down-right honest Man: Learned by Nature, sitted for the Chair, His Wit's Obstruction was his Rustick Air.
His Friends outragious, tho' in Vain, were grown, Correct your Air, cry'd They, & Change your Tone. In answer, He more Clownish, does reply, Your Dainty, Fine-Mouth'd Preachers I defy: Far from Faults mending which reproved were; In Them, He was well pleas'd to persevere. Says He, For my part, I the Gospel Preach, And shall not mind what some pretend to Teach: So London cast him off thus Unrefin'd, And He no Audience could in Village find. At This Discourse a Citizen in pet, I hear cry out, What would you, Sir, be at? Must no Man ever Preach, but what's Polite? Why Pray so sharply the dead Collins bite? But rashly my Intentions you Accuse, And Slander my Discreet and Cautious Muse: For you shall sind in my Descriptions still, Vice real is, The rest is what you will.
Let's Talk of Collins, since that Man you name: The Clownishness which you in Snipson blame, As much to Collins to belong is known; And yet he had the knack to Charm the Town. If you the least of his Success should doubt, His Bishoprick most plainly makes it out? I doubt it not, But where Tends your Discourse? To shew That Void of Art, by Natures force, In Pulpit a meer Clown may have success. Why, did not I my self as much confess? You of your Harpur do the Carriage blame; Why may not I of Snipson's do the same? If He is for his Clownishness forsook, Must We on This, as on a Wonder, look? Let's leave Our waspish Cit whom I offend: But one Word more, and I will make an End. All That does please is Good, and should be sought; The contrary Retrench, for 'tis a fault.
When Clowns can please so well, What need of Art? But Justness pleases still the Major Part. Study hard to acquire it, and forbear To think it, Bigot-like, an Impious care. For Our Conversion, not Diversion, Aim. The Citizens your Artless Sermons Love; The Lords no less the Contrary approve. Say not that Zeal at Court is useless grown; For Sin does Reign in Court as well as Town: And there is many an honest Christian Heart, Which may be Touch't, if th' Preacher does his part. There—expert, Do many Souls from custom'd Sins convert. There ev'ry day He shews the Truth bare-fac'd, By many made perhaps to be Embrac'd. A hundred more I easily could name: Whose Zeal no way Inferiour to their Fame;
Sent the Creators purpose to effect, Will tread the Course where Heav'n did them direct. To Me in Private Villages forlorn, Their Names, on Wings of Echoes, shall be borne: Pleas'd their Court-Sermons are on Vertue made, I free from Envy, which attends That Trade, Am as contented, my Acquaintance shou'd Silenc'd, or follow'd be, for th' Publick GOOD. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 3. Line 5. for being read begin. p. 17. l. 6. for his r. our. p. 21. l. 12. for for r. but. p. 25. l. 4. for Christian's r. Christian Liberty. p. 38. l. 8. for Mouth r. Mouths. Ibid. l. 11. for Similies r. Similes. p. 51. for They really. r. really They.
