B3331 R4207 13678401 101270
portrait of Charles II over royal coat of arms Carolus Secundus Dei Gratia HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE F. H. van Houe fec.
document title embellished by images of battle CLAVSTRVM REGALE RESERATVM or The Kings Concealment at Trent: By A. W. In vmbra alarum tuarum Sperabo donec trans eat miquitas London Printed for Henry Brome. F. H. Van. Houe. Sculp:
BOSCOBEL: OR THE Compleat History Of His Sacred MAJESTIES Most Miraculous Preservation After the Battle of Worcester, 3 Sept. 1651. troduced by an exact Relation of that Battle; and Illustrated with a Map of the City. The Third Edition with Addition. JOEL 1. 2. Hear this ye Old men, and give ear all ye Inhabitants of the : Has this been in your days, or in the days of your Fathers? LONDON: rinted by M. Clark, and to be sold by H. Brome and C. Harper, at their Shops in S. Pauls Churchyard and Fleetstreet. 1680.
TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. SIR, AMong the many Addresses, which every day offers Your Sacred Majesty, This humbly hopes Your particular graci∣us Acceptance; since it has no other am∣tion than faithfully to represent to Your Majesty, and, by Your Royal permission,  all the world, the History of those mi∣culous Providences that preserv'd You  the Battle of Worcester, conceal'd You  the Wilderness at Boscobel, and led You n Your way towards a Land, where ou might safely expect the returning fa∣ours of Heaven, which now, after so long  tryal, has graciously heard our Prayers, d abundantly crown'd Your Patience.
And, as in the conduct of a great part o this greatest Affair, it pleased God (th more to endear his Mercies (to mak choise of many very little, though fit In¦struments: So has my weakness, by thi happy President, been encourag'd to hop it not unsuitable for me to relate, wha the wisest King thought proper for the to act; wherein yet I humbly beg Yo Majesties pardon, being conscious to m self of my utter incapacity to express, e¦ther Your unparallel'd Valour in the da of Contending, or (which is a vertue fa¦less usual for Kings) Your strong and eve Mind in the time of Your Sufferings. From which sublime Endowments  Your most Heroick Majesty I derive the comforts to my self; That whoever u¦dertakes to reach at Your Perfections must fall short as well as I, though not  much: And while I depend on Your Roy Clemency more than others, I am mo oblig'd to be Your Majesties Most Loyal Subject, and most Humble Servant Tho. Blou▪
TO THE READER. BEhold, I present you with an History of wonders; wonders so great, that, as no former Age can parallel, succeeding Times will scarce believe them. Expect here to read the highest Tyranny nd Rebellion that was ever acted by Sub∣cts, and the greatest hardships and per∣cutions that ever were suffer'd by a King; t did His Patience exceed His sorrows; nd His vertue became at last victorious. Some particulars, I confess, are so super∣tively extraordinary, that I easily should ar, they would scarce gain belief, even om my modern Reader, had I not this rong Argument to secure me; That no inge∣uous person will think me so frontlesse, as nowingly to writ an untruth in an History, here His Sacred Majesty (my dread Sove∣ign and the best of Kings) bears the prin∣pal part, and most of the other persons con∣rn'd in the same Action (except the Earl of arby, Lord Wilmot, and Col. Blague)
still alive, ready to pour out shame and co¦fusion on so impudent a Forgery. But I am so far from that foul crime  publishing what's false, that I can safely s I know not one line unauthentick; such h been my care to be sure of the truth tha have diligently collected the particula from most of their mouths, who were the ve Actors themselves in this Scene of Miracl To every individual person (as far as  industry could arrive to know) I have giv the due of his merit; be it for Valour, Fi¦lity, or whatever other quality that any w had the honour to relate to His Majesti Service. In this later Edition I have added so particulars, which came to my knowledg since the first publication, and have observ that in this persecution, much of His M¦jesties Actions and Sufferings have run¦rallel with those of King David. And though the whole Complex may w elegance and politeness of style (which Nature of such Relations does not prope challenge) yet it cannot want Truth, chief ingredient for such Ʋndertakings. which assurance I am not afraid to venture self in your hands. Read on and wonder.
map of Worcester An Exact Ground-Plot of ye City of WORCESTER, As it stood fortify'd 3. Sept. 1651. 1 The Cathedral, or Colledge Church 2 S.t Peters Church 3 S.t Andrews Church 4 S.t Martins Church 5 S.t Nicholas Church 6 S.t Clements Church 7 S.t Albans Church 8 S.t Helens Church 9 S.t Swithins Church 10 S.t Iohns 11 All S.ts Church 12 The Fort Royall 13 Castle hill 14 Bishops Palace 15 Castle-Gate 16 Colledge-Gate 17 Sudbury-Gate 18 S.t Martins Gate 19 Fore-Gate 20 Friers-Gate 21 Frog-Gate 22 High-Streete 23 Friers Streete 24 Pitch Croft 25 Bridge over Severn 26 The Water house 27 The Key Burnford sculp.
map of Boscobel House and surrounding grounds 1 Boscobel House 2 White Ladies 3 Boscobel garden 4 The Arbor, and Mountin  Garden wherein his Md. sa. 5 The back dore through whn his a.• ast to goe to the Oake. 6 Boscobel Wood. 7 A Stone Table in the Wood 8 The Royal Oake in  his  and Coli Carlos sate 9 Spring Coppice 10 His Na.•• and Rich. Pondrel under a Treathere 11 His Na.•• Troop marching from White Ladies 12 The plain betweene Boscobal Wood, and Spring Coppice. Burnford fecit.
THE HISTORY Of His Sacred MAJESTIES Most miraculous Preservation after the Battel of WORCESTER, &c. IT was in June in the year 1650. That CHARLES the Second, undoubted heir of CHARLES the First, of Glorious Memo∣ry, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, (After his Royal Father had been Barbarously murder'd, and Himself Banish'd his own Dominions, by his own rebellious Subjects) took Shipping at Scheveling in Holland, and, having e∣scap'd great dangers at Sea, arrived soon
after at Spey in the North of Scotland. On the first of January following, His Majesty was Crown'd at Scoon, and an Army raised in that Kingdom, to invade this; in hope to recover His Regalities here, then most unjustly detain'd from him by some Members of the Long Parliament, and Oliver Cromwell their General, who soon after most trayterously assum'd the Title of Protector of the new-minted Common-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland. Of this Royal-Scotch Army the Gene∣ral Officers were these, Lieutenant Gen. David Lesley, L. Gen. Middleton (who is sence created Earl of Middleton, Lord Clarmont, and Fettercairn) Major. Gen. Massey, M. Gen. Montgomery, M. Gen. Daliel, and M. Gen. Vandrose, a Dutch∣man. The first of August 1651 His Majesty with His Army began his March into Eng∣land, and on the fifth of the same Month, at His Royal Camp at Woodhouse near the Border, publish'd His Gracious Declara∣tion of General Pardon and Oblivion, to all His loving Subjects of the Kingdom o England and Dominion of Wales, tha
would desist from assisting the Ʋsurped Authority of the pretended Common-wealth of England, and return to the obe∣dience they owed to their Lawfull King, and to the antient happy Government of the Kingdom; Except only Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, John Cook (pretended Solicitor,) and all others, who did actually sit and vote in the mur∣der of His Royal Father. And lasty did declare, that the Service being done, the Scotch Army should quietly retire, that so all Armies might be disbanded, and a lasting peace setled with Religion and Righteousnesse. His Majesty, after the publication of this gracious Offer, march'd his Army in∣to Lancashire, where He received some considerable Supplies from the Earl of Derby (that Loyal subject,) and at War∣rington Bridge met with the first oppo∣sition made by the Rebels in England, but His presence soon put them to flight. In this interim his Majesty had sent a Copy of His Declaration, inclosed in a Gracious Letter to Thomas Andrews then Lord Mayor, (who had been one of his late Majesties Judges) and the
Aldermen of the City of London, which, by order of the Rump-Rebels then sitting a Westminster, was (on the 26. of August▪ publickly burnt at the Old Exchange by the Hangman; and their own Declara¦tion Proclaimed there and at Westminster▪ with beat of Drum, and sound of Trum∣pet; by which His Sacred Majesty, (to whom they could afford no better Title than Charles Stuart) His Abetters, Agents and Complices, were Declared Traytors, Rebels, and publique Enemies. Impudence and Treason beyond Example! After a tedious March of near 300. Miles, His Majesty, with His Army, on the 22. of August, possessed himself of Wor∣cester, after some small oposition made by the Rebels there commanded by Col. John James. And at his entrance the Mayor of that City carryed the Sword be∣fore His Majesty, who had left the Earl of Derby in Lancashire, as well to settle that and the adjacent Counties in a posture of Defence, against Cromwell and his Confe∣derates; as to raise some Auxiliary Forces to recruit His Majesties Army, in case the success of a Battle should not prove so happy as all good Men desired.
But (such was Heavens Decree) On e 25 of August, the Earl's new rais'd orces, being over-powered, were totally efeated near Wiggan in that County y Col. Lilburn, with a Regiment of Rebellious Sectaries. In which conflict he Lord Widdrington, Sir Thomas Til∣lesly, Collonel Trollop, Collonel Bointon, Lieutenant Collonel Galliard, (faithfull Subjects and Valiant Souldiers) with ome others of good note, were slain; Collonel Edward Roscarrock wounded, Sir William Throkmorton, (now Knight Marshal to His Majesty) Sir Timothy Fe∣herstonhaugh, (who was beheaded by the Rebels at Chester, on the 22. of October following) Collonel Bains and others ta∣ken Prisoners, and their General the Earl of Derby (who charged the Rebels va∣iantly, and received several wounds) put to flight with a small number of his men; In which condition he made choice of the way towards Worcester, whither he knew his Majesties Army was design'd to march. After some days, my Lord, with Col∣lonel Roscarrock and two Servants, got into the Confines of Staffordshire and Shropshire near Newport, where at one Mr.
Watsons house he met with Mr. Richard Snead, (an honest Gentleman of tha Country, and of his Lordships acquain∣tance) to whom he re-counted the Mis∣fortune of his Defeat at Wiggan, and the Necessity of his taking some rest, if Mr. Snead could recommend His Lordship to any private house near hand, where he might safely continue, till he could find an opportunity to go to His Majesty. Mr. Snead brought my Lord and His Company to Boscobel-house, a very ob∣scure habitation, Scituate in Shropshire, but adjoyning upon Staffordshire, and lies between Tong-castle and Brewood, in a kind of Wilderness. John Giffard Esq; having built this house about thirty years since, invited Sir Basil Brook with other Friends and Neighbours to a house∣warming Feast; at which time Sir Basil was desired by Mr. Giffard to give the house a Name, He aptly calls it BOSCO∣BEL (from the Italian Bosco-bello, which in that language signifies fair-wood) because seated in the midst of many fair Woods. It is now the Inheritance and dwelling House of Mr. Basil Fitzher∣bert, by Jane his Wife, daughter and heir
of Mr. John Cotton, by Frances, daughter and heir of the said John Giffard. At this place the Earl arriv'd on the 29. of August (being Friday) at night, but he house at that time afforded no Inha∣itant except William Penderel, the house∣keeper and his Wife, who, to preserve so eminent a Person, freely adventur'd to receive my Lord, and kept him in safety till Sunday night following, when (ac∣cording to my Lords desire of going to Wercester) he convey'd him to Mr. Hum∣phrey Elliots house at Gatakar Park, (a true hearted Royalist) which was about nine miles on the way from Boscobel thi∣ther. Mr. Elliot did not only chearfully entertain the Earl, but lent him ten pounds, and conducted him and his Com∣pany safe to Worcester. The next day, after His Majesty's arri∣val at Worcester, being Saturday the 23. of August, He was Proclaimed King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, by Mr. Thomas Lisens Mayor, and Mr. James Bridges Sheriff of that Loyal City, with great Acclamations. On the same day His Majestie published this following Manifesto or Declaration.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scot∣land, France and Ireland, Defender of the faith, &c. To all whom it may con∣cern Greeting. We desire not the effusion of blood, We covet not the spoil or forfei∣ture of our people, our Declaration at our entry into this Kingdom, the quiet beha∣viour and abstinence of our Army throughout this long March, and our own General Pardon declared to all the Inha∣bitants of this City, without taking ad∣vantage of the opposition here made us, by a force of the Enemy over-mastring them, untill we chased them away, have sufficiently certified both what we seek in only that the Laws of England (which secure the right both of King and Sub∣ject) may henceforth recover their due power and force, and all past bitternesse of these unnatural Wars be buried and forgotten. As a means whereunto, We
ave by our Warrants of the date hereof, and do hereby Summon, upon their Alle∣iance, all the Nobility, Gentry, and thers of what degree and condition so∣ver of our County of Worcester from ixteen to sixty to appear in their per∣ons, and with any Horses, Arms and Ammunition they have or can procure, at Pitch-croft, near the City, on Tues∣day next being the 26th of this instant Moneth, where our Self will be present that day (and also the next, in case those of the further parts of the County should not be able to come up sooner) to dispose of such of them as We shall think fit, for our-Service in the war, in defence of this City and County, and to adde unto our marching Army, and to apply others (therein versed) to matters of Civil ad∣vice and Government. Upon which ap∣pearance We shall immediately Declare to all present and conforming themselves to
our Royal Authority, our Free Pardon not excluding from this Summons or th Pardon held forth, or from trust and im¦ployment in our service, as we shall fin them cordial and usefull therein, any pe¦son or persons heretofore or at this tim actually imployed in opposition to us, whe¦ther in the Military way, as Governer Colonels, Captains, Common souldier or whatsoever else; or in the Civil,  Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, Justices of th Peace, Collectors, High Constables,  any other of higher or lower quality; f securing of all whom before mentione in there Loyal addresses, and performa¦ces, (besides our Army (more than on successfull since our entrance) which w be between them and the Enemie, and t engagement of Our own Person in the defence,) We have directed this City bee forthwith fortified, and shall use su other helps and means as shall occur
s in order to that end: but on the other ide, if any person of what degree or qua∣ity soever, either through disloyalty and disaffection, or out of fear of the cruel surpers, and Oppressors, accompanied ith a presumption upon our mercy and oodness, or lastly, presuming upon former ervice, shall oppose or neglect us at this ime, they shall find, that as We have Au∣hority to punish in life, liberty, and estate,  we want not now the power to do it, and  if overmuch provoked) shall not want he will neither, and in particular un∣o those who have heretofore done and uffered for their Loyalty, We say it is ow in their hands either to double that core, or to strike it off; concluding with his, That although our disposition a∣ound with tenderness to our people, yet e cannot think it such to let them lye nder a confest slavery, and false peace, hen as We well know, and all the world
may see, We have force enough, with t conjunction of those that groan under t present yoak (we will not say to dispute for that We shall do well enough wit those We have brought with us) but clear¦ly (without any considerable opposition to restore together with Our self the Qu¦et, the Liberty, and the Laws of t English Nation. Given at Our City of Worcester th 23th of August 1651. And in th Third year of Our Reign. Upon Sunday the 24. of August, M Crosby (an eminent Divine of that City preach'd before His Majestie in the C¦thedral Church; And in his Prayer, stile His Majestie, in all causes, and over all pe¦sons, next under God, Supreme Head a Governour: At which the Presbyteria Scots took exception, and Mr. Crosby w afterwards admonish'd by some of the to forbear such expressions.
Tuesday the 26. of August was the Rendevouz in Pitcheroft of such Loyal Subjects as came into His Majesties aid, in pursuance of His before-mentioned Declaration and Summons: Here ap∣peared Francis Lord Talbot, now Earl of Shrewsbury, with about 60. Horse. Mr. Mervin Touchet, his Lieut. Collonel. Sir John Packington. Sir Walter Blount. Sir Ralph Clare. Sir Rowland Berkley. Sir John Winford. Mr. Ralph Sheldon of Beoly. Mr. John Wasburn of Witchinford, with 40. Horse. Mr. Thomas Hornyold of Blackmore Park, with 40, Horse. Mr. Willian Seldon of Finstall. Mr. Thomas Acton. Captain Benbow. Mr. Robert Blount of Kenswick. Mr. Robert Wigmore of Lucton. Mr. Edward Pennel the Elder. Captain John Kingston. Mr. Peter Blount. Mr. Edward Blount.
Mr. Walter Walsh. Mr. Charles Wash. Mr. William Dansey. Mr. Francis Knotsford. Mr. George Chambers, &c. With diver others, who were honour'd and enco¦rag'd by His Majesties presence; Not¦withstanding which access, the numbe of his Army both English and Scots, wa conceiv'd not to exceed 12000. men (viz.) 10000. Scots, and about 200 English; and those too not excellentl Arm'd, nor plentifully stored with Am¦munition. Mean time Cromwell (that grand Pa¦tron of Sectaries) had amass'd togethe a numerous Body of Rebels, commande by himself in chief, and by the Lord Gr of Groby, Fleetwood and Lambert unde him, consisting of above 30000. me (being generally the Scum and Froth o the whole Kingdom) one part of whic were Sectaries, who, through a Fana¦tique zeal, were become Devotes to th great Idol; the other part seduc'd pe¦sons, who either by force or fear we unfortunately made Actors or Partic¦pants in this so horrible and fatal a Tr¦gedy.
Thus then began the Pickeerings to the grand Engagement, Major General Massey with a commanded party, being sent by His Majesty to secure the Bridge and Pass at Ʋpton upon Severn, 7. miles below Worcester, On Thursday the 28. of August, Lambert with a far greater number of Rebels attaqu'd him, and after ome dispute, gain'd the Pass, the river being then fordable. Yet the Major Gene∣ral behav'd himself very gallantly, recei∣ved a shot in the hand from some Muske∣tiers the Enemy had convey'd into the Church, and retreated in good order to Worcester. During this encounter, Cromwell him∣self, (whose Head-quarter was the night before at Pershore) advanc'd to Stoughton within 4. miles of the City on the South-side, himself quartered that night at Mr. Simons house at White Lady-Aston, and a Party of his Horse faced the City that Evening. The next day (August the 29.) Sultan Oliver appear'd with a great Body of Horse and Foot on Redhill within a mile of Worcester, where he made a Bonne∣mine, but attempted nothing; And that
night part of his Army quartered a Judge Barkleys house at Speachley. Th same day it was resolv'd by His Ma∣jesty, at a Council of War, to give the Grand Rebel a Camisado, by beating u his Quarters that night with 1500. selec Horse and Foot commanded by Lieute¦nant General Middleton, and Sir Willia Keyth; All of them wearing their shirt over their Armor for distinction; which accordingly was attempted, and migh in all probability have been successeful▪ had not the design been most trayterously discover'd to the Rebels by one Guyse a Taylor in the Town, and a notorious Sectary, who was hang'd the day follow∣ing, as the just reward of his treachery: In this Action Major Knox was slain, and some few taken Prisoners by the Ene∣my. A considerable Party of the Re∣bels commanded by Collonel Fleetwood, Collonel Richard Ingoldsby, (who is since become a real Convert, and was created Knight of the Bath at His Majesties Coro∣nation) Collonel Goff, and Collonel Gib∣bons being got over the Severn at Ʋpton, march'd next day to Powick Town, where they made an Halt, for Powick Bridge
(lying upon the River Team, betwen Po∣wick Town and Worcester) was guarded by a Brigade of His Majesties Horse and Foot, commanded by Major General Robert Montgomery, and Collonel George Keyth. The fatal 3d. of September being come, His Majesty this day (holding a Council of War upon the top of the Colledge-Church-steeple, the better to discover the Enemies posture) observ'd some Firing at Powick, and Cromwell making a bridge of Boats over Severn, under Buns-hill, about a mile below the City towards Team mouth; His Majesty presently goes down, commands all to their Arms, and marches in Person to Powick Bridge to give orders, as well for maintaining that Bridge, as for opposing the making the other of Boats, and hasted back to His Army in the City. Soon after His Majesty was gone from Powick Bridge, the Enemy assaulted it furiously, which was well defended by Montgomery, till himself was dangerously wounded, and his Amunition spent; So that he was forced to make a disorderly retreat into Worcester, leaving Collonel
Keyth a Prisoner at the Bridge. At the same time Cromwell had with much cele∣rity finisht his Bridge of boats and planks over the main River, without any con∣siderable opposition; saving that Col. Pis∣cotty, with about three hundred High∣landers, performed as much therein as could be expected from a handfull of men fighting against great numbers: By this means Oliver held communication with those of his party at Powick Bridge, and when he had march'd over a considerable number of his men, said, (in his hypo∣critical way) the Lord of Hosts be with you, and return'd himself to raise a Battery of great Guns against the Fort-royal on the South-side the City. His Majesty being return'd from Po∣wick Bridge, march'd, with the Duke of Buckingham, Lord Grandison, and some other of His Cavalry, through the City, and out at Sudbury gate by the Fort-Royal, where the Rebels great shot came fre∣quently neer His Sacred Person. At this time Cromwell was setled in an advantageous Post at Perry wood within a mile of the City, swelling with pride and confident in the numbers of his men,
having besides rais'd a breast-work at the Cockshoot of that wood, for his greater ecurity; But Duke Hamilton (formerly Lord Lanerick,) with his own Troop and ome High-landers, Sir Alexander Forbus with his Regiment of Foot, and divers English Lords and Gentlemen voluntiers, y His Majesties command and encou∣agement, engaged him, and did great xecution upon his best men, forced the reat Sultan (as the Rhodians in like case id the Turk) to retreat with his Jani∣aries, and his Majesty was once as ab∣olute master of his great Guns, as He ught then to have been of the whole and. Here His Majesty gave an incompara∣le Ps. 86. 14. O God the Proud are risen against me and the Assemblies of violent men have sought af∣ter my Soul, and have not set Thee before them. Example of valor to the rest, by harging in Person, which the High-lan∣ers especially imitated in a great mea∣ure, fighting with the but-ends of their uskets, when their Ammunition was pent; but new Supplies of Rebels being ontinually poured upon them, and the ain Body of Scotch Horse not coming up n due time from the Town to His Ma∣esties relief, His Army was forced to re∣reat in at Sudbury gate in much disorder.
In this Action Duke Hamilton (wh fought valiantly) had his horse kill' under him, and was himself mortall wounded, of which he dyed within fe days; and many of his Troop (consistin much of Gentlemen and divers of his ow name) were slain; Sir John Dougla received his deaths wound; and Si Alex. Forbus, (who was the first Knigh the King made in Scotland, and com∣manded the Fort Royal here) was shot through both the Calves of his legs, lay in the wood all night, and was brough Prisoner to Worcester next day. The Rebels in this Encounter had great advantage, as well in their num∣bers, as by fighting both with horse and foot, against His Majesties foot only, the greatest part of his Horse being wedged up in the Town; And when the foot were defeated, a part of His Ma∣jesties horse fought afterwards against both the enemies horse and foot upon great disadvantage. And as they had few persons of condition among them to lose so no Rebels, but Quartermaster Gene∣ral Moseley and one Captain Jones, were worth taking notice of to be slain in this Battle.
At Sudbury gate (I know not whether by accident or on purpose) a Cart laden with Ammunition was overthrown and lay cross the passage, one of the Oxen that drew it being there kill'd; so that His Majesty could not ride into the Town, but was forced to dismount and come in on foot. The Rebels soon after stormed the Fort royal (the Fortifications whereof were not perfected,) and put all the Scots they found therein to the Sword. In the Friars street His Majesty put off his Armor, (which was heavy and trou∣blesome to him,) and took a fresh horse; and then perceiving many of His Foot-Souldiers begin to throw down their Arms and decline fighting, He rode up and down among them, sometimes with his hat in his hand, entreating them to stand to their Arms and fight like men; other whiles encouraging them, alledg∣ing the goodnesse and justice of the Cause they fought for; but seeing himself not able to prevail, said, I had rather you would shoot me, than keep me alive to see the sad consequences of this fatal day: So deep a sense had His prophetick Soul of the
miseries of his loved Country, even in the midst of his own danger. During this hot Engagement at Perry∣wood and Red-hill, the Rebels on the o∣ther side the Water possessed themselve of S. Johns, and a Brigade of His Maje∣sties Foot which were there, under com∣mand of M. Gen. Daliel, without any great resistance, laid down their Arms and craved Quarter. When some of the Enemy were en∣tred, and entering the Town both at the Key, Castle-hill and Sudbury gate, without any Conditions; The Earl of Cleveland, Sir James Hamilton, Col. Tho. Wogan, Col. William Carlis (then Major to the Lord Talbot) L. Col. John Slaughter, Capt. Tho. Hornyold, Capt. Tho. Giffard, Capt. John Astley, Mr. Pe∣ter Blount, and Capt. Richard Kemble (Capt. Lieutenant to the Lord Talbot) and some others rallied what force they could (though inconsiderable to the Re∣bells numbers) and charged the Enemy very gallantly both in Sudbury-street and High-street, where Sir James and Capt. Kemble were desperately wounded, and others slain; yet this Action did much
secure His Majesties march out at St. Mar∣tins gate, Who had otherwise been in danger of being taken in the Town. About the same time the Earl of Rothes, Sir. William Hamilton, and Col. Drummond, with a Party of Scots, main∣tained the Castle hill with much resoluti∣on, till such time as Conditions were a∣greed on for Quarter. Lastly, Some of His Majesties English Army valiantly opposed the Rebels at the Town Hall, where Mr. Coningsby Col∣les, and some others were slain, Mr. John Rumney, Mr. Charles Wells, and o∣thers taken Prisoners; So that the Re∣bels having in the end subdued all their Opponents, fell to plundring the City unmercifully, few or none of the Citi∣zens escaping, but such as were of the Phanatique party. When His Majesty saw no hope of rallying His thus discomfited Foot, He marched out of Worcester at S. Martins gate (the Fore-gate being mured up) a∣bout six of the Clock in the evening with his main body of horse, as then com∣manded by General David Lesley, but were now in some confusion.
The Lord St. Clare with divers o the Scottish Nobility and Gentry wer taken Prisoners in the Town. And the foot Souldiers (consisting most of Scots) were almost all either slain or taken and such of them (who in the Battle e∣scaped death) lived but longer to die fo the most part more miserably; many o them being afterwards knock'd o'th' head by Country people, some bought and sold like slaves for a small price, others went begging up and down, till Charity failing them, their necessities brought upon them diseases, and diseases, death. Before His Majesty was come to Bar∣bon's bridge, about half a mile out of Worcester, He made several Stands, faced about and desired the Duke of Buckin∣gham, Lord Wilmot, and other of his Commanders, that they might rally and try the fortune of War once more; But at the Bridge a serious consultation was held, and then perceiving many of the Troopers to throw of their Arms and shift for themselves, they were all of o∣pinion, the day was irrecoverably lost, and that their only remaining work was to save the King from those ravenous
wolves and Regicides; Whereupon His Majestie, by advice of His Council, resolv'd to march with all speed for Scot∣land; Following therein the steps of King David his great Predecessor in Ro∣al patience, who finding himself in cir∣cumstances not unlike to these, said to all 2 Sam. 15. 14. his servants that were with him at Hierusa∣em, arise and let us fly, for we shall not else escape from Absolom, make speed to de∣art, lest he overtake us suddenly and bring evil upon us, and smite the City with the edge of the sword. Immediately after this Result, the Duke ask'd the Lord Talbot, (being of that Country) If he could direct the way Northwards? His Lordship answered, that he had one Richard Walker in his Troop (formerly a Scout-master in those parts, and who since dyed in Jamaica) that knew the way well; who was ac∣cordingly called to be the Guide, and performed that duty for some miles; but being come to Kinver heath, not far from Kederminster, and day-light being gone, Walker was at a puzzel in the way. Here His Majesty made a stand, and consulted with the Duke, Earl of Derby,
Lord Wilmot, &c. To what place H might march, at least to take some hou rest; The Earl of Derby told His Ma∣jesty, that in his flight from Wiggan to Worcester, he had met with a perfect ho∣nest man, and a great convenience o concealment at Boscobel house (before mentioned) but withall acquainted the King, it was a Recusants house; And i was suggested, that those people (being accustomed to persecution and searches) were most like to have the readiest means, and safest contrivances to pre∣serve Him; His Majesty therefore incli∣ned to go thither. The Lord Talbot being made acquaint∣ed therewith, and finding Walker dubi∣ous of the way, called for Mr. Charle Giffard, (a faithful Subject, and of the antient Family of Chillington) to be Hi Majesties conductor, which office Mr. Giffard willingly undertook, having one Yates a servant with him, very expert i the ways of that Country; and being come near Sturbridge, it was under con∣sideration whether His Majesty should march through that Town or no, and resolved in the affirmative, and that al
about His Person should speak French, to prevent any discovery of His Ma∣jesties presence. Mean time General Lesley with the Scottish Horse, had, in the close of the Evening, taken the more direct way North-ward, by Newport, His Majesty being left only attended by the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Derby, Earl of Lan∣derdail, Lord Talbot, Lord Wilmot, Col. Thomas Blague, Col. Edward Ros∣arrock, Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, Mr. Richard Lane, Mr. William Armorer, (since Knighted) Mr. Hugh May, Mr. Charles Giffard, Mr. Peter Street, and ome others, in all about 60 Horse. At a house about a mile beyond Stur∣ridge, His Majesty drank, and eat a crust of bread, the house affording no etter Provision; and as His Majesty ode on, he discoursed with Col. Ros∣arrock touching Boscobel house, and the eans of security which the Earl of Der∣y and he found at that place. However Mr. Giffard humbly propo∣ed to carry His Majesty first to Whitela∣ies (another seat of the Giffards) lying ut half a mile beyond Boscobel, where
He might repose Himself for a while and then take such further resolution, a His Majesty and Council should think fi▪ This house is distant about 26 mile from Worcester, and still reteins the an∣cient name of Whiteladies, from its ha∣ving formerly been a Monastery of Cister∣tian Nuns, whose habit was of that co∣lour. His Majesty and his Retinue (being safely conducted thither by Mr. Giffard alighted, now, as they hoped, out o danger of any present surprise by pursuit George Penderel (who was a servant in th house) opened the Doors, and after Hi Majesty and the Lords were entered th house, His Majesties horse was brough into the hall, and by this time it wa about break of day on Tursday morning Psa. 142. 6. Attend O Lord unto my Cry, for I am brought very low, deliver me from my persecutors for they are stronger than I. Here every one was in a sad consult ho to escape the fury of blood-thirsty Ene¦mies, but the greatest sollicitude was  save the King, who was both hungr and tired with this long and hast march. Mr. Giffard presently sent for Richar Penderel, who lived near hand at Hol¦bal Grange, and Col. Roscarrock cause
Bartholomew Martin, a boy in the house, to be sent to Boscobel for William Penderel, mean time Mris. Giffard brought His Majesty some Sack and Bis∣ket, For the King and all the people that 2 Sam. 1. 14. were with him, came weary and refreshed themselves there: Richard came first, and was immediately sent back to bring a suit of his Clothes for the King, and by that time he arrived with them, William came, and both were brought into the Parlour to the Earl of Derby, who imme∣diately carried them into an inner Parlour (where the King was) and told William Penderel, This is the King (pointing to His Majesty) thou must have a care of Him, and preserve Him as thou didst me; And Mr. Giffard did also much conjure Richard to have a special care of his Charge, to which commands the two Brothers yielded ready obedience. Whilst Richard and William were thus sent for, His Majesty had been ad∣vised to rub his hands on the back of the Chimney, and with them his face, for a disguise, and some person had disorderly cut off His Hair: His Majesty (having put off his Garter, Blue Ribband,
George of Diamonds, Buff-coat, and other Princely Ornaments commited his Watch to the custody of the Lord Wil∣mot, and his George to Col. Blague, and distributed the Gold he had in his pock∣et among his Servants, and then put on a noggen coarse shirt which was bor∣rowed of Edward Martin, who lived in the house, and Richard Penderels Green Suit, and Leather Doublet, but had not time to be so exactly disguised as he was afterwards; for both William and Richard Penderel did advertise the Com∣pany to make haste away, in regard there was a Troop of Rebels commanded by Col. Ashenhurst, quartered at Cotsal, but three miles distant; some of which Troop came to the house within half an hour after the dissolution of the Royal Troop. Thus David and his men departed 1 Sam. 23. 13. out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. Richard Penderel conducted the King out at a back-door, unknown to most of the Company, (except some of the Lords and Collonel Roscarrock, who with sad hearts, but hearty prayers, took leave of Him) and carried Him into
an adjacent wood belonging to Boscobel, called Spring Coppice, about half a mile from Whiteladies, (where He abode, as 1 Sam. 23. 15. David did in the wildernesse of Ziph in a wood) whilst William, Humphrey and George, were scouting abroad to bring what news they could learn to His Ma∣jesty in the Coppice, as occasion requi∣red. His Majesty being thus, as they hoped, in a way of security, the Duke, Earl of Derby, Earl of Lauderdail, Lord Talbot, and the rest (having Mr. Giffard for their guide, and being then not above 40 horse, of which number His Ma∣jesties pad-nag was one, ridden by Mr. Richard Lane, one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber) marched from Whiteladies Northward by the way of Newport, in hope to overtake or meet General Lesley with the main Body of Scotch horse. As soon as they were got into the Road, the Lord Leviston (who com∣manded His Majesties Life-guard) over∣took them, pursued by a party of Rebels under the command of Col. Blundel; the Lords with their Followers faced a∣bout, fought and repeld them, but
when they came a little beyond New∣port, some of Col. Lilburns men met them in the Front, other Rebels from Worcester pursued them in the Rear, themselves and horses being sufficiently tired, the Earl of Derby, Earl of Lau∣derdail, Mr. Charles Giffard, and some o∣thers were taken and carried Prisoners, first to Whitchurch, and from thence to an Inne in Bunbury in Chesire, where Mr. Giffard found means to make an escape; but the noble Earl of Derby was thence conveyed to Westchester, and there try∣ed by a pretended Court Martial, held the first of October 1651. by vertue of a Commission from Cromwell, grounded on an execrable Rump-Act, of the 12. of August then last past, the very Title whereof cannot be mentioned without horrour, but it pretended most trayter∣ously to prohibit correspondence with CHARLES STUART (their lawfull Soveraign) under penalty of High Treason, losse of life and estate,—Prodigious Rebels! In this black Tribunal there sate, as Judges, these Persons, and under These Titles:
Colonel Humphrey Mackworth, Presi∣dent. Major General Mitton. Colonel Robert Duckenfield. Colonel Henry Bradshaw. Colonel Thomas Croxton. Colonel George Twisleton. Lieutenant Colonel Henry Birkenhead. Lieutenant Colonel Simon Finch. Lieutenant Col. Alexander Newton. Captain James Stepford. Captain Samuel Smith. Captain John Downs. Captain Vincent Corbet. Captain John Delves. Captain John Griffith. Captain Thomas Portington. Captain Edward Alcock. Captain Ralf Pownall. Captain Richard Grantham. Captain Edward Stelfax. Their Cruel Sentence. Resolved by the Court upon the Question, That James Earl of Darby is guilty of the Breach of the Act of the 12. of August
1651. last past, Entituled An Act prohi∣biting correspondence with CHARLES STUART or his Party, and so of High Treason against the Commonwealth of England, and is therefore worthy of Death. Resolved by the Court, That the said James Earl of Derby is a Traytor to the Commonwealth of England, and an Abetter, Encourager and Assister of the Declared Traytors and Enemies thereof, and shall be put to Death by sever∣ing his Head from his Body at the Market place in the Town of Boulton in Lanca∣shire, upon Wednesday the 15th. day of this instant October, about the hour of one of the Clock the same day. This was the Authority, and some of these the Persons that so barbarously, and contrary to the Law of Nations, con∣demned this noble Earl to Death, not∣withstanding his just Plea, That he had Quarter for Life given him by one Captain Edge, who took him Prisoner. But this could not obtain Justice, nor any In∣tercession,
Mercy; So that on the 15. of the said October, He was according∣ly Beheaded at Boulton, in a most Bar∣barous and Inhumane manner. The Earl of Lauderdail, with several others were carried Prisoners to the Tower, and afterwards to Windsor Ca∣stle, where they continued divers years. Whilst the Rebels were plundering those noble Persons, the Duke, with the Lord Leviston, Col. Blague, Mr. Marmaduke Darcy, and Mr. Hugh May, forsook the road first, and soon after their horses, and betook themselves to a by-way and got into Bloore Park, near Cheswardine, about five miles from New∣port, where they received some refresh∣ment at a little obscure house of Mr. George Barlows, and afterwards met with two honest Laborers in an adjoyning wood, to whom they communicated the exigent and distress which the for∣tune of war had reduced them to, and finding them like to prove faithful, the Duke thought fit to imitate his Royal Master, delivered his George (which was given him by the Queen of England) to Mr. May (who preserved it through
all difficulties, and after restored it t his Grace in Holland) and changed ha∣bit with one of the Workmen; and i this disguise, by the assistance of Mr▪ Barlow and his wife, was, after some dayes, conveyed by one Nich. Mathew a Carpenter, to the house of Mr. Hawle an hearty Cavalier at Bilstrop in Nottin∣ghamshire, from thence to the Lady Villiars house at Booksby in Leicestershire and after many hardships and encoun∣ters, his Grace got secure to London and from thence to His Majesty in France. At the same time the Lord Leviston, Col. Blague, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Ma, all quitted their horses, disguised them∣selves, and severally shifted for them∣selves, and some of them, through va∣rious dangers and sufferings, contrived their Escapes; In particular Mr. May was forced to lie 21. dayes in a hay∣mow belonging to one John Bold, an honest Husband-man, who lived at Soudley; Bold having all that time Re∣bel-souldiers quartered in his house, yet failed not to give a constant relief to his more welcome Guest; and when the
oast was clear of Souldiers, Mr. May me to London on foot in his disguise. The Lord Talbot (seeing no hope of llying,) hasted towards his Fathers ouse at Longford near Newport, where eing arrived, he conveyed his horse to a neighbours barn, but was imme∣iately pursued by the Rebels, who ound the horse sadled, and by that oncluded my Lord to be not far off, so hat they searched Longford house nar∣owly, and some of them continued in  four or five dayes; during all which ime my Lord was in a close place in one f the outhouses, almost stifled for want f air, and had perished for want of ood, had he not been once relieved in he dead of night, and with much diffi∣culty by a trusty servant; yet his Lord∣ship thought it a great providence, even by these hardships, to escape the fury of such enemies, who sought the destruction of the Nobility, as well as of their King. In this interim the valiant Earl of Cleveland, (who being above 60. years of age, had marched 21 dayes together upon a trotting horse) had also made his escape from Worcester, when all the
fighting work was over, and was go to Woodcot in Shropshire, whither he wa pursued, and taken at or near M Broughtons house, from whence he w carryed Prisoner to Stafford, and fro thence to the Tower of London. Col. Blague, remaining at Mr. Bar∣lows house at Bloor-Pipe, about eigh miles from Stafford, his first action wa with Mrs. Barlows privity and advice to hide His Majesties George under  heap of Chips and Dust: Yet the Co∣lonel could not conceal himself s well, but that he was here soon afte taken and carryed prisoner to Stafford and from thence conveyed to the Tow∣er of London; Mean time the Georg was transmitted to Mr. Robert Milwar of Stafford for better security; who af∣terwards faithfully conveyed it to Co Blague in the Tower by the trusty hand of Mr. Isaac Walton; And the Colo∣nel, not long after happily escapin thence, restored it to his Majesties own hands, which had been thus wonder∣fully preserved from being made a priz to sordid Rebels. The Scotch Cavalry (having no place t
treat unto nearer than Scotland,) were on after dispersed, and most of them ta∣en by the Rebels and Country people in heshire, Lancashire, and parts adjacent. Thus was this Royal Army totally bdued, thus dispersed; and if in this  important affair any of the Scottish ommanders were treacherous at Wor∣ster, (as some suspected) he has a reat account to make for the many ears miseries that ensued thereby to oth Nations, under the tyrannical, surped government of Cromwell. But to return to the duty of my atten∣ance on His Sacred Majesty in Spring oppice; By that time Richard Penderel ad conveyed Him into the obscurest art of it, it was about Sun-rising on hursday morning, and the heavens ept bitterly at these calamities; inso∣uch as the thickest tree in the wood as not able to keep His Majesty dry, or was there any thing for Him to sit n; Wherefore Richard went to Fran∣is Yates house, (a trusty neighbour ho married his wifes sister) where he orrowed a blanket, which he folded nd laid on the ground under a Tree for
His Majesty to sit on. At the same time Richard spoke the good-wife Yates, to provide o victuals, and bring it into the wood a place he appointed her, she present made ready a messe of milk, and so butter and eggs, and brought them His Majesty in the wood; Who bei a little surprized to see the woman ( good concealer of a secret,) said chea¦fully to her; Good woman, can you  faithfull to a distressed Cavalier? She a∣swered, Yes Sir, I will dye rather th discover you; with which answer H Majesty was well satisfied, and receive from her hands, as David did from A∣gails, 1 Sam. 25. 35. that which she brought Him. The Lord Wilmot in the interim too John Penderel for his guide, but kne not determinately whither to go, pu∣posing at first to have marched North¦wards, but as they passed by Brewo Forge, the forgemen made after then till being told by one Rich. Dutto that it was Col. Crompton whom the pursued, the Vulcans happily, upon th mistake, quitted the chase. Soon after they narrowly escaped
party of Rebels as they passed by Coven∣brook; so that seeing danger on every side, and John meeting with William Walker (a trusty neighbour,) commited my Lord to his care and counsel, who for the present conveyed them into a dry marl-pit, where they staid a while, and afterward to one Mr. Huntbaches house at Brinsford, and put their horses into John Evans barn, whilst John Penderel goes to Wolverhampton to see what con∣venience he could find for my Lords coming thither, but met with none, the Town being full of Souldiers. Yet John leaves no means unessayed, hastens to Northcot, (an adjacent vil∣lage) and there, whilst he was talking with Goodwife Ʋnderhil (a neighbour,) in the instant Mr. John Huddleston (a sojourner at Mr. Tho. Whitgreaves of Moseley, and of Johns acquaintance) was accidentally passing by, to whom John (well assured of his integrity,) presently addresses himself and his business, relates to him the sad news of the defeat of His Majesties Army at Worcester, and disco∣vers in what strait and confusion he had left His Majesty and his followers at
Whiteladies, and in particular that he had brought thence a person of quality, (for John then knew not who my Lord was) to Huntbaches house, who, with∣out present relief, would be in great danger of being taken. Mr. Huddleston goes home forthwith, takes John with him, and acquaints Mr. Whitgreave with the businesse, who freely resolved to venture all, rather than such a person should miscarry. Hereupon Mr. Whitgreave repairs to Huntbaches house, speaks with my Lord, and gives direction how he should be privately conveyed into his house a Moseley about ten of the clock at night; and, though it so fell out that the di∣rections were not punctually observed yet my Lord and his man were at las brought into the house where Mr. Whit¦greave (after some refreshment give them) conveys them into a secret place which my Lord admiring for its excel¦lent contrivance, and sollicitous for H Majesties safety, said, I would give  world my friend (meaning the King) wer here; and then (being abundantly satis¦fied of Mr. Whitgreaves fidelity
eposited in his hands a little bag of ewels, which my Lord received again t his departure. As soon as it was day Mr. Whitgreave ent William Walker with my Lords hor∣ses to his neighbour Col. John Lane of Bentley near Walsall, South-east from Moseley about four miles, (whom Mr. Whitgreave knew to be a right honest Gentleman, and ready to contribute any ssistance to so charitable a work) and wished Walker to acquaint the Colonel, hat they belonged to some eminent Per∣on about the King, whom he could bet∣er secure than the horses: The Col. wil∣ingly receives them and sends word to Mr. Whitgreave to meet him that night in  Close not far from Moseley, in order to he tender of farther service to the own∣r of the horses, whose name neither the Colonel nor Mr. Whitgreave then knew. On Thursday night, when it grew ark, His Majesty resolved to go from hose parts into Wales, and to take Richard Penderel with him for His guide; ut, before they began their journey, His Majesty went into Richards house t Hobbal Grange, where the old Good
wife Penderel had not only the honour to see His Majesty, but to see him attended by her son Richard. Here His Majesty had time and means better to complete His disguise; His Name was agreed to be Wil. Jones, and His arms a wood-Bill▪ In this posture about nine a Clock at night (after some refreshment taken in the house) His Majesty, with his trusty servant Richard, began their journey on foot, resolving to go that night to Madely in Shrop-shire about five mile from Whiteladies, and within a mile o the River Severn, over which their way lay for Wales; in this Village lived one Mr. Francis Woolf, an honest Gentle∣man of Richards acquaintance. His Majesty had not been long gone but the Lord Wilmot sent John Pendere from Mr. Whitgreaves to Whiteladies an Boscobel, to know in what security the King was, John returned and acquainted my Lord, that His Majesty was marche from thence; Hereupon my Lord bega to consider which way himself shoul remove with safety. Col. Lane, having secured my Lord horses, and being come to Moseley ac¦cordin
to appointment on Friday ight, was brought up to my Lord by Mr. Whitgreave, and (after mutual saluta∣ion) acquainted him, that his sister Mrs. ane Lane had by accident procured a Pass from some Commander of the Re∣els, for her self and a man to go a little eyond Bristow, to see Mrs. Norton her pecial friend then near her time of lying n; and freely offered, if His Lordship hought fit, he might make use of it, hich my Lord seemed inclinable to ccept; and on Saturday night was con∣ucted by Col. Lanes man (himself not be∣ng well) to the Colonels house at Bent∣ey; His Lordship then and not before iscovering his Name to Mr. Whit∣reave, and giving him many thanks or so great a kindness in so imminent  danger. Before His Majesty came to Madeley, e met with an ill-favoured encounter t Evelin Mill, being about two miles om thence; The Miller (it seems) was n honest man, but His Majesty and ichard knew it not, and had then in is house some considerable persons of is Majesties Army, who took shelter
there in their flight from Worcester, and had not been long in the Mill; so that the Miller was upon his watch, and Richard unhappily permitting a gate to clap, through which they passed, gave occasion to the Miller to come out o the Mill and boldly ask, Who is there? Richard thinking the Miller had pursued them, quitted the usual way in some haste, and led his Majesty over a little Brook, which they were forced to wad through, and which contributed much towards the surbating and galling Hi Majesties Feet, who (as he afterward pleasantly observed) was here in som danger of losing his Guide, but that th rusling of Richards calveskin breeche was the best direction His Majesty had t follow him in that dark night. They arrived at Madeley about mid¦night, Richard goes to Mr. Woo house, where they were all in bed knocks them up and acquaints Mr. Woo Daughter, (who came to the door that the King was there, who present received him into the house, where H Majesty refreshed himself for some time but understanding the Rebels ke
several Guards upon Severn, and it being eared that some of their party (of which many frequently passed through he Town) might quarter at the house, ▪as had often hapned,) it was appre∣hended unsafe for His Majesty to lodge n the house (which afforded no secret place for concealment,) but rather to retire into a Barn near adjoyning, as less iable to the danger of a surprise, whi∣ther His Majesty went accordingly, and continued in a hay-mow there all the day following, His servant Richard at∣tending him. During his Majesties stay in the Barn, Mr. Woolf had often conference with him about His intended journey, and in order thereto took care by a trusty ser∣vant (sent abroad for that purpose,) to inform himself more particularly of those guards upon Severn, and had certain word brought him, that not only the Bridges were secured, but all the Pas∣sage-boats seized on; Insomuch that he conceived it very hazardous for His Majesty to prosecute His design for Wales, but rather to go to Boscobel∣house, being the most retired place for
concealment in all the Country, and  stay there till an opportunity of a fur∣ther safe conveyance could be foun out; which advice His Majesty incline to approve: And thereupon resolve for Boscobel the night following; in th mean time, His hands not appearing suf∣ficiently discoloured, suitable to his o∣ther disguise, Mrs. Woolf provided Wal∣nut-tree leaves, as the readiest expedien for that purpose. The day being over, His Majesty ad∣ventured to come again into the house where having for sometime refreshe himself, and being furnished with con∣veniences for His Journey, (which wa conceived to be fafer on foot than b horse) He, with His faithful guide Rich∣ard, about eleven of Clock at night set forth toward Boscobel. About three of the Clock on Saturd morning, being come near the house Richard left His Majesty in the wood whilst he went in to see if any Souldie were there or other danger; Where h found Col. William Carlis, (who had seen not the last man born, but the last ma killed at Worcester, and) who, having wit
much difficulty, made his escape from thence, was got into his own neighbour∣hood, and for some time concealing himself in Boscobel-wood, was come that morning to the house to get some relief of William Penderel his old acquaintance. Richard having acquainted the Col. that the King was in the wood, the Col. with William and Richard go presently thi∣ther to give their attendance, where they found His Majesty sitting on the root of a tree, who was glad to see the Col. and came with them into the house, where He eat bread and cheese heartily, and (as an Extraordinary) William Penderels wife made His Majesty a Posset, of thin milk and small beer, and got ready some warm water to wash His feet not only extreme dirty, but much galled with travail. The Col. pulled off His Majesties shooes, which were full of gravel, and stockens which were very wet, and there being no other shooes in the house that would fit Him, the good wife put some hot embers in those to dry them, whilt His Majesties feet were washing and His stockins shifted. Being thus a little refreshed, the
Colonel persuaded His Majesty to go back into the wood, (supposing it safer than the house,) where the Colonel made choise of a thick leafed Oak, into which William and Richard helped them both up, and brought them such provi∣sion as they could get, with a cushion for His Majesty to sit on; the Col. hum∣bly desired His Majesty (who had taken little or no rest the two preceding nights) to seat himself as easily as He could in the tree, and rest his head on the Co∣lonels lap, who was watchful that His Majesty might not fall; In this Oak they continued most part of that day, and in that posture His Majesty slumbred away some part of the time, and bore all these hardships and afflictions with incomparable patience. In the Evening they returned to the house, where William Penderel acquaint∣ed His Majesty with the secret place, wherein the Earl of Derby had been se∣cured, which His Majesty liked so well, that He resolved, whilst he staid there, to trust only to that, and go no more into the Royal Oak, as from hence it must be called, where he could not so
much as sit at ease. His Majesty now finding himself in a hopeful security, permitted William Penderel to shave Him, and cut the hair of His head, as short at top as the Scis∣sers would do it, but leaving some a∣bout the ears, according to the Coun∣try mode; Col. Carlis attending, told His Majesty, William was but a mean Barber; To which His Majesty answer∣ed, He had never been shaved by any Bar∣ber before: The King bad William burn the hair which he cut off, but William was only disobedient in that, for he kept a good part of it, wherewith he has since pleasured some persons of Honor, and is kept as a civil Relique. Humphrey Penderel was this Saturday designed to go to Shefnal, to pay some Taxes to one Captain Broadway; At whose house he met with a Colonel of the Rebels, who was newly come from Worcester in pursuit of the King, and who, being informed that His Majesty had been at Whitladies, and that Hum∣phrey was a near Neighbour to the place, examined him strictly, and laid before him, as well the penalty for concealing
the King, which was death without mercy; as the reward for discovering him, which should be one thousand pounds certain pay. But neither fear of punishment, nor hope of reward, was able to tempt Humphrey into any dis∣loyalty; He pleaded ignorance, and was dismissed; And on Saturday night re∣lated to His Majesty and the Loyal Colo∣nel at Boscobel, what had passed betwixt him and the Rebel Colonel at Shefnal. This night the Good-wife (whom His Majesty was pleased to call My dame Joan) provided some chickens for His Majesties supper, (a dainty He had not lately been acquainted with) and a lit∣tle Pallet was put into the secret place for His Majesty to rest in; some of the Brothers being continually upon duty, watching the Avenues of the house and the Road-way, to prevent the danger of a surprise. After supper Col. Carlis asked His Majesty what meat He would please to have provided for the morrow, being Sunday, His Majesty desired some Mut∣ton, if it might be had; but it was thought dangerous for William to go to
any market to buy it; since his Neigh∣bours all knew he did not use to buy such for his own dyet, and so it might be∣get a suspicion of his having strangers at his house; But the Colonel found ano∣ther expedient to satisfie His Majesties desires; Early on Sunday morning he repairs to Mr. William Stauntons sheep∣coat, who rented some of the Demeans of Boscobel, here he chose one of the best sheep, sticks him with his dagger, then sends William for the Mutton, who brings him home on his back. On Sunday morning (September the seventh) His Majesty got up early (his dormitory being none of the best nor his bed the easiest) and, near the secret place where he lay, had the conveni∣ence of a Gallery to walk in, where be was observed to spend some time in His Ps. 116. I have found tri∣bulation and sor∣row, and I called on the name of our Lord. Devotions, and where he had the ad∣vantage of a window, which surveyed the road from Tong to Brewood; Soon after His Majesty coming down into the Parlor, his nose fell a bleeding, which put his poor faithful servants into a great fright, but his Majesty was pleas∣ed soon to remove it, by telling them,
It often did so. As soon as the Mutton was cold, William cut it up and brought a Leg of it into the Parlor; His Majesty called for a Knife and a Trencher, and cut some of it into Collops and pricked them with the Knifes point, then called for a Frying-pan and butter, and fryed the Collops himself, of which he eat hear∣tily; Col. Carlis the while being but Under-cook, (and that honour enough too) made the fire, and turned the Collops in the Pan. When the Colonel afterwards attend∣ed His Majesty in France, His Majesty calling to remembrance this passage a∣mong others, was pleased merrily to propose it, as a Problematical Question; Whether Himself or the Col. were the Master-Cook at Boscobel; and the su∣premacy was of right adjudged to His Majesty. All this while the other Brothers of the Penderels were in their several sta∣tions, either scouting abroad to learn In∣telligence, or upon some other service; but it so pleased God, that, though the Souldiers had some Intelligence of
His Majesties having been at Whitela∣dies, and none that he was gone thence, yet this house (which proved a happy sanctuary for His Majesty in this sad Ex∣igent) had not at all been searched du∣ring His Majesties aboad there, though that had several times; this perhaps the rather escaping, because the Neigh∣bours could truly inform, none but poor servants lived here. His Majesty spent some part of this Lords-day in Reading in a pretty Arbour in Boscobel garden, which grew upon a Mount, and wherein there was a stone Table and Seats about it; and commended the place for its retired∣ness. And having understood by John Pen∣derel, that the Lord Wilmot was at Mr. Whitgreaves house, (for John knew not of his remove to Bentley) His Majesty was desirous to let my Lord hear of Him, and that He intended to come to Mosely that night. To this end John was sent on Sunday morning to Moseley; But, finding my Lord removed thence, was much trou∣bled, and then acquainted Mr. Whit∣greave
and Mr. Huddleston, that His Majesty was returned to Boscobel, and the disaccommodation He had there; whereupon they both resolve to go with John to Bentley, where having gained him an access to my Lord, his Lordship designed to attend the King that night at Moseley, and desired Mr. Whitgreave to meet his Lordship at a place appointed about 12. of the Clock, and Mr. Huddleston to nominate a place where he would attend His Majesty a∣bout one of the clock, the same night. Upon this Intelligence my Lord made stay of Mrs. Jane Lane's journey to Bristol, till His Majesties pleasure was known. John Penderel returned to Boscobel in the afternoon with intimation of this de∣signed meeting with my Lord at Mose∣ley, that night, and the place which was appointed by Mr. Huddleston, where His Majesty should be expect∣ed. But His Majesty, having not reco∣vered his late foot journey to Madeley, was not able without a horse, to per∣form this to Moseley, which was about five miles distant from Boscobel, and near the mid-way from thence to Bentley.
It was therefore concluded, that His Majesty should ride upon Humphrey Pen∣derels Mill-horse (for Humphrey was the Miller of Whiteladies Mill,) The horse was taken up from Grass, and accou∣tred, not with rich trappings or furni∣ture, befitting so great a King, but with a pittiful old Saddle and a worse Bridle. When His Majesty was ready to take horse, Col. Carlis humbly took leave of Him, being so well known in the Coun∣try that his attendance upon His Ma∣jesty would in all probability have proved rather a disservice than other∣wise; however his hearty prayers were not wanting for His Majesties preser∣vation. Thus then His Majesty was mounted, and thus he rode towards Moseley, at∣tended by all the honest brothers, Wil∣liam, John, Richard, Humphrey, and George Penderel, and Francis Yates, each of these took a Bill or Pike staff on his back, and some of them had Pistols in their pockets; two marched before, one on each side His Majesties horse, and two came behind aloof off, their design
being this, that in case they should have been questioned or encountered but by five or six Troopers or such like small Party, they would have shewed their valor in defending, as well as they had done their fidelity in otherwise serving His Majesty: And though it was near Midnight, yet they conducted His Ma∣jesty through by-ways, for better Se∣curity. After some experience had of the horse, His Majesty complained, It was the heaviest Dull Jade he ever rode on; To which Humphrey (the owner of him) Answered (beyond the usual capacity of a Miller,) My Liege! Can you blame the horse to go heavily, when he has the weight of three Kingdoms on his back? When His Majesty came to Penford Mill, within two miles of Mr. Whit∣greaves house, His Guides desired Him to alight and goe on foot the rest of the way, for more security, the Foot-way being the more secure and the nearer, and at last they arrived at the place ap∣pointed by Mr. Huddleston, (which was a little grove of trees in a Close of Mr. Whitgreaves called the Pit-leasow,)
in order to his Majesties being private∣ly conveyed into Mr. Whitgreaves house; William, Humphrey and George, return∣ed with the horse, the other three at∣tended His Majesty to the House; but His Majesty, being gone a little way, had forgot (it seems) to bid Farewel to William and the rest, who were going back, so He called to them and said, My troubles make me forget my self, I thank you all, and gave them his hand to kiss. The Lord Wilmot, in pursuance of his own appointment; came to the meeting-place precisely at his hour, where Mr. Whitgreave received him and conveyed him to his old chamber; but hearing nothing of the King at his prefixed time, gave occasion to suspect ome misfortune might have befaln him, though the night was very dark and ainy, which might possibly be the oc∣casion of so long stay; Mr. Whitgreave therefore leaves my Lord in his cham∣ber, and goes to Pit-leasow, where Mr. Huddleston attended His Majesties coming, and about two hours after the time appointed His Majesty came,
whom Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Hud∣dleston conveyed, with much satisfa∣ction, into the house to my Lord, who expected him with great sollicitude, and presently kneeled down and im∣braced His Majesties knees, who kiss∣ed my Lord on the cheek, and asked him earnestly, What is become of Buc∣kingham, Cleveland, and others? To which my Lord could give little satis∣faction, but hoped they were in safety. My Lord soon after (addressing him∣self to Mr. Whitgreave, and Mr. Hud∣dleston,) said, though I have concealed my friends name all this while, now I must tell you, this is my Master, your Master, and the Master of us all; not knowing that they understood it wa King; Whereupon His Majesty was pleas∣ed to give his hand to Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Huddleston to kiss, and told them he had received such an Account from my Lord Wilmot of their fidelity, tha he should never forget it; and present¦ly asked Mr. Whitgreave, Where is yo secret place? which being shewed Hi Majesty, He was well pleased there∣with, and returning into my Lord
chamber, sate down on the bed-side, where his nose fell a bleeding; and then pulled out of His pocket a handker∣cher, suitable to the rest of his Appa∣rel, both coarse and dirty. His Majesties Attire, as was before ob∣served in part, was then a leather-doublet, with pewter buttons, a pair of old green breeches and a Jump-coat (as the Country calls it) of the same green, a pair of his own stockens with the tops cut off, because embroydered, and a pair of stirrop stockens which were lent him at Madeley, a pair of old shooes, cut and slashed to give ease to his feet, an old gray, greazy hat with∣out a lyning, a noggen shirt, of the coarsest linnen, His face and hands made of a reechy complexion, by the help of the Walnut-tree leaves. Mr. Huddleston, observing the coars∣ness of His Majesties shirt to dis-ease im much and hinder his rest, asked my Lord, if the King would be pleased to change his shirt, which His Majesty condescended unto, and presently put off his coarse shirt and put on a flaxen one of Mr. Huddleston's, who pulled off
His Majesties shooes and stockens, and put him on fresh stockens and dryed his Feet, where he found some body had innocently, but indiscreetly applyed white paper, which, with going on foot from the place where His Majesty alighted to the house, was rolled be∣twixt his stockens and his skin, and ser∣ved to increase rather than asswage the soreness of his feet. Mr. Whitgreave had by this time brought up some Bisket and a Bottle of Sack, His Majsty eat of the one, and drank a good glass of the other; and, being thus refreshed, was pleased to say cheerfully, I am now ready for ano∣ther March; And if it shall please God once more to place me in the head of bu eight or ten thousand good men,  of one mind, and resolved to fight, I shall not doub to drive these Rogues out of my Kingdoms. It was now break of the day on Mon∣day morning the eighth of September▪ and His Majesty was desirous to tak some rest: To which purpose a Pale was carried into one of the secret pla∣ces, where His Majesty lay down, bu rested not so well as his host desired
for the place was close and inconveni∣ent, and they durst not adventure to put him into any bed in an open Cham∣ber, for fear of a surprise by the Rebels. After some rest taken in the hole, His Majesty got up, and was pleased to take notice of, and salute Mr. Whit∣greaves Mother, and (having his place of retreat still ready) sate between whiles in a Closet over the Porch; where he might see those that passed the road by the house. Before the Lord Wilmot betook him∣self to his Dormitory, he conferred with Mr. Whitgreave, and advised, that him∣self or Mr. Huddleston would be alwayes vigilant about the house, and give no∣tice if any Souldiers came, and (sayes this noble Lord) If it should so fall out that the Rebels have intelligence of your harbouring any of the Kings Party, and should therefore put you to any torture for confession, be sure you discover me first, which may haply in such case satisfie them, and preserve the King. This was the expression and care of a loyal Subject, worthy eternal memory. On Munday His Majesty and my Lord
resolved to dispatch John Penderel to Col. Lane at Bentley, with direction for the Colonel to send my Lords hor∣ses for him that night about midnight, and to expect him at the usual place: My Lord accordingly goes to Bentley again, to make way for His Majesties recep∣tion there, pursuant to a resolution taken up by His Majesty to go West∣ward, under the protection of Mrs. Jane Lanes Pass; it being most proba∣ble, that the Rebels wholly pursued His Majesty Northwards, and would not at all suspect him gone into the West. This Munday after noon Mr. Whit∣greave had notice that some Souldiers were in the neighborhood, intending to apprehend him, upon information that he had been at Worcester Fight: The King was then laid down upon Mr. Huddlestons bed, but Mr. Whitgreave presently secures his Royal Guest in the secret place, and my Lord also, leaves open all the Chamber doors, and goes boldly down to the Souldiers, assuring them (as his Neighbours also testified) that he not been from home in a fort∣night
then last past; with which asseve∣ration the Souldiers were satisfied, and came not up stairs at all. In this interval the Rebels had taken a Cornet in Cheshire, who come in His Ma∣jesties Troop to Whiteladies, and either by menaces or some other way, had ex∣torted this confession from him concer∣ning the King, (whom these bold Bloud∣hounds sought with all possible diligence) that he came in company with His Maje∣sty to Whiteladies, where the Rebels had no small hope to find him; whereupon they posted thither without ever draw∣ing bit, almost kill'd their horses, and brought their faint-hearted Prisoners with them. Being come to Whiteladies, on Tuesday, they called for Mr. George Giffard, who lived in an appartiment of the house, pre∣sent a Pistol to his breast, and bad him confess where the King was, or he should presently die; Mr. Giffard was too loy∣al, and too much a Gentleman to be fright∣ed into any infidelity, resolutely denies the knowing any more, but that divers Cavaliers came thither on Wednesday night, eat up their provision and departed, and
that he was as ignorant who they were as whence they came, or whither they went, and beg'd, if he must dye, that they would first give him leave to say a few prayers. One of these Villains answered, If you can tell us no news of the King, you shall say no prayers: But his discreet answer did somewhat asswage the fury of their Leader. They used the like threats and violence (mingled notwithstanding with high promises of reward) to Mrs. Anne Andrew (to whose custody some of the Kings Cloaths, when He first took upon him the disguise were committed) who (like a true Virago) faithfully sustain'd the one, and loyally refus'd the other, which put the Rebels into such a fury, that they searched every corner of the house, broke down much of the Wainscoat, and at last beat the Intelligencer severely, for mak∣ing them lose their labours. During this Tuesday in my Lord Wil∣mots absence, His Majesty was for the most part attended by Mr. Huddleston, Mr. Whitegrave being much abroad in the Neighbourhood, and Mrs Whitegrave be∣low stairs, both inquisitive after news, and the motions of the Souldiery, in or∣der
to the preservation of their Royal Guest; the old Gentle woman was this day old by a Country-man, who came to her house, that he heard the King, upon his retreat had beaten His Enemies at War∣rington-bridg, and that there were three Kings come in to his assistance; which sto∣ry she related to His Majesty for diver∣tisement, Who smiling, answered, Surely they are the three Kings of Colen come down from heaven, for I can imagine none else. The same day His Majesty out of the Closet window, espy'd two Souldiers, who pass'd by the gate in the Road, and told Mr. Huddleston, he knew one of them to be a Highlander, and of his own Regi∣ment; who little thought his King and Colonel to be so near. And His Majesty for entertainment of the time was pleas'd to discourse with Mr. Huddleston the particulars of the Bat∣tle of Worchester (the same in substance with what is before related) And by some words which His Majesty let fall, it might easily be collected that His Coun∣sels had been too often sooner discovered to the Rebels, than executed by His loy∣al Subjects.
Mr. Huddlestone had under his charge young Sir John Preston, Mr. Thomas Play and Mr. Frances Reynolds, and on thi Tuesday in the morning (the better to con∣ceal His Majesties being in the house, and excuse his own more than usual long stay above stairs) pretended himself to be in∣disposed and afraid of the Souldiers, and therefore set his Scholars at several Gar∣ret windows, that survey'd the roads, to watch and give notice when they saw any troopers coming; This service the youths perform'd very diligently all day and at night when they were at Supper Sir John call'd upon his Companions, and said (more truly than he imagin'd) Come Lads let us eat lustily, for we have been upon the life-guard to day. This very day (9 Septemb.) the Rebels at Westminster (in further pursuance o their bloudy designs) set forth a Procla∣mation, for the discovery and apprehend∣ing of Charles Stuart (for so their frontless impudence usually styl'd His Sacred Maje∣sty) His Adherents and Abettors, with promise of 1000 l. Reward to whomso∣ever should apprehend Him, (so vile  price they set upon so inestimable a Jew∣el.)
And besides gave strict command to all, Officers of Port-Towns, that they should permit no person to pass beyond Sea, without special Licence. And Saul ought David every day, but God delivered 1 Sam. 23. 14. him not into his hands. On Tuesday night between 12 and one of the Clock, The Lord Wilmot sent Colonel Lane to attend His Majesty to Bentley, Mr. Whitgreave meets the Colonel at the place appointed, and brings him to the corner of his Orchard, where the Colo∣nel thought fit to stay whil'st Mr. Whit∣greave goes in and acquaints the King that he was come: Wherupon His Majesty took his leave of Mrs. Whitgreave, saluted her and gave her many thanks for his enter∣tainment, but was pleas'd to be more par∣ticular with Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Hud∣dleston, not only by giving them thanks, but by telling them, he was very sensi∣ble of the dangers they might incur by entertaining Him, if it should chance to be discover'd to the Rebels; Therefore His Majesty advis'd them to be very care∣ful of themselves, and gave them directi∣on to repair to a Merchant in London, who should have order to furnish them
with moneys and means of conveyance beyond Sea, if they thought fit. However His Majesty concluded, that if it should please God ever to restore Him to the Government of His Dominions, He should not be unmindful of their civilities and fidelity to him. Thus grateful was this Excellent King, for even that which was every good Subjects duty, and thus solli∣citous (in the midst of His own dangers) for their Security. After His Majesty had vouchsaf'd these gracious expressions to Mr. Whitegrave and Mr. Huddleston, they told His Majesty Al the service they could now do Him, was to pray heartily to Almighty God for His safety and preservation, and then kneeling down, His Majesty gave them His hand to kiss, and so wen down stairs with them into the Or∣chard, where Mr Whitgreave both humbly and faithfully deliver'd his great Charg into Col. Lanes hands, telling the Colone who the Person was he there presented to him. The night was both dark and cold, and His Majesties cloathing thin, therefore Mr. Huddleston humbly offer'd His Maje∣sty
a Cloak, which He was pleased to ac∣cept, and wore to Bentley, from whence Mr. Huddleston afterward received it. As soon as Mr. Whitgreave and Mr. Hud∣dleston heard His Majesty was not only got safe to Bentley but march'd securely from thence, they began to reflect upon His ad∣vice, &, lest any discovery should be made of what had been acted at Moseley, they both absented themselves from home; The one went to London, the other to a friends house in Warwickshire, where they liv'd privately till such time as they heard His Majesty was safely arriv'd in France, and that no part of the aforesaid transactions at Moseley had been discover'd to the Re∣bels, and then return'd home. This Mr. Whitgreave is descended of the ancient family of the Whitgreaves of Burton in the County of Stafford, and was first a Cornet, afterwards Lieutenant to Captain Thomas Giffard, in the first War for His late Majesty. Mr. John Huddleston is a younger bro∣ther of the renowned Family of the house of Hutten-John in the County of Cumber∣land, and was a Gentleman voluntier in His late Majestys service first under Sir
John Preston the Elder, till Sir John was render'd unserviceable by the desperate wounds he received in that service and af∣ter under Colonel Ralph Pudsey at New∣ark. His Majesty, being safely convey'd to Bentley by Colonel Lane, staid there but a short time, took the opportunity of Mris Janes Pass, and rode before her to Bri∣stow, the Lord Wilmot attending, by ano∣ther way, at a distance. In all which Jour∣ney Mris. Lane performed the part of a most faithful and prudent Servant to His Majesty, shewing her observance, when a∣ny opportunity would allow it, and at other times acting her part in the disguise with much discretion. But His Majesties particular Gists to Bristow and to the houses of several Loy∣al Subjects, both in Somersetshire, Dorset∣shire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and so to Brig∣hempston in Sussex where he on the 15. of October 1651. took shipping and landed securely in France the next morning, and the several accidents, hardships and en∣counters, in all that Journey, must be the admired Subject of the Second part of this History.
The very next day, after His Majesty eft Boscobel, being Monday the eighth of September, two parties of Rebels came thither, the one being part of the County Troop, who searched the house with some civility; The other, (Cap∣ain Broadwayes men) did it with more everity, eat up their little Store of pro∣vision, plundered the house of what was portable, and one of them present∣ed a pistol to William Penderel, and much frighted My Dame Joan; yet both Parties returned, as ignorant as hey came, of that intelligence they so greedily sought after. This danger being over, honest Wil∣iam began to think of making satisfacti∣on for the fat Mutton, and accordingly endered Mr. Staunton its worth in mo∣ney; but Staunton, understanding the Sheep was killed for the relief of some onest Cavaliers, who had been shel∣ered at Boscobel, refused to take the money, but wished, much good it might do them. These Penderels were of honest Pa∣entage, but mean degree, six brothers born at Hobbal Grange in the Parish of
Tong and County of Salop; William, John, Richard, Humphry, Thomas, and George; John, Thomas and George▪ were Souldiers in the first War for Hi late Majesty, Thomas was slain at Sto fight, William, as you have heard, wa a servant at Boscobel, Humphry a Miller and Richard rented part of Hobba Grange. His Majesty had not been long gone from Boscobel, but Colonel Carlis sen William Penderel to Mr. Humphry Iron∣monger, his old friend, at Wolverhamp∣ton; who not only procured him a Pas from some of the Rebel-Commanders in a disguised name to go to London, bu furnished him with money for his Jour∣ney, by means whereof he got safe thither, and from thence into Holland▪ where he brought the first happy new of His Majesties safety to His Royal Sister▪ the Princess of Orange. This Colonel William Carlis was bo at Brom-hall in Staffordshire, within two miles of Boscobel, of good Parentage, is  Person of approved valor, and was enga∣ged all along in the first War for His lat Majesty, of happy memory; and since Hi
Death has been no less active for His Ma∣esty that now is; for which, and his particu∣ar service and fidelity before mentioned, His Majesty has been pleased by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England o give him, by the name of William CARLOS (which in Spanish signifies Charles) this very honorable Coat of Arms, in perpetuam rei memoriam, as 'tis expressed in the Letters Patents.
blazon or coat of arms SUBDITUS FIDEIIS REGIS & REGNI SALUS He bears upon an Oak proper in a Field Or a Fess Gules, charged with three Regal Crowns of the se∣cond; by the name of Carlos. And for his Crest  Civie Crown, or Oaken Garland with a Sword and Scepter crossed through it Saltier-wise.
The Oak is now properly call'd The oyal Oak of Boscobel, nor will it lose at name whilst it continues a Tree, r that Tree a memory, whilst we have  Inn left in England; since the Royal ake is now become a frequent sign both London, and all the chief Cities of is Kingdom. And since His Majesties ppy Restauration, that these mysteries ve been revealed, hundreds of peo∣e for many miles round, have flock'd  see the Famous BOSCOBEL, which (as ou have heard) had once the honour to e the Palace of His Sacred Majesty, but iefly to behold the Royal Oak, which as been deprived of all its young oughs by the numerous visiters of it, ho keep them in memory of His Ma∣sties happy preservation; Insomuch that r. Fitzherbert the Proprietor, has been rced in a due season of the year, to crop art of it, for its preservation, and has tely been at the charge to fence it a∣out with a high Fale, the better to trans∣it the happy memory of it to posteri∣. This Boscobel House has yet been a third me fortunate; for after Sir George Booths
forces were routed in Cheshire in Aug. 1959. the Lord Brereton, who was e¦gaged with him, took Sanctuary the for some time, and was preserved. When His Majesty was thus happi convey'd away by Colonel Lane and Sister, the Rebels had an intimation th some of the Brothers were instrument in His preservation; so that, besides t temptations Humphry overcame at Sh¦nal, William Penderel was twice questio¦ed at Shrewsbury on the same account  Captain Fox and one Lluellin a Sequ¦strator, and Richard was much threa¦ned by a peevish Neighbour at Whitel¦dies; but neither threats nor temptatio were able to batter the Fort of their Lo¦alties. After this unhappy Defeat of His M¦jesties Army at Worcester, Good God! i what strange canting language did th Fanaticks communicate their exultatio to one another; particularly in a Lett (hypocritically pretended to be writte from the Church of Christ at Wrexham, a printed in the Diurnal, Nov. 10. 1651▪ there is this malignant expression, Chri has revealed his own Arm, and broke t
rm of the Mighty once and again, and now stly at Worcester; so that we conclude (in zekiels phrase) there will be found no roller  bind the late Kings Arm to hold a Sword gain, &c. And that you may know who ese false Prophets were, the Letter was us Subscribed; Daniel Lloyd. Mor. Lloyd. John rown. Edw. Taylor. An. Maddokes. Dav. aurice. Men who measur'd Causes by hat Success, which fell out according  their evil desires, not considering that od intended, in his own good time, To stablish the Kings Throne with Justice. Prov. 25. After the King had entred into the ingdom, and returned to his own Land, Dan. 1. 9. e five Brothers attended Him at White∣all, on Wednesday the 13. of June 1660. hen His Majesty was pleased to own eir faithful service, and graciously dis∣isled them with a Princely Reward. And soon after Mr. Huddleston and r. Whitgreave made their humble Ad∣resses to His Majesty, from whom they kewise received a gracious acknowledg∣ent of their service and fidelity to Him  Moseley; and this in so high a degree f gratitude, and with such a condescend∣ing
frame of spirit, not at all puff'd u with prosperity, as cannot be parallel'd i the best of Kings. Here let us all with glad and thankfu hearts humbly contemplate the admira¦ble Providence of Almighty God, wh contrived such wonderful wayes, an made use of such mean Instruments fo preservation of so great a Person. Let  delight to reflect minutely on every par¦ticular, and especially on such as mo approach to Miracle; let us sum up th number of those, who were privy to thi first and principal part of His Majestie disguise and concealment; Mr. Giffard the five Penderels, their Mother, and thre of their Wives, Colonel Carlos, Franci Yates and his Wife, divers of the Inhabi¦tants of Whiteladies (which then held fiv several Families) Mr. Woolf, his Wife, So▪ Daughter and Maid, Mr. Whitgreave an his Mother, Mr. Huddleston, Colonel La and his Sister; and then consider whe¦ther it were not indeed a Miracle, that s many men, and (which is far more) s many women should faithfully conceal s important and unusual a Secret; and thi notwithstanding the temptations an
promises of reward on the one hand, the anger and menaces of punishment on he other. To which I shall add but this one cir∣umstance, that it was perform'd by per∣ons, for the most part, of that Religion hich has long suffer'd under an imputa∣ion (laid on them by some mistaken Ze∣ots) of disloyalty to their Soveraign. And now, on my bended knees, let me oyfully congratulate His restored Maje∣ty, and humbly offer Him this short and earty wish, O KING LIVE FOR Dan. 3. 10. EVER. And not content with my own nconsiderable Prayers, with all my Soul  beg the universal assistance of others, earnestly inviting all the Nation, even all the three Nations, to sing Te Deum Laudamus, 2 Sam. 19. 14. And he bow'd the hearts of all the people, as the heart of one man; So that they sent this word unto the King, Re∣turn thou and all thy Servants. FINIS.
BOSCOBEL: OR THE HISTORY Of His Sacred MAJESTIES Most Miraculous Preservation After the Battel of Worcester, 3 Sept. 1651. The Second Part. Psal. 19. 15. shall call upon me, and I will answer Him; I will be with Him in trouble, I will deliver Him and will honour Him. LONDON nted by M. Clark, and are to be sold by H. Brome and C. Harper, at their Shops in S. Pauls Churchyard and Fleetstreet. 1681.
PREFACE. THe First Part of this Miracu∣lous History I long since pub∣lished, having the means to be well in∣form'd in all circumstances relating to it; The Scene (whereon those great Actions were performed) being my na∣tive Comntrey, and many of the Actors my particular Friends. I did not then intend to have proceeded farther, presuming some of those worthy Persons of the West (who were the happy Instruments in this Second Part) would have given us that so much desired sup∣plement; The rather since the publicati∣on of the wonderful series of this great Work, wherein the hand of God so mi∣raculously
appeared, in preservation of Him, whom the Lord hath chosen, 1 Sam. 10. 24. wust needs open the eyes and convert the hearts of the most disloyal. But finding, in all this time, nothing done, and the world more greedy of it, than ever young Ladies were to read the Con∣clusion of an amorous strange Romance, after they had left the darling Lover plunged into some dire misfortune; I have thus endeavoured to compleat the Hi∣story. Cheifly encourag'd hereunto, by an Express from Lisbon, wherein 'tis cer∣tified, that (besides the translation of the First Part of Boscobel into French) Mr. Peter Giffard of Whiteladies has lately made it speake Portuguese, and presented it to the Infanta, our most ex∣cellent Queen, who was pleased to accept it with Grace, and peruse it with Passion; intimating her Royal desire to see the particulars, how the hand of Providence
bad led the great Monarch of her heart out of the treacherous snares of so many Rebels. In this, I dare not undertake to deliver so many particulars, as in the former; for though the time of His Majesties stay in those Western parts was longer, yet the places were more remote, and my Lord Wilmot the principal Agent) dead: But I will again confidently promise to write nothing but truth, as near as a se∣vere scrutiny can inform me. And perhaps a less exactness in Cir∣cumstantials will better please some, who (as I have heard) object against my former endeavours on this Royal Subject as too minutely written and particulars set down of too mean a concern, for which I have yet the example of that renowned Historian De Bello Belgico. Famian Strada to protect me, who wri∣ting of the Emperor Charles the fifth, mentions what meat he fed on such a day, what cloaths he wore another time, and
gives this reason; That it pleases, to know every thing that Princes do: Especially when by a chain of Providences, whose every Link seems small and weak in its single self, so great a Blessing will, at last, be drawn in among us. 1 Sam. 23. 17. That Part of this unparallel'd Rela∣tion of a King, which here I undertake to deliver, may fitly I think be called The second Stage of the Royal Progress; wherein, as I am sure every good subject will be astonished to read the hardships and difficulties his Majesty encountred in this long and perillous journey; so will they be even overjoy'd to find Him at last (by the conduct of Heaven) brought safe to Paris, where my humble endea∣vours leave Him, thus comforted by the Prophet, Fear not, for the hand of Saul shall not find Thee, and Thou shalt be King over Israel. T. B.
THE HISTORY Of His SACRED MAJESTIES Most Miraculous Preservati∣on after the BATTLE of WORCESTER. The Second Stage of the Royal Progress. HE that well considers the ad∣mirable events, particula∣riz'd in the First Part of this History of His Majesties most Miraculous Preserva∣tion, will be apt to think His Evil Genius had almost rackt its invention to find out
hardships and perils beyond humane ima∣gination, and that his Good Angel had been even tired out with contriving suitable means for his deliverance; yet if you please, (after you have sufficiently won∣dred and blessed God for the preserva∣tions you read there) proceed and ad∣mire the strange stupendious passages you shall find here; which, when you have done with just and due attention, I can∣not doubt but your thoughts will easily raise themselves into some holy extasie, and growing warm with often repeating their own reflections, break forth at last, and joyn your exclamations, with all the true and hearty Adorers of the divine Providence, Thou art great O Lord, and dost wonder∣full Psal. 86. 10. things; Thou art God alone. I shall not need, I hope, to bespeak my Readers patience for any long Intro∣duction; since all the Complement I in∣tend, is humbly to kiss the pen and pa∣per, which have the honour to be Ser∣vants of this Royal Subject, and without farther Ceremony begin. Colonel John Lane having (as't has been related) safely conveyed his Maje∣sty
from Mosely to his own house at Bent∣ey in Staffordshire on tuesday night the 9th of September 1651. the Lord Wilmot was there ready to receive Him, and af∣er His Majesty had eaten and conferred with my Lord and the Colonel of his in∣ended journey towards Bristol the very next morning, He went to bed, though his rest was not like to be long; for at he very break of the day on Wednesday morning the Colonel called up His Ma∣esty and brought him a new suit and Cloak which he had provided for him of Country grey cloth, as neer as could be contrived like the holy-day suit of a Far∣mers Son, which was thought fittest to carry on the disguise; Here His Majesty quitted his Leather Doublet and Green Breeches, for this new Grey Suit; and for∣sook his former name Will. Jones for that of Will. Jackson. Thus then was the royal Journey de∣signed, the King, as a tenants Son (a qua∣ity far more convenient for their inten∣ion, than that of a direct Servant) was ordered to ride before Mrs. Jane Lane, as her Attendant, Mr. Henry Lassels (who was Kinsman and had been Cornet to the
Colonel in the late warrs) to ride single and Mr. John Petre of Horton in Bucking¦hamshire and his Wife, the Colonels Si¦ster, who were then accidentally at Bent¦ley, being bound homeward, to ride i the same Company; Mr Petre and hi Wife little suspecting Will. Jackson, their fellow Travailer, to be the Monark o Great Britain. His Majesty, thus refreshed and thus ac¦coutr'd with all necessaries for a journey in the designed equipage, after he had taken leave of my Lord Wilmot and a¦greed on their meeting within few dayes after at Mr. George Nortons house at Leigh near Bristol, the Colonel convey'd him a back way into the Stable, where he fit∣ted His Stirrups, and gave Him some In∣structions for better acting the part of Will. Jackson, mounted Him on a good double Gelding, and directed Him to come to the Gate of the House, which He punctually performed, with his Hat un∣der his Arm. By this time it was twilight, and old Mrs. Lane (who knew nothing of this Great Secret) would needs see her Be∣loved Daughter take horse, which whilst
she was intending, the Colonel said to the King, Will. thou must give my Sister thy hand; But His Majesty, (unacquainted with such little Offices) Offred his hand he contrary way, which the old Gentle∣woman taking notice of, laughed, and sk'd the Colonel her Son, what goodly Horseman her Daughter had got to ride be∣fore her? Mr. Petre and his wife, and Mr. Las∣sels being also mounted, the whole Com∣pany took their journey under the pro∣ection of the King of Kings) towards Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire; And oon after they were gone from Bentley, he Lord Wilmot, Colonel Lane, and Robert Swan my Lords Servant, took Horse, with a Hawk, and Spaniels with them for  disguise, intending to go that night to Sir Clement Fishers house at Packington in Warwickshire; where the Colonel knew hey should be both as welcome as Gene∣osity, and as secure as Fidelity could make hem. When the King and His small Retinue rived near Wotton, within four miles of Stratford, they espy'ed a Troop of Rebels, baiting (as they conceived) al∣most
a mile before them in the very Road, which caused a Council to be held among them, whereein Mr. Petre presided, and he would by no means go on, for fear of losing his Horse, or some other Detri∣ment; so that they wheeld about a more indirect way, and at Stratford (where they were of necessity to passe the River Avon) met the same or another Troop in a narrow passage, who very fairly opened to the right and left, and made way for the Travellers to march through them. That night (according to designment) Mrs. Lane and her Company took up their Quarters at Mr. Tomb's house, a Longmarston, some tree miles West o Stratford, with whom she was well ac¦quainted; here Will. Jackson being in th Kitchin, in pursuance of his disguise, an the Cook Maid busie in providing sup∣per for her Masters Friends, she desire him to wind up the Jack; Will. Jackson wa obedient, and attempted it, but hit no the right way, which made the Maid, i some passion ask, What Country-man are yo that you know not how to wind up a Jack▪ Will. Jackson answered very satisfactorily I am a poor Tenants son of Colonel La
in Staffordshire, we seldom have roast-meat, but when we have, we don't make use of a Jack; which in some measure asswaged the Maids indignation. The same night my Lord, with the Colonel arrived safely at Sir Clement Fish∣ers house at Packington, where they found a welcome suitable to the Noblenesse of his mind, and a security answerable to the faithfulnesse of his heart. Next morning my Lord thought fit to dispatch the Colonel to London, to procure, if possible, a Passe for the King, by the name of William Jackson, to go into France, and to bring it himself or send it (as opportunity should be offered) to Mr. Norton's house, where my Lord (as you have heard) was designed to at∣tend His Majesty. On Thursday morning (11th. of Sep∣temb.) the King with Mrs. Lane, and Mr. Lassels rose early, and after Mrs. Lane had taken leave both of Mr. Petre and his Wife (whose way lay more South) and of Mr Tombs the Master of the house, they took horse, and wtihout any con∣siderable accident, rode by Camden, and arrived that night at an Inn in Cirencester,
in Gloucestershire, distant about twenty four miles from Long-marstons. After Supper a good bed was provided for Mr. Lassels, and a truckle-bed for Will. Jack∣son, in the same (Chamber; but Mr. Las∣sels after the Chamberlain had left them) laid His Majestie in the best bed, and himself in the other, and used the like due observance, when any opportuni∣ty would allow it. The next day, being Friday, the Roy∣al Traveller, with his Attendants, left Cirencester, and by the way of Sudbury rode to and through the City of Bristol, (wherein they had once lost their way, till inquiry better informed them) and arrived that evening at Mr. Norton's house at Leigh, some three miles from Bristol, and about thirty from Cirencester, which was the desired end of this perillous journey. At this place His Majesty still conti∣nued under the notion of one of Colo∣nel Lanes Tenants sons; and, by a pre∣settled contrivance with Mrs. Lane, feign∣ed himself sick of an Ague, under colour whereof she procured Him the better Chamber and Accommodation without any suspition, and still took occasion from
thence with all possible care, and obser∣ance to send the sick person some of the est meat from Mr. Nortons Table; and Mrs. Nortons Maid, Margaret Rider, (who was ommanded to be his Nurse-keeper, and elieved Him sick indeed) made William a arduus-posset, & was very carefull of Him; or was His Majesty at all known or suspe∣ted here, either by Mr. Norton or his Lady, rom whose knowledge yet, he was not oncealed out of any the least distrust of heir Fidelity, (for his whole Domini∣ons yeilded not more faithful Subjects) ut because such knowledge might haply t unawares have drawn a greater re∣pect and observance from them, than hat Exigent would safely admit of. Under the disguise of this Ague His Majestie for the most part kept his Cham∣er, during his stay at Leigh; yet, being omewhat wearied with that kind of Im∣prisonment, one day (when his Ague might be imagined to be in the intermissi∣on) he walk't down to a place where the Young men played at a game of Ball cal∣led Fives, where His Majestie was askt by one of the Gamesters, if he could play, and would take his part at that Game;
He pleaded unskilfulnesse and modestly refused. But behold an unexpected acciden here fell out, which put His Majesty and Mrs. Lane into some apprehension of the danger of a discovery, Mr. Norton's But∣ler (whose name was John Pope) had ser∣ved a Courtier some years before the War, and his late Majestie in the War, un∣der Colonel Bagot at Litchfield, and by that means had the Physiognomy of the King (then Prince of Wales) so much im∣printed in his memory, that (though His Majestie was in all points most accurately disguised) yet the Butler knew him, and communicated his knowledge to Mrs. Lane, who at first absolutely denyed him to be the King, but after, upon confe∣rence and advise had with His Majesty, it was thought best to acknowledge it to the Butler, and, by the bonds of Allegi∣ance, conjure him to secrecy, who there∣upon kissed the Kings hand, and proved perfectly honest. On Saturday night (13th. of September) the Lord Wilmot arrived at a village near Leigh where he lay, but came every day to visit Will Jackson and Mrs. Lane, as per∣sons
of his acquaintance; and so had the opportunity to attend and consult with His Majestie unsuspected, during their stay at Leigh. Soon after, upon serious advise had with my Lord, it was resolved by His Ma∣jestie to go to Trent, the house of Co∣lonel Frances Windham, (of whose Fide∣lity His Majesty had ample assurance) which lies in Somersetshire, but bor∣dring on the very skirts of Dorsetshire near Sherburn; and therefore was judged to be conveniently seated in the way to∣wards Lime and other Port Tows, where His Majesty might probably take Shipping for France. In pursuance of this Resolve, the Lord Wilmot (as His Majesties Harbinger,) rode to Trent on Munday, to make way for His more private reception there; and on Tuesday morning (Sept. 16.) His MA∣JESTIES Ague being then (as was pre∣tended) in the Recess, He repaired to the Stable, and there gave Order for mak∣ing ready the Horses, and then it was sig∣nified from Mrs. Lane, (though before so agreed) that William Jackson should rid
single and carry the Portmantean; Accor∣dingly they mounted, being attended part of the way by one of Mr. Nortons men, as a Guide, and that day rode, through the body of Somersetshire, to Mr. Edward Kir∣ton's house, at Castle Cary near Burton, where his Majesty lay that night, and next morning arrived at Colonel Windhams said house, which was about twenty six miles from Leigh. His Majestie was now at Trent, in as much safetie, as the Master of the House his Fidelity and Prudence could make Him; but the great work was how to procure a Vessel for Transportation of this great Treasure; for this end His Ma∣jestie, the Lord Wilmot, and Colonel Wind∣ham, had several Consults, and in pursu∣ance of their determination, the Colo∣nel, with his trustie servant, Henry Peters, posted to Lime, which is about twenty miles from Trent, where, after some dif∣ficultie, by the assistance of Captain Wil∣liam Eldsden, a Loyal Subject (at whose house the Colonel lodged) he hir'd a Bark to transport His Majesty for France, which Bark was by agreement to attend at Charmouth (a little maritine Village neer
Lime) at a time appointed, and return'd with all speed to Trent with the good news. The next day His Majestie resolved for Lime and Mrs. Jane Lane here hum∣bly took her leave of Him, returning with Mr. Lassels, by His Majesties permis∣sion, into Staffordshire, leaving Him in faithfull hands, and in a hopeful way of escaping the bloudy designs of merciless Rebels; which as it was all along the scope of her endeavours, so was it now the subject of her prayers; yet it was still thought the best disguise, for His Maje∣sty to ride before some woman, and accor∣dingly Mrs. Julian Conningsby, Colonel Windhams kinswoman, had the honor to ide behind His Majesty, who with the Lord Wilmot, the Colonel, and Henry Pe∣ers, came that evening to a blind Inn in Charmouth, nee which place the Skipper had promised to be in readiness with his Bark; but observe the disappointment. In the interim (whilst Colonel Wind∣ham was gone back to Trent) it seems the Rebels proclamation, for apprehending Charles Stuart (meaning, in their impu∣dent phrase, our gracious King) and
prohibiting, for a certain time, the trans∣portation of any Person without a parti∣cular Licence, had been published in and about Lime, and the Skipper having ac∣quainted his wife, that he had agreed t transport two or three persons into France, whom he believed might be Ca¦valiers, it seem's the Grey-Mare was the better Horse; for she lock'd up her hus∣band in his Chamber, and would by n means permit him to go the Voyage; so that whilst Henry Peters stayed on the Beach most part of the night, His Maje¦stie and the rest of the Company sate up i the Inn, expecting news of the Sea-ma with his Boat, who never appeared. The next morning His Majesty and Attendants resolving to return to Trent rode first to Bruteport in Dorsetshire where He staid at an Inn, whilst Henry Peters was sent back to Captain Eldsden to see if their were any hope left of per∣suading the Skipper, or rather of gain∣ing leave of his wife, for him to under∣take the Voyage; but all endeavours pro∣ved ineffectual, and by that time Harry returned, the day was so far spent, that His Majesty could conveniently reach no
farther that night then Broad-Windsor; And (which added much to the danger) Col. Heane (one of Cromwels Command∣ers) at this very time was marching Re∣bels from several Garrisons to Weymouth and other adjacent Ports, in order to their being shipped, for the forcing the Island of Jarsey from His Majesties obe∣dience, as they had done all the rest of His Dominions; so that the roads of this County were full of Souldiers: Broad-windsor afforded but one Inn, and that the George, a mean one too (and which was worse) the best accomodati∣ons in it were, before His Majesties ar∣rival taken up by Rebel Souldiers, one of whose Doxies was brought to bed in the House, which caused the Constable and Overseers for the Poor of the Parish to come thither at an unseasonable Hour of the night, to take care that the Brat might not be left to the charge of the Parish; so that His Majesty, through this Distur∣bance, went not into Bed at all, and we may safely conclude, He took as little rest here, as He did the night before at Charmouth. Thus were the tribulations of Davids heart enlarged, and he prayed,
deliver me, O Lord from my distresses. His Majesty having still thus miracu∣lously escaped Dangers, which hourly en∣viron'd Him, returned safe to Trent next morning, where after some refreshment and rest taken, He was pleased to call my Lord Wilmot and Colonel Windham (the Members of His little privy council) toge∣ther, to consider what way was next to be attempted for His transportation. After several Proposals, it was at last resolved that my Lord (attended and con∣ducted by Henry Peters) should the next day be sent to Salisbury to Mr. John Co∣ventry, (Son to the late Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England) who then lived in the Close of that City, and was known to be both a prudent per∣son and a perfect lover of this Soveraign, as well to advise how to procure a Bark for passing His Majesty into France, as for providing some moneys for His present necessary occasions. My Lord, being arrived at Salisbury, dispatched Henry Peters back to Trent, with intimation of the good reception he found there; For, Mr. Coventry did not
only furnish him with monies, but was very solicitous for His Majesties safety; To which end he advised with Dr. Hum∣phrey Henchman, a worthy Divine, who since His Majesties happy restauration, is with much merit advanced to the Episco∣pal Sea of Salisbury. The result of these two loyal persons consultation was, that His Majestie should be desired to remove to Hele, (which lay about three miles North-East of Salisbu∣ry) the dwelling house of Mrs. Mary Hyde, the relict of Laurence Hyde Es; eldest bro∣ther to honourable Sir Robert Hyde one of the Justices of His Majesties Court of Common-pleas, whom they knew to be both as discreet and as loyal, as any of her sex. With this resolution and advice Mr. Co∣ventry dispatched his Chaplain, Mr. John Selleck to Trent with a Letter, rolled up into the bignesse of a musket Bullet which the faithful Messenger had order to swal∣low down his throat, in case of any danger. Mean time Mr. Coventry had found out a trusty Sea-man at Southampton, who un∣dertook to transport whom he pleased, ut on second thoughts and advice had
with my Lord Wilmot, it was not held safe for His Majesty to take shipping there, in regard of the so many Castles by which the ships passe, that are outward bound, and the often examination of the Passen∣gers in them; so that some of the small Ports of Sussex were concluded to be the safer places, for effecting this great work of His Majesties delivery from the hands of such unparallel'd Rebels, who even ra∣venously thirsted after Royal blood. In the interim Mr. Selleck returned with His Majesties resolution to come to Hele, signified by a like paper bullet, And by this time His Majesty thought fit to admit of the service and assistance of Colonel Robert Phillips (Grandson to the famed Sir Edward Phillips late Master of the Rolls) who lived in those parts, and was well acquainted with the ways of the Country, and known to be as faith∣full as loyalty could make him; This Co∣lonel undertook to be His Majesties con∣ductor to Hele, which was near thirty miles distant from Trent. During His Majesties stay at Tren (which was above a fortnight) He was▪ for His own security, forced to confine
Himself to the voluntary Imprisonment of His Chamber, which was happily ac∣commodated (in case the Rebels had searched the House) with an old well-contrived secret place, long before made (for a shelter against the inquisition of Pursuivants) by some of the ancient Fa∣mily of the Gerhards, Col. Windhams Lady's Ancestors, who were Recusants, and had formerly been owners of that House. His Majesties meat was likewise (to prevent the danger of a discovery) for the most part dressed in his own Chamber, the Cookery whereof served Him for some divertisement of the time; And 'tis a great truth, if we say, there was no cost spared, nor care wanting in the Co∣lonel, for the entertainment and preserva∣tion of his Royal Guest. On the 3. of October, His Majesty) ha∣ving given Colonel Windham particular thanks for his great care and sidelity to∣wards him) left Trent, and began his jour∣ney, with Colonel Philips, and persona∣ting a tenants son of his, towards Hele, attended by Henry Pers (who i now Yeoman of the field  Hi Mjsty) nd
riding before Mrs. Cunningsby: The Tra∣vailers passed by Wincaunton, and near the midst of that dayes journey arrived at Mere, a little Market Town in Wilt∣shire, and din'd at the George-Inn; the Hoast, Mr. Christoph. Philips, whom the Colonel knew to be perfectly ho∣nest. The Hoast sate at the Table with His Majesty, and administred matters of dis∣course, told the Colonel for news, that he heard the Men of Westminster (mean∣ing the Rebels) not withstanding their Vi∣ctory at Worcester, were in a grate maze, not knowing what was become of the King; but (sayes he) 'tis the most re∣ceived opinion that he is come in a disguise to London, and many Houses have been searched for Him there; at which His Majesty was observed to mile. After Dinner mine Hoast familiarly asked the King, if he were a friend to Cae∣sar, to which His Majesty answered, Yes▪ then said he, here's a health to King Charles in a glasse of Wine, which His Majesty and the Colonel both pledged, and that evening arrived in safety at Hele. And Hi
Majesty since His happy return has been pleased to ask what was become of his honest Hoast at Mere? In the mean time the Lord Wilmot (who took up the borrowed name of Mr. Barlow) rode to such Gentlemen of his acquaintance in Hampshire, whom he knew to be faithfull Subjects, to seek means for (what he so much de∣sired) the transportation of His Majesty; and first repaired to Mr. Laurence Hyde, (a name as faithful, as fortunate in His Majesties service at his house at Hinton D'aubigny neer Catharington, then to Mr. Thamas Henslow at Burhant in the same County, to whom (as persons of known fidelity) my Lord communicated his weighty business, and desired their as∣sistance for procuring a Bark for His Ma∣jesties transportation. Mr. Henslow (in zeal to this service) immediately acquainted the Earl of South∣ampton (then at his House at Titchfield, and now with much merit dignifyed with the great Office of Lord high Treasurer of England) with this most important affair; my Lord Wilmot judging it fitter for Mr. Henslow (his neighbour) to do it, than for,
himself, in those circumstances, to ap∣pear at my Lords house; whose eminent fidelity and singular prudence, in the conduct of even the greatest affairs of State, being known both to them and all the world, and his great power and com∣mand at Bewly Haven and the maritine parts of Hampshire, esteem'd very favo∣rable for their design, wherein his Lord∣ship was extreamly active and sollici∣tous. Besides this, Mr Laurance Hyde recom∣mended my Lord Wilmot to Colonel George gunter, who lived at Rackton neer Chichester in Sussex, and was known to be both faithful and active, not unlike to be succesful in this service, to whom therefore my Lord hasted, and lay at Rackton one night, where he imparted his great sollicitation to the Colonel and and his kinsman Mr. Thomas Gunter, who was then accidentally there. All these persons had the like instructi∣ons from my Lord, which made a deep impression on their loyal hearts, and ex∣cited them to use their utmost endeavors by several ways and means to procure the Noahs Ark, which might at last secure
His Majesty from the great inundation of Rebellion and Treason, which then did o∣verspread the face of his whole Domi∣nions. But to return to my humble observance of His Majesty at Hele, where Mrs. Hyde was so transported with zeal and loyal∣ty towards Him, that at Supper, though His Majesty was set at the lower end of the Table, yet the good Gentlewoman had much adoe to overcome herself, and not carve to him first, however she could not refrain from drinking to Him in a glasse of Wine, and giving Him two Larks, when others had but one. After Supper Mr. Fredrick Hyde (bro∣ther in Law to the Widow, who was then at Hele, and since created Serjeant at Law) discoursed with His Majesty up∣on various subjects, not suspecting who he was, but wondred to receive such ra∣tional discourse from a Person, whose habit spoke him, but of mean degree; and when His Majesty was brought to his Chamber, Doctor Henchman attend∣ed him there, and had a long and pri∣vate communication with him. Next day it was thought fit, to prevent
the danger of any discovery, or even suspition in the house, that in regard His Majesty might possibly stay there some days before the conveniency of a Tran∣sportation could be found out, he should that day publickly take his leave, and ride about two miles from the house, and then be privately brought in again the same evening, when all the servants were at Supper; which was accordingly performed, and after that time His Ma∣jesty appeared no more at Hele in publick, but had meat brought him privately to his Chamber, and was attended by the good Widow with much care and ob∣servance. Now among the many faithful Sollici∣tors for this long expected Bark, Colo∣nel Gunter hapned to be the lucky man, who first procur'd it at Brighthemston in Sussex by the assistance of Mr. Francis Mansel, Merchant of Chichester; and the concurrent endeavours of Mr. Thomas Gunter; And on Saturday night the ele∣venth of October he brought the happy ti∣dings to My Lord Wilmot, and Col. Philips who then lay, the one at Mr. Laurence, Hydes, the other at Mr. Anthony Brown's
house, his neighbour and Tenant. The next morning, being Sunday, Col. Philips was dispatch't to Hele with the much desir'd news, and with instructions to attend His Majesty on munday to the Down's called old Winchester, neer Warn∣ford. Early in the morning His Majesty was privately convey'd from Hele, and went on foot at least two miles to Clarendon Park Corner, attended by Docter Hench∣man, then took horse, with Col. Philips, and at the appointed time and place the Lord Wilmot, Col. Gunter, and Mr. Tho. Gunter met His Majesty, with a brace of Crey-hounds, the better to carry on the disguise. That night, though both Mr. Law∣rence Hyde and Mr. Henslow had each of them provided a secure lodging for His Majesty by the Lord Wilmots order, yet it was judged fittest by Colonel Gunter, and accordingly agreed unto by my Lord, that His Majesty should lodge at Mr. Tho∣mas Symons house at Hambledon in Hamp∣shire, who marryed the Colonels Sister, in regard the Colonel knew them to be very faithful, but chiefly because it lay
more directly in the way from Hele to Brighthemston; and accordingly Colonel Gunter attended His Majesty to his Sisters house that night, who provided a good Supper for them, though she had not the least suspition or intimation of His Maje∣sties Presence among them. The KING and his small Retinue, ar∣riving in safety at Mr. Symons house on Munday night the 13. of October, were heartily welcomed by Mrs. Symons, for her husband was not then at home; but by that time they had sup'd in comes Mr. Symons, who, wondring to see so many strangers in his house, was assured by his Brother Gunter, that they were all ho∣nest Gentlemen, yet, at first interview, he much suspected Mr. Jackson to be a Round-head, observing how little hair William Penderels Scissers had left Him; but at last being fully satisfied they were all Cavaliers, he soon laid open his heart, and thought nothing too good for them, was sorry his beer was no stronger, and, to encourage it, fetch't down a bottle of strong water, and, mixing it with the Beer, drank a cheerful cup to Mr. Jack∣son, calling him brother Roundhead, whom
His Majesty pledged; who was here ob∣served to be cloathed in a short Juppa of a sad coloured cloath, and his breeches of another species, with a black hat, and without cuffs, somewhat like the meaner sort of Country Gentlemen. Mr. Symons in the time of entertain∣ing his Guests, did by chance let fall an Oath, for which Mr. Jackson took occa∣sion modestly to reprove him. His Majesty, thus resting himself Mun∣day night at Hambledon, early on Tu∣esday morning (14. Octob.) prepared for his journey to Brigthemston, distant a∣bout thirty five miles from thence; But (having then no further use of Colonel Philips) dismiss'd him with thanks for his fidelity and service, in this most secret and important affair; and then, having also bidden farewel to Mr. Symons and his wife, took horse, attended by my Lord Wilmot and his man, Colonel Gun∣ter, and Mr. Thomas Gunter. When they came neer the Lord Lum∣leys house at Stanstead in Sussex, it was considered, that the greatness of the num∣ber of horse might possibly raise some suspition of them, Mr. Thomas Gunter
was therefore dismis'd with thanks, for the service he had done, and His Majesty held on his journey without any stay, and being come to Bramber with∣in seven miles of the desir'd Port, met there some of Colonel Herbert Morleys Soldi∣ers, who yet did neither examine, nor had they, as far as could be discerned, the least suspition of the Royal Passen∣gers, who arrived at last at the George Inn in Brighthamston, where Mr. Fran∣cis Mansel, (who assisted Colonel Gunter in this happy service, had agreed to meet him.) At supper Mr. Mansel sate at the upper end of the Table, and Mr. Jackson (for that Name His Majesty still reteined) at the lower end. The Inn-keepers name was Smith, and had formerly related to the Court, so that he suspected Mr. Jack∣son to be whom he really was, which His Majesty understanding, he discours'd with his Hoast after supper, whereby his loyalty was confirmed; and the man pro∣ved faithfull. The next morning, being Wedenesday 15. October, (the same day on which the Noble Earl of Derby became a Royal Mar∣tyr
at Boulton) His Majesty, having given particular thanks to Colonel Gunter, for his great care, pains, and fidelity to∣wards Him, took Shipping with the Lord Wilmot in the Bark, which lay in readiness for him at that Harbour, and whereof Mr. Nicholas Tetersal was owner; And the next day, with an auspicious gale of wind, landed safely at Fecan neer Haure de Gra∣ce in Normandy; Where His Majesty might happily say with David; Thou hast deli∣vered me from the violent man, therefore will I sing praises to thy Name, O Lord. This very Bark, after His Majesties hap∣py restauration, was by Cap. Tetersal brought into the River Thames, and lay some months at Anchor before Whitehall, to renew the memory of the happy ser∣vice it had performed. His Majesty having nobly rewarded Cap. Tetersal, in Gold for his transporta∣tion, lodged this night at an Inn in Fe∣cam, and the next day rode to Roan, still attended by the faithful Lord Wilmot, where he continued Incognito several days at Mr. William Scots house, since cre∣ated Baronet, till he had sent an Express to the Queen his Royal Mother (who had
been long sollicitous to hear of his safety) and the Court of France; intimating his safe arrival there, and had quitted his disguised habit for one more befitting the dignity of so great a KING. Upon the first intelligence of this wel∣come news, his Highness the Duke of York sent his Coach forthwith to attend His Majesty at Roan, and the Lord Gerard, with others His Majesty Servants, made all possible hast, with glad hearts, to per∣form their duty to Him. So that on the 29 of October, His Majesty set forward to∣wards Paris, lay that night at Fleury, a∣bout seven Leagues from Roan; the next morning his Royal Brother the Duke of York was ready to receive Him at Mag∣nie, and that evening His Majesty was met at Mouceaux, a Village neer Paris, by the Queen of England, accompany'd with her Brother the Duke of Orleans, and at∣tended by a great number of coaches and many both English and French Lords and Gentlemen on horseback, and was thus gladly conducted the same night, though somewhat late, to the Louvre at Paris, to the inexpressible joy of his Dear Mother the Queen, his Royal Brother the Duke of York, and of all true hearts.
Here we must again, with greater rea∣son, humbly contemplate the admirable Providence of Almighty God, which cer∣ainly never appeared more miraculously han in this strange deliverance of His Ma∣esty from such an infinity of dangers, that History it self cannot produce a parallel, nor will Posterity willingly believe it. From the 3. of September at Worcester to the 15. of October at Brithemston, being one and forty dayes, He pasted through more dangers than he travailed miles, of which yet He travers'd in that time only eer 'three hundred (not to speak of His dangers at Sea, both at his comming nto Scotland, and his going out of Eng∣land, nor of his long march from Scotland to Worcester (sometimes on foot with un∣easy shooes; at other times on horsback, en∣combered with a portmantean, and which was worse, at another time, on the gall∣back'd, slow-paced millers horse; some∣times acting one disguise in course linnen and a leather doublet; sometimes ano∣ther, of almost as bad a complection; one day He is forced to sculke in a barn at Madely; another day sits with Co∣lonel Carlos in  Tree, with his feet
extreamly surbated and at night glad to 1 Sam. 19. 2. Thus Jo∣nathan prayed David to abide in a secret place and hide himself from the fury of Saul. lodge with Willam Penderel in a secret plac at Boscobel which never was intended for the dormitory of a King. Sometimes he was forced to shift with course fare for a Bellyfull; ano∣ther time in a wood, glad to releive the necessities of nature with a messe of milk, served up in an homely dish by Good∣wife Yates a poor Country woman; Then again, for a variety of tribulation, when he thought himself almost out of danger, he directly meets some of those rebels, who so greedily sought his bloud, yet, by Gods great providence, had not the power to discover Him; and (which is more than has yet been mentioned) He sent at another time to some Subjects for relief and assistance in his great necessity, who out of a pusillanimous fear of the bloudy Arch-Rebel then reigning, durst not own Him. Besides all this twas not the least of his afflictions daily to hear the Earl of Derby and other his most Loyal Subjects, some murdered, some imprisoned, and others sequestred in heaps, by the same bloudy Ʋsurper, only for performing their duty
o their Lawful King. In a word, there as no kind of misery (but death it self) f which His Majesty, in this horrid ersecution, did not in some measure, oth in body, mind, and estate, bear a ery great share; yet such was his invin∣ible Patience in this time of Tryal, such is Fortitude, that he overcame them all with such pious advantage to himself, hat their memory is now sweet, and It's ood for Him, that He has been afflicted. Of these His Majesties sufferings and orced extermination from his own Do∣minions, Englands Great Chancelor thus xcellently Descants. We may tell those desperate wretches, Lord Chancel∣lors Speech to the Parli∣ament, 29. De∣cemb. 1660. who yet harbor in their thoughts wick∣ed designs against the Sacred person of he King, in order to the compassing their own immaginations, That God Al∣mighty would not have led Him through so many wildernesses of afflictions of all kinds, conducted Him through so ma∣ny perils by Sea, and perils by Land,
snatch'd Him out of the midst of thi Kingdom, when it was not worthy o Him, and when the hands of His Ene¦mies were even upon Him, when they thought themselves so sure of Him, tha they would bid so cheap and so vile a price for Him; He would not in that Articl have so covered Him with a Cloud, tha He travailed even with some pleasur and great observation through the mids of His Enemies: He would not so won∣derfully have new modelled that Army; s inspired their hearts and the hearts of th whole Natoniwith an honest and impatien longing for the return of their Dear Sove∣reign, and in the mean time have exercis' Him (which had little lesse of Providenc in it than the other) with those unnatur or at least unusual disrespects & reproach¦es abroad, that He might have a harmles and an innocent appetite to His ow Country, and return to His own Peo∣ple, with a full value, and the whole un¦wasted
bulk of His affections, without being corrupted or byassed by extraordi∣nary foreign obligations; God Almighty would not have done all this but for a Ser∣vant, whom he will always preserve, as the apple of his own eye, and alwayes de∣fend from the most secret machinations of His Enemies. Thus the best and happiest of Orators.
WE have hitherto only admired his Majesties Fortitude; which Car∣dinal vertue, properly consists of two parts, the one active, the other passive, the first was signally manifest in his Cou∣rage during the time of Battle; the other, in his Patience, by suffering his follow∣ing afflictions with an even and undaunt∣ed Spirit; yet his Gratitude and invinci∣ble Memory remain still to be reverenc∣ed by my humble Pen: For, among the so many persons, who were instrumental and serviceable in this his great delive∣rance, there was scarce one whose face (after so many years absence) His Ma∣jesty did not, at his happy return, pre∣cisely remember, and whose merits he has not particularly owned and reward∣ed, either in fact, or by his Royal Pro∣mise, which are equivalent. He dignifyed the Lord Wilmot (of principal merit in this service) with the Earldom of Rochester, and doubtless his acknowledgments had not beenso bound∣ed, but that death snatched that noble Lord away, before his great Masters re∣stauration. And, besides His Majesties Grace
vouchsafed to Mrs. Jane Lane and Col. Francis Windham, the most honourable Houses of Parliament took notice of the great services performed by them, and were so sensible thereof, That on the se∣venteenth of December 1660. they voted one thousand pounds to be given the one, and on the nineteenth of the same month, voted the like sum to the other, with the thanks of the Parliament, the Repre∣sentative of the whole Nation. Doctor Henchman (as ye have heard) is advanced to the Bishoprick of Salis∣bury. Master George Norton has received the honour of Knighthood from His Maje∣sties hands. Col. Philips is deservedly preferred to be one of the Grooms of His Maje∣sties Bed-chamber. Mr. Selleck (to omit others) is now Dr. in Divinity, and advanced to the Arch∣deaconry of the Cathedral Church of Bathe.
How can we better conclude these our humble endeavors, than in the Words of Holy David, His Majesties great Ex∣emplar in afflictions, and Royal Patience, and to whom we heartily pray; and con∣fidently hope His Majesty will be a per∣fect Successor in tranquillity of State, and execution of judgment and justice to all His People, The KING shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice? Thou hast given Him his hearts desire and not denyed him the request of his lips. For thou preventest him with the blessing o goodness: thou settest a Crown of pure gol on his head. He asked life of thee, and thou gavest i him, even length of days for ever and ever His glory is great in thy salvation, hono and Majesty hast thou laid upon him. For Thou hast made him most blessed fo ever: Thou hast made him exceeding gla with thy countenance. For the KING trusteth in our Lord, an though the mercy of the most high, he sha not be moved.
Some may haply here expect I should have continued the particulars of this History to the time of His Majesties hap∣py restauration, by giving an account of the reception His Majesty found from he several Princes beyond the Seas, dur∣ng his Exile, and of his evenness of mind, nd prudent deportment towards them upon all occasions; But that was clear∣y beyond the scope of my intention, which aimed only to write the wonder∣ul History of a Great and Good King, violently pursued in His own Domini∣ons, by the worst of Rebels, and mi∣raculously preserved, under God, by the best of Subjects. In other Countreys, of which His Majesty travers'd not a few, He found kindness and a just compassion of His Adversity from many, and from some a neglect and disregard; yet, in all the almost nine years abroad, I have not heard of any passage that approached he degree of a Miracle like that at home. Therefore I may, with faith to my own intentions, not improperly make a silent transition from His Maje∣sties
arrival at Paris, on the thirtieth day of October 1651. to His Return to London on the nine and twentieth o May 1660. and with a TE DEƲM LAƲDAMƲS, sum up all, and say▪ with the Prophet, My Lord, the King, is come again in peace, to his own House, 2 Sam. 19. 30. And all the people shouted, and said GOD SAVE THE KING 1 Sam. 30 24. FINIS.
Claustrum Regale Reseratum OR THE KINGS Concealment AT TRENT Published by A. W. In umbra alarum tuarum sperabo donec transeat iniquitas. LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for H. Brome in S. Pauls Churchyard, & C. Harper in Fleetstreet. 1681
TO THE QUEENS Most Excellent MAJESTY. THis little Book having ob∣tained liberty, after a long Imprisonment, to walk a∣broad, prostrates it self at Your Majesties feet for patronage and protection. In it Your Majesty may be∣hold GOD's wonderfull Mercy and Pro∣vidence, in keeping and preserving our Gracious Sovereign from the hands of His Enemies, when they so pleased them∣selves with the hopes of seising His Sa∣cred Person after the Battel of Wor∣cester, As they had invented and pre∣pared new ways to afflict His Majesty,
such as till then never entred into the harts the worst of Tyrants before them. But it pleased God to frustrate the hopes and designs of the Kings Adversaries, and to restore His Majesty to His Fathers Throne: Which that he may long enjoy with Your Majesty, in health, Peace and Happiness, Is, and shall be the prayers of Your MAJESTIES Most obedient, and most Faithful Servant, ANNE WYNDHAM.
Claustrum Regale Reseratum: OR, THE KINGS Concealment AT TRENT. HOw that after the Battel of Worcester, His Sacred Ma∣jesty most wonderfully es∣caped the hands of his blood-thirsty Enemies, and (under a Disguise, in the company of Mrs. Jane Lane) safely arrived at Abbots-Leigh in Somersetshire, (the seat of Sir George Norton, lying near to the City of Bristol) hath been fully published unto the World. His Majesties Journey from thence to the house of Colonel Francis Wyndham at Trent in the same County,
his Stay there, his Endeaour (though frustrate) to get over into France, his Return to Trent, his final Departure thence in order to his happy Transpor∣tation, are the subject of this present Relation. A Story, in which the Con∣stellations of Providence are so refulgent, that their light is sufficient to confute all the Atheists of the world, and to enforce all persons (whose faculties are not per∣tinaciously depraved) to acknowledge a watchful Eye of GOD from above, look∣ing upon all Actions of Men here below, making even the most wicked, subservient to his just and glorious designs. And in∣deed, whatsoever the Antients fabled of Gyges's Ring, by which he could render himself Invisible, or the Poets fancied of their Gods, who usually carried their chief Favourites in the Clouds, and by drawing those aerial Curtains, did so conceal them, that they were heard and seen of none, whilst they both heard and saw others, is here most certainly ve∣rified. For, the Almighty so closely co∣veed the King, with the wing of his Protection, and so clouded the Under∣standing of his cruel Enemies, that the
most piercing Eye of malice could not see, nor the most Barbarously-bloody Hand offer Violence to his Sacred Person: God smiting his pursuers (as once he did the Sodomites) with blindness, who with as much eagerness sought to sacrifice the Lords Anointed to their fury, as the other did to prostitute the Angels to their lust. But before the several Particulars of this Story are laid open, two Questions (easily foreseen) which will be readily asked by every Reader, call for an An∣swer. The one is, Why this Relation so much expected, so much longed for, has been kept up all this while from publick veiw? And the other, How it comes to pass, that now it takes the liberty to walk abroad? Concerning the first, it must be known, that a Narrative of these Passages was (by especial command frnm his Maje∣sty) written by the Colonels own hand, immediately after the Kings return into England; which (being presented to his Majesty) was laid up in his Royal Cabi∣net, there to rest for some time, it being the Kings pleasure (for reasons best known to his Sacred self) that it should not then be published.
And as his Majesties command to keep it private, is a satisfactory answer to the first; so, his licence now obtained that it might travel abroad, may sufficiently re∣solve the second question. But besides this, many prevalent reasons there are, which plead for a publication; the chief of which are briefly these. That the implacable E∣nemies of this Crown may be for ever silenced and ashamed; who having nei∣ther Law, nor Religion to patronize their unjust undertakings, construed a bare Permission, to be a Divine Appro∣bation of their Actions; and (taking the Almighty to be such a one as themselves) blasphemously entitled God to be the Author of all their wickedness. But the arm of God stretched out from heaven to the rescue of the King, cutting off the clue of their Success, even then when they thought they had spun up their thred, hath not left them so much as an apron of fig-leaves to cover the naked∣ness of their most shameful proceedings. The next is, That the Truth of his Ma∣jesties Escape (being minced by some, mistaken by others, and not fully set forth by any) might appear in its native
eauty and splendor: That as every dust f gold is gold, and every ray of light is ght; so every jot and title of Truth being ruth, not one grain of the treasure, nor ne beam of the lustre of this Story might e lost or clouded; it being so rare, so excel∣ent, that aged Time out of all the Archives f Atiquity can hardly produce a Parallel. ingularly admirable indeed it is, if we onsider the Circumstances and Actors. The Colonel (who chiefly designed, and oved in this great affair) could not have ad the freedom to have served his Maje∣ty, had he not been a Prisoner; his very Confinement giving him both a liberty, nd protection to act. For, coming home rom Weymouth upon his Parole, he had he opportunity to travel freely, with∣out fear of being stopped, and taken up: And being newly removed from Sher∣orne to Trent, the jealous eye of Somer∣etshire Potentates had scarce then found him out, whose malevolent Aspect af∣erwards seldom suffered him to live at home. and too too often furnished his house with very unwelcom guests. Others, who contributed their assistance, were persons of both sexes, and of very
different conditions and qualities: And although their endeavours often proved successless, though they received discou∣ragements on one hand, were terrified with threats on the other; That a seal of silence should be imprinted upon the lips of Women, who are become proverbi∣al for their garrulity; That faithfulnes and constancie should guard the heart of servants, who are usually corrupted with rewards, or affrighted with punish∣ments; That neither Hope nor Fear (mos powerful passions, heightned by Capi∣tal animadversions proclaimed against Al that should conceal, and large Remune∣rations promised to such as should disco∣ver the King) could work nothing upon any single person, so as to remove him o her from their respective duty, but that al should so harmoniously concenter, both i the Design, and also afterward keep them∣selves so long close shut up under th lock of secrecy, that nothing could be dis¦covered by the most exquisite art an cunning, till the blessed Restauration o his Majesty to his glorious Throne, s filled their hearts with joy, that it brok open the door of their lips, and let thei
tongue loose to tell this Miracle to the amazed World, would (were not the Persons yet alive, and the Story fresh in memory) rarifie it into a Romance. The reproaches and scandals, by which some envious persons have sought to di∣minish and vilifie the faithful services, which the Colonel out of the integrity of his soul performed unto his Majesty, shall not here be mentioned. Because by taking up dirt to bespatter him, they de∣file their own hands, and the gun they level at his Reputation, recoils to the wounding of their own. These things thus premised, by way of Introduction, open the Gate, through which you may enter, and in the ensuing Pages (as in several Tables) take a full view of the Particulars. The Disguise His Majesty put on, se∣cured him from the Cruelty of his Ene∣mies; but could not altogether hide him from the prying eyes of his dutiful Sub∣jects. For in the time of his stay at Leigh, one John Pope (then Butler to Sir George Norton, but formerly a Souldier for the King in the West) through all those clouds espied the most Illustrious Person
of the King, With him His Majesty (af∣ter he saw himself discovered) was pleas∣ed familiarly to discourse; And speak∣ing of the great Sufferings of very ma∣ny of his Friends in the Western parts, (most whereof were well known to Pope) his Majesty enquired if he knew Colonel Francis Wyndham, who (in the time of the late Wars) was Governor of Dunster-Castle? Very well, Sir, answered Pope. The King then demanding what was be∣come of him? Pope replies, That the Colonel had married Mrs. Anne Gerard, one of the daughters and heiresses of Thomas Gerard Esq; late of Trent in So∣mersetshire, and that he had newly brought thither his Mother (the Lady Wyndham) his Wife and family, and that he belie∣ved the Colonel intended there to reside and live. His Majesty having received this intelligence concerning the Colonel, together with an exact information of the scituation of Trent, sought an op∣portunity to speak with Mrs. Lane, (from whom the better to conceal himself, he then kept at a distance) and by means of Mr. Lassels (who accompanied the King in this journey) obtaining his de∣sire,
His Majesty with much content∣ment imparted to Mrs. Lane what Pope had informed him concerning Colonel Wyndham, and his habitation; telling her withal, That if she could bring him thither, he should not much doubt of his safety. In this very point of time comes the Lord Henry Wilmot (afterward Earl of Rochester) from Dirham in Glocestershire (the seat of John Winter Esq; a person of known loyalty and integrity) to eigh. My Lord had attended his Ma∣jesty in his passage Westward, and on Friday morning (September the 13.) met accidentally Captain Thomas Abington of Dowdswell in the County of Glocester at Pinbury Park; and being known by the Captain, (who had served, under his Lordship in the Wars) was that night by im conducted to Mr. Winter's, from whom his Lordship (as he hath often ince acknowledged) received great Ci∣ilities. Mrs. Lane presently reveals to he Lord Wilmot the Kings resolution to emove to Trent: whereupon my Lord demanded of Henry Rogers (Mr. Winter's ervant, and his Lordships guide from Dirham to Leigh) whether he knew Trent?
He answered that Colonel Wyndham and his Master had married two Sisters, and that he had often waited on his Master thither. These things so happily concur∣ring, his Majesty commanded the Lord Wilmot to haste to Trent and to ascer∣tain the Colonel of his speedy Approach. His Lordship took leave, and conti∣nuing Rogers for his guide, with one Robert Swan, arrived at Trent the six∣teenth of September. Rogers was sent in forthwith to the Colonel to acquai him, that a Gentleman a friend of his, de∣sired the feavour of him, that he would please to step forth and speak with him. The Colonel enquiring of Rogers whe∣ther he knew the Gentleman or his bu∣siness? answered, No, he understood nothing at all, but only that he was called by the name of Mr. Morton. Then without further discourse the Colonel came forth, and found the Gentleman walking near the Stable; whom as soon he approach∣ed, (although it was somewhat dark) he saluted by the Title of My Lord Wil∣mot. His Lordship seemed to wonder that he should be known, but it was nothing strange onsidering the Colonels for∣mer
acquaintance with him, being one of the first that engaged under his Com∣mand in his late Majesties service. Be∣sides his Lordship was not in the least altered, except a Hawk on his fist, and a Lure by his side might pass for a Dis∣guise. This Confidence of his Lordship really begat admiration in the Colonel, calling to mind the great danger he was in, and whose Harbinger he was; For he advertised the Colonel, that the King himself was on his way to Trent, intend∣ing that very night to lodge at Castle-Cary (a Town six miles thence) hoping by Gods assistance to be with him a∣bout ten of the clock next morning. At this joyful news the Colonel was transported, (there having run a report, that his Majesty was slain in the Fight at Worcester) and giving God thanks for his wonderful mercy, he assured his Lordship, That for his Majesties preser∣vation he would value neither his life, fa∣mily nor fortune, and would never injure His Majesties confidence of him; not doubt∣ing, but that God who had led His Ma∣jesty through the midst of such inexpressible dangers, would deliver him from all those
barbarous threats, and bloody intentions of his Enemies. With these and such like ex∣pressions, the Colonel brought the Lord Wilmot into his parlour, where he recei∣ved an exact account of His Majesties condition and present affairs. Next morning, the Colonel found it necessary to acquaint the Lady Wyndham his mother, and also his own Lady, with the particulars the Lord Wilmot had over∣night imparted to him, concerning the King. The relation he gave them, did not (through the weakness of their sex) bring upon them any womanish passion, but surprized with joy, they most cheer∣fully resolve (without the least shew of fear) to hazard all, for the safety of the King. And so (begging Gods bles∣sing upon their future endeavours) they contrive how his Majesty might be brought into the house, without any su∣spition to their family, consisting of a∣bove twenty persons. Among them there∣fore, Mrs. Julian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's Neece) Elianor Withers, Joan Halsenoth, and Henry Peters (whose loyalty to the King, and fidelity to them∣selves, they had sufficiently experienced)
are made privy to their design. Next they consider what Chambers are fittest for his Majesties rception. Four are made choice of; amongst which the La∣dy. Wyndham's was counted most con∣venient for the day-time, where the ser∣vants might wait with most freedom up∣on his Majesty. Then a safe place is provided to retreat unto, in case of search, or imminent danger: And last∣ly, Employments are designed to re∣move all others out of the way at the instant of his Majesties arrival. All which after a while, answered their desires, even beyond their expectation. Between nine and ten the next mor∣ning, the Colonel and his Lady walk∣ing towards the fields adjoining to the house, espied the King riding be∣fore Mrs. Lane, and Mr. Lassels in their company. Assoon as his Majesty came near the Colonel, He called to him, Frank, Frank, how dost thou do? By which gracious pleasance the Colonel perceived, that though his Majesties ha∣bit and countenance were much chan∣ged yet his Heroick spirit was the same, and his mind immutable. The Colonel
(to avoid the jealous eyes of some neigh∣bours) instantly conveyed the King and Mrs. Lane into the Lady Wyndham's Chamber, where the passions of Joy and Sorrow did a while combat in them, who beheld his Sacred Person. For what loyal Eye could look upon so Glorious a Prince thus eclipsed, and not pay un∣to him the homage of tears? But the consideration of his Majesties safety, the gracious words of his own mouth con∣futing the sad reports of his untimely death, together with the hope of his fu∣ture preservation, soon dried them up. In a short time the Colonel brought the Lord Wilmot to the King, and then the Ladies withdrew into the Parlour, hav∣ing first agreed to call Mrs. Lane Cou∣sin, and to entertain her with the same familiarity as if she had been their near Relation. That day she stayed at Trent, and the next morning early Mr. Lassels and she departed. His Majesty, after he had refreshed himself, commanded the Colonel in the presence of the Lord Wilmot, to pro∣pose, What way he thought most pro∣bable for his Escape into France; for
thither he desired with all speed to be transported. The Colonel (the King giving him this opportunity) entertained and encouraged his Majesty with this re∣markable passage of Sir Thomas Windham (his Father) Who, not long before his death [in the Year 1636] called unto him his five Sons, (having not seen them together in some years before) and discoursed unto us [said he] of the loving Peace and Pro∣sperity this Kingdom had enjoyed under its Three last Glorious Monarchs: Of the many Miseries and Calamities which lay sore upon our Ancestors, by the several Inva∣sions and Conquests of Forein Nations, and likewise by Intestine Insurrections and Re∣bellions. And notwithstanding the strange mutations and Changes in England, He shewed, how it pleased God in love to our Nation to preserve an undoubted Succession of Kings, to sit in the Regal Throne. He mentioned the healing Conjunction of the two Houses of York and Lancaster, and the blessed Ʋnion of the two Crowns of England and Scotland, stopping up those fountains of Blood, which, by National feuds and quarrels kept open, had like to have drowned the whole Island. He said,
he feard the beautiful garment of Peace would shortly be torn in pieces through the Neglect of Magistrates, the general corruption of man∣ners, and the prevalence of a Puritanical fac∣tion, which (if not prevented) would under∣mine the very pillars of Government. My sons! We have hither to seen serene and quiet Times: but now prepare your selves for cloudy and troublesom. I command you to honour and obey our Gracious Sovereign, and in all times to adhere to the Crown; and though the Crown should hang upon a Bush, I charge you forsake it not. These words being spoken with much earnestness, both in gesture and manner extraordinary, he arose from his chair, and left us in a deep consultation what the meaning should be of—The Crown hanging upon a Bush. These words, Sir, (said the Colonel) made so firm an im∣pression in all our breasts, that the many afflictions of these sad Times cannot raze out their undelible characters. Certainly these are the days which my Father pointed out in that Expression: and I doubt not, God hath brought me through so many dangers, that I might shew my self both a dutiful Son, and a loyal Subject, in faithfully endeavouring to serve your Sacred Majesty, in this your greatest Distress▪
After this Rehearsal, the Colonel (in obedience to His Majesties command) told the King, That Sir John Strangways (who had given many testimonies of his loyalty, having two Sons, both of them Colonels for his Royal Father) lived but four miles from Trent; That he was a person of great fortune and interest in Dorsetshire, and therefore he supposed that either Sir John, or his Sons might be servicable to His Majesty's occasions. The King, in prosecution of this proposal, commanded the Colonel to wait on them; and accordingly the next morning he went over to Melbury; the place where Sir John dwelt. No sooner was he come thither, but he met with Colo∣nel Giles Strangways, and after usual sa∣lutations, they walked inio the Park ad∣joyning to the house, where Colonel Wyndham imparted the reason and end of his present Visit. Colonel Strangways his answer was, That he was infinitly grieved, because he was not able to serve His Majesty in procuring a Vessel accor∣ding to expectation; That he knew not any one Master of a Ship, or so much as one Mariner that he could trust: All
that were formerly of his acquaintance in Weymouth, being for their loyalty banished, and gone beyond the sea; and in Pool and Lime he was a meer stran∣ger, having not one Confident in either. A hundred pounds in Gold he delivered to Colonel Wyndham, to present to the King; which at his return, by command was deposited in the hands of the Lord Wilmot, for his Majesties use. About this time the Forces under Cromwell were retreated from Worcester into the several Quarters of the Coun∣try; some of which coming to Trent, pro∣claimed the Overthrow of the Kings Ar∣my, and the Death of the King, giving out that he was certainly killed; And one of them affirmed that he saw him dead, and that he was buried among the rest of the slain, no injury being offered to his body, because he was a Valiant Soldier, and a Gallant man. This wel∣come News so tickled the Sectaries, that they could not hold from expressing their joy by making Bonfiers, firing of Guns, Drinking, and other jollities, And for a close of all, to the Church they must, and there ring the Kings knell.
These rude Extravagancies moved not His Majesty at all, but only (as if he were more troubled for their madness, than his own misfortune) to this most Christian and compassionate Expression, Alas poor people! Now though the King valued not the menaces of his proud Enemies, being confident they could do him no hurt; yet he neglected not to try the faithful∣ness of his Friends to convey him out of their reach. Thus the former design proving unsuccessful, and all hope of Transfretation that way being laid aside, the Colonel acquainted His Majesty, that one Captain William Ellesden of Lime (formerly well known unto him) with his Brother John Ellesden, (by means of Colonel Bullen Reymes of Wad∣den in Dorsetshire) had conveyed over into France, Sir John Berkley (afterward Lord Berkley) in a time of danger. To this Captain therefore His Majesty sends the Colonel, who lodging at his house in Lime, took an opportunity to tell him. That the Lord Wilmot had made his es∣cape from Worcester; that he lay private∣ly near to him; and that his Lordship
had earnestly solicited him to use his ut∣most endeavours to secure him from the hands of the pursuers. To this purpose he was come to town, and assured the Cap∣tain, if he would joyn in this affair, his courtesie should never be forgotten. The Captain very cordially embraced the motion, and went with the Colonel to Charmouth (a little place near Lime) where at an Inn, he brought to him a Tenant of his, one Stephen Limbry, assuring the Colonel that he was a right honest man, and a perfect Royalist. With this Limbry Colonel Wyndham treated under the name of Captain Norris, and agreed with him to transport himself and three or four friends into France. The con∣ditions of their Agreement were; That before the two and twentieth day of that instant September, Limbry should bring his Vessel into Charmou-Road, and on the said two and twentieth, in the night should receive the Colonel and his company into his Long-boat from the Beach near Charmouth, from thence car∣ry them to his Ship, and so land them safe in France. This the Colonel con∣jured Limbry to perform with all secre∣sie,
because all the Passengers were of the Royal party, and intended to be shipped without leave, to avoid such Oaths and Engagements, which other∣wise would be forced upon them: And therefore Privacie in this transaction would free him from Danger, and them∣selves from Trouble, the true cause why they so earnesty thirsted (for some time) to leave their native Country. Limbry's Salary was Sixty pounds, which the Captain engaged to pay at his return from France, upon sight of a Certificate under the Passengers hands of their land∣ing there. To the performance of these Covenants, Limbry with many vows and protestations obliging himself, the Co∣lonel with much satisfaction, and speed came back to his Majesty and the Lord Wilmot to Trent, who at the narration of these passages expressed no small con∣tentment. The business being thus far success∣fully laid, the King consults how it might be prudentially managed, that so there might be no miscarriage in the prosecuti∣on. Necessary it was that his Majesty and all his Attendants (contrary to the
use of Tavellers) should sit up all the night in the Inn at Charmouth; that they ought to have the command of the house, to go in and out at pleasure, the Tide not serving till twelve at night. To remove therefore all suspicion and Inconveni∣niencies, this Expedient was found out. Henry Peters (Colonel Windham's ser∣vant) was sent to Charmouth Inn, who inviting the Hostess to drink a glass of wine, told her, That he served a very gallant Master, who had long most af∣fectionately loved a Lady in Devon, and had the happiness to be well beloved by her; and though her Equal in birth and fortune, yet so unequal was his fate, that by no means could he obtain her Friends consent: And therefore it was agreed be∣tween them, that he should carry her thence, and marry her among his own Allies. And for this purpose his Master had sent him to desire her to keep the best Chambers for him, intending to be at her house upon the two and twen∣tieth day of that month in the evening; where he resolved not to lodge, but only to refresh himself and friends, and so travel on either that night, or very early
next morning. With this Love-story (thus contrived and acted) together with a Persent delivered by Peters from his Master, the Hostess was so well pleased, that she promised him, her house and servants should be at his Masters com∣mand. All which she very justly per∣formed. When the day appointed for His Ma∣jesties journey to Charmouth was come, he was pleased to ride before Mrs Ju∣lian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's Neece) as formerly before Mrs. Lane: The Colonel was His Majesties Guide, whilst the Lord Wilmot with Peters kept at a convenient distance, that they might not seem to be all of one company. In this manner travelling, they were timely met by Captain Elesden, and by him conducted to a private house of his Brothers among the hills near Charmouth. There His Majesty was pleased to disco∣ver himself to the Captain, and to give him a piece of forein Gold, in which in his solitary hours he made a hole to put a ribbon in. Many like pieces His Majesty vouchsafed the Colonel and his Lady, to be kept as Records of His
Majesties favour, and of their own fi∣delity to his most Sacred Person in the day of his greatest Trial. All which they have most thankfully treasured up as the chiefest Jewels of their Family. This Royal Company from thence came to the Inn at Charmouth, a little af∣ter night; where Captain Elesden solemn∣ly engaging to see the Master of the ship ready, (the wind blowing then fair for France) took leave of his Majesty. A∣bout an hour after came Limbry to the Inn, and assured the Colonel all things were prepared, and that about midnight his Long-boat should wait at the place appointed. The set hour drawing nigh, the Colonel with Peters went to the Sea∣side (leaving His Majesty and the Lord Wilmot in a posture to come away upon call) where they remained all night ex∣pecting; but seeing no Long-boat, nei∣ther hearing any message from the Master of the ship, at the break of day the Co∣lonel returns to the Inn, and beseeches the King and the Lord Wilmot to haste from thence. His Majesty was intreat∣d; but the Lord Wilmot was desirous o stay behind a little, promising to fol∣low
the King to Bridport, where His Majesty intended to make a halt for him. When the King was gone, the Lord Wilmot sent Peters into Lime, to demand of Captain Elesden the reason why Limbry broke his promise, and forfeited his word? He seemed much surprised with this message, and said, He knew no rea∣son, except it being Fair-day the Sea∣men were drunk in taking their Farewell; and withall advised his Lordship to be gone, because his stay there could not be safe. But since that, Limbry himself hath given this account under his own hand:— That according to an Agreement made at Charmouth, September the 19. 1651. betwixt himself and one Captain Norris, (since known to be Colonel Francis Win∣ham) he put forth his Ship beyond the Cobs-mouth into Charmouth-road, where his servants on the 22. of the same moneth were all ready in her, waiting his com∣ing; That he going to his house about ten that night, for linen to carry with him, was unexpectedly locked into a chamber by his Wife, to whom he had a little before revealed his intended Voy∣age
with some Passengers into France▪ for whose Transportation, at his return, he was to receive a considerable sum o money from Captain Elesden. This woman (it seems) was frighted into a panick fear by that dreadful Pro∣clamation (of the tenth of September) set out by the Men of Westminster, and published that day at Lime. In this,  heavy Penalty was thundred out agains all that should conceal the King, or any of his party who were at Worcester Fight▪ and a Reward of a Thousand pound promised to any that should betray him▪ She, apprehending the Persons her hus∣band engaged to carry over to be Roy∣alists, resolved to secure him from dan∣ger, by making him a Prisoner in hi own chamber. All the persuasions he use for his liberty, were in vain: For th more he intreated, the more her violen passion increased, breaking forth into such clamors and lamentations, that h feared if he should any longer contend both himself and the Gentlemen he pro∣mised to transport, would be cast away in this storm, without ever going to Sea▪ Thus a Design in a business of the high¦est
nature, carried on with industry and prudence, even to the very last, still pro∣mising full hope of a happy production, by one mans single whisper (the bane of Action) proved abortive. For no doubt, had Limbry kept his counsel, he had gained the honour of Conveying over his Majesty; of whose Noble Cou∣rage and Vertue, God was pleased to make yet farther trial, as the sequel will inform. The King passing on upon London-Road from Charmouth, met many travel∣lers, among whom was one of his Fa∣thers servants, well known both to His Majesty and the Colonel; who were ve∣ry well pleased that he was not guilty of so much Civility, as to give either of them the complement of a Salutation. As they drew near to Bridport, the Co∣lonel riding a little before, and entring the town, perceived it full of Soldiers: whereupon stopping his horse till the King came up, he inreated His Majesty to keep on, and by no means to put himself into the mouth of them, who gaped gree∣dily after his destruction. Nevertheless, the King having engaged to the Lord
Wilmot to expect him there, (without the least apprehension of danger) rode into the George, and alighting in the Court, was forced to stay there, and in the Sta∣ble, near half an hour, before the Co∣lonel could procure a Chamber. All this while his bloody Enemies were his on∣ly Companions, with whom he discours∣ed freely without fear, and learned from them their intended Voyage for Jersey and Guernsey, and their Design upon those Islands. Here may you see the Pursu∣ers overtaken, and the bitterest of E∣nemies friendly discoursing with Him, whose utter Ruine they accounted would compleat their Happiness. He that sate in Heaven certainly laughed them to scorn, and by the interposition of his mighty Arm eclipsed their glory, and by his admirable Wisdom reproved and confuted their malice against the King, and their blasphemies against Heaven. No sooner had the King withdrawn himself from this dangerous Company in∣to a Chamber (with much difficulty ob∣tained) but Mrs. Coningsby espied Pe∣lers riding into the Inn. He (being beck∣ned up) acquainted His Majesty, that
the Lord Wilmot humbly petitioned him to make haste out of that place, and to overtake him slowly passing on the road, and waiting his Majesties coming. Pre∣sently upon the dismission of Peters, the King having taken some small repast, not far from the Town joyned in com∣pany again with the Lord Wilmot, and discoursing of the several Adventures of that hopeful, and (as it fell out) most pe∣rilous Journey, concluded that London-Road was very unsafe, and therefore re∣solved to follow the next Turning which might probably lead towards Yeavill or Sherborn, neither of which is computed to be above two miles distant from Trent. Providence (the best of Guides) direct∣ed these Strangers (for so they were all to those parts) to a way, which after many hours travel brought them into a Village, in which was a small Inn for entertainment. Thus entred these mas∣qued Travellers, to enquire where they were. And to this purpose calling for some Beer, the Host of the house (one Rice Jones) came forth, and informed them that the place was called Broad∣winsor. The Colonel knew the Inn∣keeper
and his wife to be very honest, loyal persons, and that for their fidelity to the King and his party, they had (according to their condition) under∣gone their share of troubles. The King understanding the affection of the peo∣ple, resolves to lodge in the house that night, it being already somewhat dark, and His Majesty and Company suffici∣ently wearied with their former nights watching, and that days travel. The Colonel (while the horses were put up) desired Mr. Jones to shew him the most private rooms; the reason he gave was, Be∣cause his Brother-in-law Colonel Reymes (whom the Lord Willmot personated) had been a long time imprisoned as well as himself; That they had lately ob∣tained their Paroles, and to be seen to∣gether so far from their homes, might create new jealousies, and so consequent∣ly crush them with new troubles. The good Host upon this brought them up into the highest chambers, where Pri∣vateness recompensed the meanness of the Accommodation, and the pleasantness of the Host (a merry fellow) allayed and mitigated the weariness of the Guests.
Now the face of things began to smile, which all the day and night preceding looked so louring and ill-favoured. But this short Calm was on a sudden inter∣rupted by a violent Storm. For in comes the Constable with almost Forty Soldi∣ers to be billeted that very night in the Inn: All the lower Receptacles were thronged up with this unexpected Com∣pany; so that the King was in a man∣ner besieged, there being no passage from above, but through those suspect∣ed Guards. Thus every place brought forth its troubles, and every period of time disclosed fresh dangers! Shortly af∣ter the Soldiers had taken up their Quar∣ters, a Woman in their company fell in labour in the Kitchin. The pangs she endured, made the Inhabitants of that place very ill at ease, fearing lest the whole Parish should become the reputed Father, and be enforced to keep the Child. To avoid this charge, the chie∣fest of the Parish post to the Inn, between whom and the Soldiers arose a very hot conflict concerning provision to be made for the mother and the infant. This dis∣pute continued till such time as (accor∣ding
to orders) they were to march to the Sea-side. This quarrelsom Gossip∣ping was a most seasonable diversion, exercising the minds of those troublesom Fellows, who otherwise were likely to have proved too too inquisitive after the Guests in the house; the sad con∣sequences of which, every loyal heart trembles to think on. Surely we cannot, (except we wilfully shut our own eyes) but clearly see, and with all reverence and thankfulness a∣dore the Divine Goodness for His Ma∣jesties signal Deliverances in this Voy∣age. Especially if looking back upon Charmouth, we consider the dangers that threatned him, occaonsied by the Lord Wilmot's short stay there, after the Kings departure. For one Hamnet a Smith, be∣ing called to shoe his Lordships horse, said, He well knew by the fashion of the shoes, that they were never set in the West, but in the North. The Hostler (a bird of the same feather) hearing this, began to tell what Company had been there, how they sate up, and kept their horses sadled all the night; and from hence they conclude, That either the
King, or some Great Persons had certain∣ly been at the Inn. The Hostler (whose heart was soured against the King) runs presently to one Westly (of the same lea∣ven) then Minister of Charmouth, to in∣form him of these Passages, and to ask counsel what was to be done. This West∣ley was at his Morning Exercise, and be∣ing something long-winded [And by the way it may be observed, that long Prayers proceeding from a Traiterous heart, once did good, but by accident onely] the Host∣ler, unwilling to lose his reward at the Gentlemans taking horse, returns with∣out doing his errand. As soon as my Lord was mounted and gone, Hamnet tells Westly of the discourse between him∣self and the Hostler. Away comes West∣ley upon full speed to the Inn, and (al∣most out of breath) asks the woman of the house, what Guests she had enter∣tained that night? She said, They were all strangers to her, she knew them not. I tell you then (said he) one of them was the King. Then hastily turning away from her, he and Hamnet ran to Mr. Butler of Commer (then Justice of Peace) to have him dispatch abroad his Warrants
to raise the Country for the apprehend∣ing of the King, and those persons the last night with him at Charmouth. But he spends his mouth in vain, a deaf ear is turned upon him, no Warrant would be issued forth. This check given to his zeal so vexed him, that it had like to have caused a suffocation, had not Cap∣tain Massey (as errant a Hotspur as him∣self) given it vent, by raising a Party and pursuing the King upon London-Road. But God preserved His Majesty by di∣verting him to Broadwinsor, whilst Mas∣sey and his hot-mettled company outran their Prey as far as Dorchester. And in∣deed, the report of the Kings being at Charmouth, was grown so common, that the Soldiers (lying in those parts) search'd the houses of several Gentlemen, who were accounted Royalists, thinking to surprize him. Amongst which, Pilisdon (the house of Sir Hugh Windham Uncle to Colonel Francis Windham) was twice rifled. They took the old Baronet, his Lady, Daughters, and whole Family, and set a Guard upon them in the Hall, whilst they examine every corner, not sparing either Trunk or Box. Then taking a
particular view of their Prisoners, they seize a lovely young Lady, saying, she was the King disguised in womens ap∣parel. At length being convinced of their gross and rude mistake, they desisted from offering any farther violence to that Fa∣mily. And here it is much to be obser∣ved, that the same day the King went from Charmouth, Captain Elesden came to Pilesdon, and enquired of Sir Hugh and his Lady for the King and Colonel, con∣fidently affirming that they must needs be there. His Majesty having with an evenness of spirit gotten through this roughpassage, safely anchored at Broadwinsor, Where at length enjoying some rest, he com∣mands the Colonel to give his opinion what course was to be taken, as the face of affairs then looked. The Colonel (seeing Forces drawn every where up∣on that shore) thought it very hazardous to attempt any thing more in Dorsetshire; and therefore humbly besought his Ma∣jesty, that he would be pleased to retreat to Trent: He hoped his Majesty was al∣ready satisfied in the fidelity of his ser∣vants; and that he doubted not, his Ma∣jesty
might lie securely in that Creek, till it was fair weather, and a good season to put forth to Sea. He humbly advi∣sed, that Peters might conduct the Lord Wilmot to Mr. Huit's house at the Kings-Arms in Sarum, where he and many of his friends had been sheltered in the time of troubles. That Peters (being at Sa∣rum) should by a private token bring his Lordship to Mr. John Coventry (his Kins∣man) a Person Noble, Wise, and Loyal, with whom he had kept Intelligence in order to the Kings service, ever since his Majesty had set foot in Scotland; That he was assured Mr. Coventry would think himself highly honoured to correspond in this matchless employment, The King's Preservation. He desired the Lord Wil∣mot to be confident of lying concealed; And likewise to treat with Mr. Coventry, and by Peters to return his Majesty an account how he found that Gentleman affected towards this service. This counsel being well relished and approved, 'twas resolved, That between Sarum and Trent (lying 30 miles distant and better) an intercourse should be kept by trusty messengers, and a secret way
of writing, to avoid danger in case of interception. All things being thus con∣cluded, the King left his jovial Host at Broadwindsor, and returned with the Co∣lonel and Mrs. Coningsby to Trent. The Lord Wilmot with Peters went that night to Sherborn, and the next morning was waited on by Swan (who attended his Lordship to the Colonels) and that day got into Sarum; where he soon saluted Mr. Coventry, in all things fully answer∣ing his Lordships expectation: And (the 25. of September) Peters was sent back with this joyful message from the Lord Wilmot to his Majesty, That he doubted not (by Mr. Coventries assistance, and those recommended by him) to be able in some short time to effect his desires. Whilst his Sacred Majesty enjoys his peace at Trent, and the Lord Wilmot (with those other Worthies) is busied at Sarum to procure its continuation, It can∣not be impertinent ro mention a Circum∣stance or two, which inserted in the midst of the web and texture of this Story would have looked unhandsom, but ad∣ded as a fringe may prove ornamental. Upon the Sunday morning after the
King came to Trent, a Tailor of the Parish informed the Colonel, That the Zealots [which swarmed in that place] discoursed overnight, that Persons of Quality were hid in his house, and that they intended to search and seise them; and therefore he desired the Colonel (if any such there were) to convey them thence, to avoid surprisal. The Colonel (rewarding the good man for his care and kindness to∣wards himself and family) told him, That his Kinsman (meaning the Lord Wilmot) was not private, but publick in his house, (for so his Lordship pleased to be) and that he believed he would shew himself in the Church at the time of Prayers. When the honest fellow was gone, the Colonel acquaints the King what passed between himself and the Tailor, and withall besought his Majesty to persuade the Lord Wilmot to accompany him to Church, thinking by this means not only to lessen the jealousie, but also to gain the good opinion of some of the Fana∣ticks, who would be apt to believe, that the Colonel was rather brought to Church by my Lord, than his Lordship by the Colonel, who seldom came to
that Place, since Faction and Rebellion had justled out, and kept possession against Peace and Religion. He alledged moreo∣ver, that he sate in an Ile distinct from the body of the Congregation, so that the Parishoners could not take a full view of any of his company. These reasons, joined with his Majesties command, pre∣vailed with his Lordship; and (though he thought it a bold adventure, yet) it not only allayed the fury, but also took out the very sting of those wasps; inso∣much that they who the last night talked of nothing but searching, began now to say, that Cromwell's late success against the King, had made the Colonel a Con∣vert. All being now quiet about home, the Colonels Lady (under a pretence of a Visit) goes over to Sherborn to hear what news there was abroad of the King. And towards evening, at her return, a Troop of horse clapt privately into the town. This silent way of entring their Quarters, in so triumphant a time, gave a strong a∣larm to this careful Lady, whose thoughts were much troubled concerning her Royal Guest. A stop she made to heark∣en
out what brought them thither, and whither they were bound: But not one grain of Intelligence could be procured by the most industrious enquiry. When she came home, she gave his Majesty an ac∣count of many stories, which like fly∣ing clouds were blown about by the breath of the people, striving to cover her trouble with the vail of chearfulness. But this the King perceiving to be rather forced than free, as at other times, was earnest to know the cause of her discom∣posure. And to satisfie his Majesties im∣portunity, she gave him a full relation of the Troop at Sherborn: At which his Majesty laughed most heartily, as if he had not been in the least concerned. Yet upon a serious debate of the matter, the Colonel and his Lady supplicated the King to take a view of his Privy chamber, into which he was persua∣ded to enter, but came presently forth again, much pleased, that upon the least approach of danger, he could thither re∣treat with an assurance of security. All that night the Colonel kept strict watch in his house, and was the more vigilant, because he understood from Sherborn,
that the Troop intended not to quarter there, but only to refresh themselves and march. And accordingly (not so much as looking towards Trent) about two of the clock next morning, they removed towards the Sea-coast. This fear being over, the King rested all the time of his stay at Trent, without so much as the ap∣prehension of a disturbance. The strangeness of which will be much increased by the addition of what a Cap∣tain who served under Cromwell at Wor∣cester, reported to two Divines of un∣doubted veracity, long before the King's blessed Restauration: That he was fol∣lowed and troubled with Dreams for three nights together, That the King was hid at Trent near Sherborn, in a house nigh to which stood a Grove or patch of trees, and that thither he should go and find him. This suggestion thus reitera∣ted, was a powerful spur to prick him forwards: But the hand which held the reins and kept him back, was irresistible. Now the hands of his Majesties enemies were not only restrained from doing him evil, but the hands of his friends were strengthened to do him good. In order
to which, Colonel Edward Phelips of Montacute in the County of Somerset, came from Sarum to his Majesty (Sep∣tem. 28.) with this intelligence, That his brother Colonel Robert Phelips was em∣ployed to Southampton to procure a Ves∣sel, of whose transaction his Majesty should receive a speedy account. In the mean time, Captain Thomas Lit∣tleton (a Neighbour of Colonel Wynd∣ham) was dispatch'd up into Hampshire, where by the aid of Mr. Standish he dealt with the Master of a Ship, who under∣took to carry off the Lord Wilmet and his company, upon the condition his Lordship would follow his direction. But the hope of Colonel Phelips his good suc∣cess at Hampton dashed this enterprise, and the Captain was remanded to Trent, and to make no progress till farther order. Upon the first of October Mr. John Sel∣liok (Chaplain to Mr. Coventry) brought a Letter to his Majesty. In answer to which the King wrote back, That he desired all diligence might be used in providing a Vessel; and if it should prove difficult at Hampton, trial should be made farther: That they should be ascertained of a Ship
before they sent to remove him, that so he might run no more hazards than what of necessity he must meet with in his pas∣sage from Trent to the place of his Tran∣sportation. October the fifth, Colonel Phelips came from the Lord Wilmot and Mr. Coventry to his Majesty with this assurance, That all things were ready; And that he had informed himself with the most private ways, that so he might with greater probability of safety guide his Majesty to the Sea-side. Assoon as the King heard this Message, He resolved upon his Jour∣ney. Colonel Wyndham earnestly peti∣tions his Majesty, that he might wait on him to the shore: But his Majesty gave no grant, saying, It was no way neces∣sary, and might prove very inconvenient. Upon the renewing this request, the King commanded the contrary, but sweetned his denial with this promise, That if he were put to any distress, he would again retreat to Trent. About ten next morning (October the sixth) his Majesty took leave of the old Lady Wyndham, the Colonels Lady and Family, not omitting the meanest of
them that served him. But to the good old Lady he vouchsafed more than an or∣dinary respect, who accounted it her highest honour, that she had three Sons and one Grandchild slain in the defence of the Father, and that she her self in her old age had been instrumental in the pro∣tection of the Son, both Kings of Eng∣land. Thus his Sacred Majesty, taking Mrs. Juliana Coningsby behind him, attended by Colonel Robert Phelips, and Peters, bad Farewel to Trent, the Ark in which God shut him up, when the Floods of Rebellion had covered the face of his Dominions. Here he rested Nineteen days, to give his faithful Servants time to work his deliverance: And the Al∣mighty crowned their endeavours with success, that his Majesty might live to appear as Glorious in his Actions, as Cou∣ragious in his Sufferings. FINIS.
