B390 R37054 16197765 105047
ETERNITY: OR, THE WEIGHTINESS OF THE UNSEEN CONCERNS Of the other World, from their Duration: Opened, proved, and applyed in a Sermon preached in WORCESTER-SHIRE. By THO. BADLAND, Minister of the Gospel. Illi brevi huic vitae se totos implicent, qui aeterna nesciunt. Hieron. LONDON, Printed for Sampson Evans, Book-seller in Wor∣cester, and are to be sold by N. Simmons at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church Yard, 1676.
Jan. 18. 1675. IMprimatur haec Concio de Aeternitate Gul. Jane S. T. B. Rev. in Christo Patri Dno Henrico Episc. Londin. agrave; Sac Domest.
TO THE READER. Christian Reader, THis Sermon was never intended to peep out of the bounds of a popular auditory: The importunity of Friends, who would not otherwise be sa∣tisfied, hath brought it upon the publick Stage. The Discourse is but short and mean for so large and ponderous a sub∣ject; but the smalness of the Volume may bring it to more hands, and the plain∣ness thereof is most apt and congruous
for their use and benefit, for whom 'tis chiefly sent abroad. The poor and un∣learned, which are alwaies most numerous, and who are also no less concerned in the weighty affair of Eternity than others, cannot reach nor perhaps so well under∣stand the bigger and more learned, or o∣therwise more useful Treatises of this sub∣ject that are written: And to such, I hope, the Father of Mercies at least will make this hasty scrible a Blessing; which is the great desire, and shall be the ear∣nest prayer of the Author, who is Thine in Christ T. B.
2 Cor. 4.18. the latter part. But the things which are not seen are eternal. TO pass by the Analysis of this Chapter; toward the latter end you have the Apostle ac∣quainting us with the reason of his own, and other Apo∣stles and Ministers of the Gospel's constan∣cy, boldness, unwearied diligence, and faithfulness in the work of Christ, in the midst of the great perils, distresses and ha∣zards attending them in their course. The main of their encouragement is this, that their utmost sufferings and sorrows in their duty were their high advantage: They
worked for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: vers. 17. This prize (he tells us) their hearts were on in the contempt of all things here. This they would not lose, whatever they lost, or suf∣fer'd in pursuance of it. And that they were rational in this resolution, he evi∣denceth from the Glory of the prize they had in their eye. This is the most excel∣lent prize, and infinitely sufficient to re∣compence them for all losses and afflictions befalling them in the due prosecution of it. There is no comparison between things that are seen, and things that are not seen. The invisible concerns of the other world do as much excell outward and visible con∣cerns, as Eternity is of more consequence than time. The things that are seen (saith he) are temporal; but The things that are not seen are eternal. So that the words are a reason why the Apostles had their hearts so fixed on the blessings of the unseen world, as lightly to set by the most terrible discouragements attending them in pursuance of them. They
were eternal; whereas their outward af∣flictions and miseries were but temporal. In the words there is, 1. The things spoken of: Things which are not seen; that is, the invisible concerns and enjoyments which yet are out of our view in the other world; The mercies of the Paradise of God, and the miseries of the unquenchable fire, which will be the portion of the damned. The happy estate of the Blessed, and the wretched condi∣tion of the Cursed and condemned beyond the borders of time; These are the things which in general the Apostle means by things unseen. 2. Here is something affirmed of these unseen things: They are Eternal; that is, they are of everlasting duration; they will never have an end, but continue for ever and for ever. When this world and all Sublunary things are burnt up and va∣nish, and all concerns of time have a pe∣riod; the happiness of the Saints, and the misery of the wicked shall last and continue: they shall never vanish or have
a period. The Godly shall triumph in God's Love, and the wicked weep and howl under God's fury, to the endless bounds of eternity. When the space of million of millions of years, according to our poor and shallow reckoning, are over, the happiness of the Pious, and the sor∣row and perplexity of the wicked is ne∣ver the nearer a period: still the Saints joy continues, and still the wickeds suf∣ferings continue, and are no nearer end∣ing than at the beginning; Night and day to eternity the Holy shall rejoyce and triumph; and night and day to eternity the impious shall have gnashing of teeth, and mourn. Unseen things are eternal. From the words thus explained, were raised these two Doctrines. Doctr. 1. The weighty concerns attend∣ing us in the other world are unseen. The entertainment that immortal Souls will meet with, when death comes, and hath done its work upon them, we cannot here behour. We perceive not the triumphant joys of the Glorified here: nor do we per∣ceive
the doleful howlings of the damned here. 'Tis true, we have something of these weighty concerns revealed in the Word: but yet they are not within our view. We see not now the Saints Crowns or Glorious Robes, and we hear not now their melodious and transporting Songs of triumph and praise, wherewith they are priviledged in the Kingdom of their Fa∣ther; and we see not now the wickeds horrour, torments and insupportable suf∣ferings in the Hellish Lake: we have only the report of these things, though it be an infallible report. And doubtless, this is the main cause why Heaven is no more prized, and no more vigorously pursued; and Hell is no more abhorred, and stre∣nuously and diligently avoided and shunned by Mortals; they believe not these things, because they see them not, had they seen the happiness of the Righteous in God's Eternal Kingdom, or the misery of the impious, in the Infernal prison; or had they believing apprehensions of  e∣quivalent to sense; they could not neglect
them, they could not choose but look up∣on them, as the Apostle here doth, as the most weighty affair and concerns. Doctr. 2. The weighty concerns of the unseen world are eternal. They are not fading or vanishing, but of never ending continuance and duration. The trium∣phant world's felicity shall never have a period, and the damned world's misery shall never expire. When innumerable years are past and gone, the Saints triumph is as far from a period, as at the beginning; and the sorrows and sufferings of the wicked are no nearer expiring than at the beginning. This last is the Doctrine we intend to handle; and in the prosecution thereof, we shall observe this Method. 1. We shall prove it. 2. We shall shew what is imply'd in this word Eternal, and so the weighiness of Unseen concerns. 3. We shall make some application. First, we shall prove th Doctrine, That
the weighty concerns of the unseen world are eternal. And that, 1. By Scripture plainly. 2. By induction from Scripture and Nature. 1. We shall prove the Doctrine by plain Scripture, Mat. 25. ult. These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into life eternal. Here you see the rewards of the other world, that all shall reap, are styled everlasting and eter∣nal. Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and ever∣lasting contempt. Both the reward of the Godly and the impious is here called Ever∣lasting in the unseen world. So you have the Scripture speaking of the Righteous and the wicked particularly, and proclaiming their reward to be eternal and everlast∣ing. Thus 'tis said the Godly seek for Eternal life in the other world, Rom. 2.7. and, that They are heirs of Eternal life, Titus 3.7. and, that They have an House not made with hands eternal in the Heavens,
2 Cor. 5.1. And the Apostle tells us, that he therefore endured all things for the Elects sake, that they may also obtain the salvation, which is in Jesus Christ, with eternal Glory, 2 Tim. 2.10. so, Heaven is called their Everlasting Habitation, Luke 16.9. And as the enjoyments of the Saints are eternal; so likewise are the miseries of the wicked. They are to be punished with Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his power, 2 Thes. 1.9. they are to be cast into Everlasting fire, Mat. 18.8. or into fire that shall never be quenched, and where the worm dieth not, Mark 9.44. So also 'tis said, that they shall be tormented day and night for ever, and for ever, Rev. 20.10.15. 2. We shall prove the Doctrine by in∣duction from Scripture and Nature. 1. The Soul is eternal and dies not, and therefore must be happy or miserable for ever. This cannot be killed, Mat. 10.28. when it leaveth the Body, it doth not sleep or die as the Body doth, Eccles. 12.7. and when 'tis again re-united to the Body
at the Resurrection, 'twill never be se∣parated from it; but Body and Soul are joyned together at the Resurrection for Everlasting life, or Everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. and therefore they will have an Eternal Existence. At the Resurrection the very Body it self will be raised incorruptible; Our corru∣ption must put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.53. Though at present our Bodies die and moul∣der to dust, yet at the Resurrection they will not be capable of corruption. We shall then die no more a Natural death, Luke 20.36. And if Body and Soul will live eternally after the Resurrection-day, they must needs be either happy or mi∣serable to eternity; if they have for ever an Existence, they must needs have a felicitous or infelicitous Existence. If they do not vanish into nothing, or are not corrupted, killed, or separated; then they will certainly for ever groan or triumph, rejoyce or mourn. 2. Eternal rewards are promised, or threatned: God doth not promise to ma∣gnify
mercy and loving kindness to the Saints for a small season only, but to E∣ternity; nor doth he threaten momentany losses or sufferings only to the wicked and impious, but everlasting. The Righteous shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. And the wicked have dark∣ness for ever reserved for them, 2 Peter 2.17. Believers shall never perish or die, John 11.26. And the Impenitent are to be cast into fire that shall never be quench∣ed, Mark 9.43. This is the encourage∣ment that God doth give his People, they shall have everlasting joy upon their heads ere long: and this is the discouragement he gives the wicked, they shall be punished with eternal destruction, or tormented day and night for ever and for ever. Oh! Heaven will have Believers triumphing in it to the utmost limits and bounds of Eter∣nity; for God hath promised it to them. And Hell will have ungodly Souls and the finally impenitent, weeping and gnashing their teeth in it for ever more: for God hath fore-told and threatned it; and he is
a true, just, and Righteous GOD. 3. GOD, that is engaged to distri∣bute these Rewards, is eternal; he liveth for ever to see the execution of what ever hath gone out of his mouth. As he was from everlasting, so he will continue to everlasting. He inhabits eternity, Isa. 57.15. The Eternal God is the refuge, com∣fort and salvation of the Saints, Deut. 33.27. And the confusion, discomfort and and terrour of the impious and wicked. If Jehovah himself could die, the Saints happiness would expire, and have a pe∣riod; and the wickeds and damneds mi∣sery in Hell would be over: but he living, who hath promised and threatned, and is engaged to accomplish the Saints hopes, and wicked's fears; we may be sure they will last for ever. Oh! God hath no end of daies, Jehovah's age will never expire. He is Eternal that hath undertaken to priviledg the Pious with eternal Life, and reward the Impious with eternal Death; therefore unseen concerns will be eternal.
4. As God is eternal, so he will be eter∣nally Alsufficient to make good his word. As he was Almighty, and Infinite, and boundless in all perfections from eternity; so he will remain unto eternity. From everlasting to everlasting he is God, Ps. 90.2. He will never descend from the Throne, or become frail, or unable to execute his promises or threatnings. He is the eter∣nal and immortal King, 1 Tim. 1.17. He is independent for ever, and can perform his pleasure to all eternity. And there∣fore his Decree and Law touching the end∣less condition of the Righteous and wicked will stand. Alas! God can as easily make the Righteous immortally happy, and the impious immortally miserable, as uphold the world and all things therein upon the borders of time. He lives continually in the same Majesty, Glory, and Perfecti∣ons, that he is invested with to this day: And he will never have his Omnipotency impaired, diminished, or weakned. If God were capable to be dethroned, or to be∣come infirm or weak for the accomplish∣ment
of his projects or revealed Will; the ungodly might hope for an expiration of their sorrows, and the Righteous might fear a period of their Joy and Felicity: but God being unchangeable, and immu∣tably the same to everlasting; the hopes of the one, and the fears of the other will be vain. 5. God will eternally delight in the happiness of the Saints, and miseries of the wicked; and therefore both the one and the other will be eternal. Touching the Pious 'tis said, that 'tis the Father's good pleasure to give them a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. They are the Persons, that Jehovah delights to honour: their Glory is God's Glory, Ephes. 1.12. JESUS CHRIST will come to be glorified in them at the Resurrection-day, when he shall set the Crown of Heavenly Felicity and magnificency upon their heads, 2 Thes. 1.10. So that their happiness and ex∣altation will be God's Glory, Delight and Rejoycing; and therefore will be eternal. 'Twill continue as long as God shall
delight in it, and that will be for ever more. So likewise the misery of the wicked in Hell will be to the glory of God's Justice and Righteousness; and therefore will be eternal, even as long as God doth continue just and righteous, which will be for ever. So also God doth rejoyce in their perdition and de∣struction; he laughs at their calamity, and mocks at their distress, when they are remediless, Prov. 1.26. And therefore though they call upon him, he will not answer them; though they seek him early, they shall not find him, that is, not mer∣ciful or gracious to them. He that made them (saith the Prophet) will not have mercy on them; and he that formed them, will shew them no savour, Isa. 27.11. So that you see, that both the happiness of the Godly, and misery of the wicked in the other world, will be God's delight and his Glory: and therefore they will be eternal. 6. The Saints cannot forfeit their hap∣piness, and the wicked cannot purchase
or make satisfaction for their Redemptio from their misery in the other world▪ and therefore both will be eternal. 'Ti apparent that in Heaven the Saints are as the confirmed Angels, and so not capable to be tempted to evill, or to fall from God. Their separated Souls in Eternall Mansions are said to be made perfect, Hebr. 12.23. And into God's Paradise, which is their glorious Abode and Habi∣tation, there entreth nothing that defileth, Rev. 21.27. Whilst they are in the King∣dom of their Father, they are under the fullest communications of sanctifying, and preventing, and triumphing Grace. Ho∣liness is their element; duty love and praise to God is their very food and re∣creation; and sin is as lothsom, as death and the most exquisite miseries and torments are to us. There also they have no tem∣pter, and nothing to be a bait or allure∣ment to draw them from God: which with the consideration of their corrobating and confirming Grace doth proclaim, that they cannot sin, or forfeit the mercies where∣with
they are priviledg'd: And therefore they will not lose their happiness. God will not deprive them of their mercies without cause, he will not send them from his Triumphant Kingdom, to which they are Heirs, till they cut off the entail of eternal Blessings, and that will be never: So that their happiness must needs be eter∣nal. And then, the wicked will never make satisfaction in order to their redemption from Hell; and therefore their miseries must be also eternal. They must stay there, till they have pay'd the utmost mite they are endebted unto Divine Justice, Matt. 5.26. and that will be for ever more: And therefore that expression, Till thou hast pay'd the last mite, thou shalt not depart thence, signifies as much as, Thou shalt ne∣ver depart thence, Luke 12.59. Oh! all the sufferings of the damned, even to an endless eternity will not satisfy for their sin and disobedience here. And 'tis apparent, they have none else to satisfy for them; CHRIST will die no more for them. There remains no more Sacrifice
for sin, when the price of CHRIST's Blood is neglected. Oh! the Godly will not lose their happiness, and the wicked will never get redemption from Hell; as 'tis in the Parable, There is an Unpassable Gulf between the Glorified and the damned, so that they cannot pass the one to the other, Luke 16.26. and therefore their condition in the other world will be eternal. 7. If the Saints happiness were not e∣ternal, 'twould much discomfort them in the other world; and if the wicked's mi∣sery were not eternal, 'twould much com∣fort them, and alleviate their miseries and extremities in the Unseen world: and therefore both are eternal. The Saints have fulness of joy in God's everlasting Kingdom; and therefore have no expecta∣tion that 'twill have an end: And the damned have perfection of misery in the Infernal prison; and therefore have, no hope that their sorrows will ever have a period. Reason will tell you, that if Triumphant Souls had any apprehensions
that their felicitous estate should at length expire, it would much abate their glo∣rious peace and tranquillity. And Rea∣son will also tell you, that, if the wicked had any hopes that their sorrows and ex∣quisite torments should at length cease, it would something at least mitigate their infelicity and grief; but this word Eternal added to the enjoyments of the Glorified filleth them with perfect Triumph, exclu∣ding all pensiveness fear and dolour. And the same word Eternal or Everlasting ad∣ded to the sorrows and miseries of the damned makes them most exquisite, and sets Hell a roaring most dismally. Oh! that the pleasures of the Saints are for ever more, Psal. 16.11. this makes them pleasures indeed: And that the anguish, perplexity and extremities of the damned are for ever more, this makes them per∣fectly dolefull indeed. 8. Nature doth seem to evidence this Truth, that things unseen are eternal. The very Heathens are taught to believe in general that the Good shall be everlastingly
happy, and the wicked everlastingly mi∣serable, in the other world. Not only the Christians, but the Mahometans; yea, and the Pagans, that have not unman'd themselves, do hold that after this life Men and Women shall live in a felicitous or dolefull condition for ever. The Soul's immortality is commonly believed, even where Christianity is not known: Nature hath dictated this to those that never heard the Scripture-revelation; and if the Soul dies not, it must needs be happy or mi∣serable for ever. Now, lay all these allegations together, and how apparent and undoubted is this Doctrine, that the weighty concerns of the unseen world are eternal. 2. We come to shew you what is im∣plyed in this word (Eternal) and so the weightiness of unseen concerns: And there are three things implied in it. 1. That the Unseen concerns of the o∣ther world have continuance or are lasting, they are not of short or small duration. Our lives here cannot be said to be eter∣nal,
because they are but of short continu∣ance; yea, they are said to flee away as a Weaver's shuttle, Job 7.6. and are com∣par'd to a vapour that soon vanisheth: but now the happiness of Heaven, and the suf∣ferings of Hell are more lasting. They continue not a 100 or a 1000 Years only, but many millions of millions of Years: When many Ages and Generations of Years are past and gone, yet still the Saints feli∣city and the wicked's misery and sorrow continueth. When the Saints have been in the Kingdom of their Father triumphing in his love, as long as this World shall last or endure; yet they have thousands of Years of the same felicity still behind. And when the wicked have been in Hell groan∣ing, and hideously roaring under the most doleful sufferings, as long as this World doth endure; yet they have millions of Years of the same misery, sorrow, and suffering; still behind. Oh! Eternity doth note not a short or transitory season, but a space  continuance beyond the limits of time: an verily, this doth bespeak unseen things,
or the happiness or misery of the other World, to be fearfully and dreadfully weighty; especially in comparison of our concerns here, that are all shut up in the narrow compass and bounds of a little time. Heaven is the Saints, and Hell is the wickeds long abode and habitation; whereas our stay here is comparatively very short. The enjoyments of your other world are continuing, and not of a short, fading, or transitory nature. 2. Eternity implies continuance also without intermission, or any discontinu∣ance. 'Tis not like the life of mortals that hath a mixture of joy and sorrow, or a succession of content and discontent: but the happiness of the Saints continues with∣out any intervening infelicity or sorrow; And the misery of the wicked continues in Hell without the intermixture of any joy or comfort whatsoever. Oh! so long as Eternity lasts, the Pious will be tri∣umphing in the highest Heavens; and so long as Eternity lasts, the wicked will have weeping and gnashing of teeth in the In∣fernal
prison. The Saints shall not weep an hour or a moment; they shall not grieve or be sadned the continuance of the twink∣ling of an eye during their abode in the o∣ther World: And the wicked shall not re∣joyce an hour or a minute, they shall have no intermission of their sorrow or misery in the other World. The Saints joy will con∣tinue or last without the least mixture of grief to allay their happiness; and the wick∣eds grief, perplexity and horror will con∣tinue and last without the least mixture of joy or comfort to alleviate their infelicity. The Rich man in Hell is not allow'd a drop of water to ease or refresh him for a moment's season, Luke 16.24, &c. And how much more considerable are unseen concerns in this respect than all our concerns here? Alas! who is there here that continues in a constant tenure of happiness or misery without change, during the daies of their vanity in this World? The most felicitous hath some sorrow mixed with his joy here: and the most miserable hath some in∣tervening hours or minutes of refreshment
or ease here: but in Eternity there is no change at all. The Saints rejoyce still, and are immutably triumphing; and the wicked mourn alwaies, and are unchangeably over∣whelm'd with dismal amazement and asto∣nishment. The happiness of the one is eter∣nal, and the misery of the other is eternal, and unchangeably so for the least moment. 3. Eternity notes continuance without any period, or length of space without any end: and this completes the Saints joy, and per∣fects the damneds misery in the other world. 'Tis not only a lasting continuance, and a continuance without intermission, but 'tis an everlasting continuance without any final discontinuance▪ When the bounds of time, yea ten thousand millions of millions of the bounds of time are passed over and gone; yet the Triumphs of the Glorified, and the roaring and sorrows of the damned are no nearer ending than at the beginning. Eter∣nity is a space of continuance immeasu∣rable, and inexpressible, yea and inconcei∣vable 'Tis pictured out by a ring or circle, which you may turn round, but cannot find
any end in it. And though we might give you strange measures of Eternity, yet we shall fall infinitely short of fully measuring it: we shall only set before you one, which though common, will best help you to con∣ceive of it, as indeed it is, to be inconcei∣vable. Suppose God should make a De∣cree, (which he hath not done, and never will do) that if an Angel would take a drop of water from the Sea once in a million of Years, till he had quite emptied it; that then the misery of the wicked should have a period, when the Sea is thus quite emptied, so that there remaineth not one drop of wa∣ter there more: this would be an inconcei∣vable term of time; and yet this would be nothing unto Eternity. Yea, if we should add to the drops of water in the Sea, the in∣numerable piles of grass in fields, the small dust of the Earth, the particular sands on the Sea-shore, the atoms or motes in the Sun, the small leaves of every tree, the hairs on Men and Women's heads, and the Stars in the spacious Firmament; that an Angel should take but one of these away once in a
milion of Years, and when they are all gone with every drop of water in the Sea, and in all Rivers, that then the damned should be released, and be delivered from their miseries; this would be a much more inconceivable term of time, and yet all would be nothing unto Eternity. Nay fur∣ther, Suppose the condition of their dis∣charge from those fearful miseries they groan under were straitned thus, that when an Angel had thus emptied all the Sea and every River, and carried away or removed every pile of grass in the field, all the dust in the Earth, the sand on the Sea-shore, the atoms in the Sun, the smal leaves of every tree or flower, the hairs of Men and Women's heads, and all the Stars of the Firmament, by taking away only one once in a million of Years; that then at the expiration of this term of time, only one of the damned should be redeemed and released from their dread∣ful miseries and sorrows; and so allow them all one after another successively the same priviledg, as soon as the Angel had performed this condition particularly for
each of them: This would be an inconcei∣vable term of time; and yet all would be delivered at last, Hell would be emptied of all its inhabitants at last: but now, when all this space of time is over and gone, Eter∣nity is no nearer ending, than it was at the very beginning of the Saints entrance into Heaven, or the wickeds entrance into Hell. When all these Years are past and expired, the Sints have as many more; yea, ten thousand times as many more to rejoyce and triumph in. And the wicked have as many more; yea, ten thousand times as many more to weep, and howl, and to be miserable in. Oh, Eternity! who can conceive the length thereof? Finite Creatures cannot compre∣hend it: when you think the utmost you can, Eternity runs quite beyond your thoughts, and much more beyond your ut∣most expressions. Oh! this comforts the Saints to purpose in the Triumphant world, that their happiness is everlasting, and will never, never end, expire, or have a period: And this makes hellish inhabitants roar to purpose, and sills them with horror, un∣speakable
confusion and amazement, that their misery will be everlasting, even to the utmost bounds of Eternity, and never never end, expire, or have a period. 3. We come to make application of this Truth, That the unseen things of the other world are eternal. Which will be 1. By way of Inference. 2. By way of Examination. 3. By way of Dehortation, and Caution. 4. By way of Exhortation. 1. To speak by way of Inference, and so many things may be drawn from this Do∣ctrine for our instruction: As, 1. Our concerns of time are certainly, but trifles and inconsiderable to unseen things. Alas! what is time to Eternity? and what is 30, or 60, or a 100 Years, the common utmost bounds of our abode here, unto Eternity? 'tis but a flash, a vapour or a dream. Oh! whether we are miserable or felicitous in this world, is nothing in com∣parison of happiness or misery in the other.
Mens utmost and longest day of happiness here will be quickly at an end; and Mens utmost and longest day of misery here will very speedily expire: but Eternity, into which all must lanch, will never end. What a bubble is all sublunary glory, and what a vanity is all sublunary ignominy and dis∣grace, to the more weighty unseen concerns that are before us? what are transient, fa∣ding, perishing Riches and wealth, and what is a short season of poverty or want, to the Riches of Heaven, or the necessities of in∣digent Souls in Eternity? Alas! Men put too high a price and value on Creature∣contents, and are dolefully too proud of their earthly felicity; and too much discon∣tented with their temporal afflictions and miseries: All concerns here, whether con∣tenting or not contenting, are but things that are not. And therefore the Apostle tells us, It remains, that both they that have wives be as though they had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoyce, as though they rejoyced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they
that use the world, as not abusing it, for the fashion of this worldpasseth away, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Sorrow and joy here, if rightly con∣sidered with Eternity, are nothing, or at least much less matters than mortals esteem them; even the greatest felicity and infelicity upon the borders of time are poor inconsiderable things, if seriously weighed and compar'd with the Unseen things of the other world, which are eternal. 2. Of what consequence and weighty import is the well or ill improvement of time here? as time is spent here, so will be our eternal portion. As our daies, hours and Years are husbanded here, will be our re∣ward for ever and for ever. Heaven or Hell attend us, the enjoyments whereof are ever∣lasting, according as we sow here. As hap∣piness or misery in this world is light, tri∣vial and inconsiderable to the weighty un∣seen things that are before us: so our judg∣ment of them is of eternal consequence. Time well spent, though it be but a short season, will be our happy and everlasting advantage; and time ill spent, though it be very short, will be our detriment and dam∣mage.
Here the Seed of that harvest of felici∣ty or misery that all reap in the other world is sown: You have no more time or opportu∣nity to provide for your eternal peace, but your present day of mercy and grace. And the neglect or abuse of your present transi∣tory daies or hours will everlastingly undo you. Oh! 'tis not to no purpose that you are called upon to redeem your time, and prize every inch of the Day of grace that is before you, and to work whilst 'tis called (to day,) and not to harden your hearts whilst opportunity lasteth: Alas! an eter∣nity of joy or sorrow and misery depends on it. He that allures you to trifle away your precious time, allures you to make shipwrack of eternal mercies, and to ad∣venture on eternal wrath, distress and per∣plexity. And how dreadful should tem∣ptations to such folly and madness be to us? 3. Sin is no light matter, for 'tis the seed of unseen sorrow in the other world, which is eternal: 'tis the seed of Hell, and the furious rebuke of the infinitely terrible and dreadful God for ever and for ever. This is little considered by the generality, who
wallow in it like swine as in their element▪ little do they think, or at least they have no strong convictions, that it prepares never ending exquisite and perfect misery for them. Materially some sins are final matters▪ as Adam's eating the forbidden-fruit, or the speaking of a vain word, &c. but formally▪ and in its cursed wages, nothing is a greater evill. If sinners did but see the doleful fruit that iniquity bears, they would dread and abhor it in publick and in private, a they do extremity of misery, or Hell it self▪ Oh! how injurious is that which most take to be their profit and advantage? what doth the world more hurt finally than sin? what brings the rational Creature under God's eternal displeasure, but iniquity? what∣ever content at present any have in sin or wickedness, be sure they will have none in the everlasting pernicious and cursed conse∣quents of it: they will not make light of it when it hath brought them under the mise∣ries, that are the portion of the damned for ever. 4. What a dreadful evill is unbelief▪ Alas! this is the cause of all other sins: and
Mens dreadful making light of the weighty nseen things that are before them. Men ear that the happiness and misery of the ther world is eternal; and that here we sow or our portion there: but they do not be¦ieve it, or but superficially believe it; that is he reason why Heaven is neglected, and not ecured, and why its eternal mercies and oyes are slighted; and that is the reason hy Hell and its everlasting miseries and orrows are no more industriously shunned, nd that sin the seed thereof is no more ab∣orred and lothed. Alas! who could for hort perishing concerns slight these in∣conceivably weighty concerns of eternity, hat did to purpose believe their certainty, or had through convincing apprehensions of their verity? Oh! unbelief is a more com∣mon malady than Mens profession intimates; most are unbelievers, and the faith of those hat do sincerely believe hath some unbelief mix'd with it; otherwise unseen things would have more influence upon them. The great reason, why Believers themselves are not more the world's wonders in their si∣gnal and remarkable self-denyal, crucifi∣xion
& estrangedness to the vanities of time▪ is because their faith is but imperfect and infirm. Alas! the weightiness of the con∣cerns of Heaven and Hell would certainly work the greatest contempt in us of the things here below; if we were as sensible of it, as ere long we shall be. Oh! unbelie is that which undoth the World, keeping them from knowing and firmly pursuing the things of their eternal peace. 5. What an unspeakable price is Christ's Love and Blood? what a singular mercy and rich advantage to sinners is the Redem∣ption that Christ hath wrought for us? The mercies of eternity would never have been our portion, had it not been for Christ; and eternal misery perdition and destruction would certainly have been our portion, had it not been for Christ's appearing for our salvation and deliverance. After a few daies spent upon the borders of time, we should all have been the fire-brands of un∣quenchable fire, and the vessels of God's fu∣rious rebukes to eternity without remedy, had it not been for Christ. But Christ being incarnated, and having satisfied justice, and
purchased a Gospel-Covenant, we are now apable of escaping everlasting sorrow and erplexity, and of triumphing eternally  God's Love and Mercy. And what a ich and glorious priviledg is this? how appy are we if we knew, and had wise∣om to lay hold on the things of our peace nd comfort? We may be happy for ever, hrough Christ, if we will look about us. Eternal life through Christ's Blood is ob∣ainable, if we are not wanting to our selves: nd that everlasting wrath, which we have deserved will never be our portion, if we do but ark our selves in Christ. Oh! Christ s the greatest price that ever was put into he hands of mortals; and they are the wisest Men that know his worth, and prize him ccordingly: And they are fools and mad∣men that lightly esteem and neglect him. 6. The Word and Ordinances of the Gospel are likewise an inestimable price in our hands: for these help us to acquain∣tance with, and security about these unseen concerns. Alas! notwithstanding all that Christ hath done for us, if we had not the Word among us, we should eternally without
question perish and be undone. How should we ever know the way to Heaven, or an escape from the wrath to come with∣out this? how easily would Hell beguile the best of us, & cause us to make shipwrack of our eternal hopes, and sow the seed of eter∣nal misery, had it not been for this? Many poor Heathens are therefore in a lamen∣table condition, that have nothing but the dim light of Nature to help them in this weighty affair: though they know, or have have some imperfect or superficial convi∣tions of another life in the other world, where it shall go well with the Good, and ill with the Bad; yet they do not know the way to true Happiness. The Book of Nature preacheth not Christ or his Redeeming Love to sinners: multitudes are in darkness and blindness in comparison of those that are priviledged with the Scripture. Little do many that are only under the Tutorage of the Light of Nature, know of their duty, or of their sin; and what wonder is it then that they walk not in the way of Life, or forsake not the way of eternal death? And those that now enjoy the Word and Ordi∣nances
of the Gospel, if they should be de∣prived of them, will be in no small danger of losing their eternal hopes: In a little time they may forget those precious truths they are acquainted with; or at least the constant preaching of temptations, and the Spirit of seduction may in time wear off the impression the Word had formerly made upon them. Experience tells us, that the frequent pressing of the same truths is ne∣cessary to their effectual influence upon the hearts of mortals, and to the prevention of the frauds and cheats of their Spiritual enemies: Without the Word and Ordinances of Christ Men will not sow for eternal Life; yea, they will certainly sow the seed of e∣ternal death. And what a mercy doth this bespeak the Word and Ordinances to be? And what enemies are they to a people that deprive them of these mercies, considering the weightiness of eternal concerns that are before us? 7. They are unworthy of unseen mercies that slothfully carelesly and indifferently prosecute them: They bid too low a price for these stupendious Blessings, and judge
themselves unfit to enjoy them, that faintly or lukewarmly mind them. How righteously will they miss of everlasting Triumphs, that think it much all the daies of their vanity here to sweat and labour to make them sure? And how righteously will they be the Vessels of eternal misery, that think not salvation from it worth their utmost endeavours du∣ring their short abode here? Alas! that there should be any so dismally unreaso∣nable thus to undervalue Everlasting con∣cerns; and yet what more common, gene∣ral or epidemical malady in the world? though these are the most weighty affair; yet they are not at all, or inconsiderably minded by the most. Most seek after eternal life, as if it were a matter of smallest moment: Most prefer the trivial concerns of time before them. Men's greatest care and most con∣stant endeavours are about temporal enjoy∣ments, what they shall eat, or drink, or wherewith they shall be clothed; or how they shall be Great, or felicitous or happy here; whereas Eternity is allow'd only those scraps of time & care, that the world or their earthly concerns can spare. Oh! very
few live like strangers here in the exercise of self-denyal and contempt of Creature∣comforts and enjoyments; 'tis but a little flock that to purpose maketh it the business of their daies to work out their salvation, and make sure their everlasting peace and comfort; and how deservedly then is ever∣lasting Life entailed and confined only to a little flock? If never ending felicity be not worth the work and utmost diligence of a few daies and years, 'tis worth nothing: and if salvation, from Hell and the dismal mi∣series there attending the damned for ever more be not worth constancy in duty, and utmost faithfulness during the little season of mortals abode here, 'tis worth nothing. 8. The Unholy and Ungodly are unmeet and unfit to dwell in Heaven: The enjoy∣ments thereof are so much against their na∣ture, that they will soon be weary of them; they cannot endure holy work, or such a holy place a little while, and much less for ever. None but those that have Godliness for their element are meet for the everlast∣ing mercies of the Paradise of God. None else will delight to be housed in that eter∣nal
Dwelling. Those that are enemies to holy love, and praise and duty to God; what should they do there, where there is nothing else? All that dwell in God's trium∣phant Kingdom must make holiness their de∣light; and this the wicked do not, and there∣fore are unmeet for these Eternal mercies. 9. Afflictions and sharp providences that cause us to mind Unseen concerns most in∣tensely and effectually are happy dispensa∣tions. Alas! 'tis better to weep and groan dismally for a small season, than for ever: 'tis better to be in heaviness and distress for a short moment, than to eternity: and Heaven's joy being everlasting will certain∣ly fully make amends for all our temporal sufferings how great soever: Though we should lye in extremity of misery during the age of Methusalah; yet if all be sanctified to our never ending comfort and triumph, we shall not (ere long) repent it, but call our miseries happy miseries, and our afflictions happy afflictions. This was that which supported and cau∣sed our Apostle and the rest of his Brethren to rejoyce under all the most terrible pro∣vidences attending them in the exercise of
their duty and faithfulness, that they worked for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Yea, all that are bound for Heaven are more or less the Sons and Daughters of sorrow here: God estrangeth them from the world and its vanities by many sharp and severe tryals here; and yet Eternity makes them glad of these whole∣som severities, and causeth them to bless God for these medicinal and healthful cor∣rections. Oh! 'tis happy for the Saints that God hedgeth up their way with thorns, that they may not sin against him: 'Tis their high priviledg, that they have be times God's fatherly sharp rebukes to preserve them from making shipwrack of their eternal hopes: Alas! if they did not mourn & weep dolefully here, they would be in danger of weeping and mourning much more dole∣fully to all eternity in Hell; and that would be dreadful indeed, and bespeak them mise∣rable indeed. 10. How happy a change will the Pious have, and how dismal and doleful a change will the Impious have, when Death hath done its work upon them, or when they lanch into the other world? Oh! how the
Righteous will rejoyce, when they are sen∣sible of the alteration of their condition for the better to the utmost date of eternity! And oh! how the wicked will be horribly amazed, when they are sensible of the altera∣tion of their condition for the worse to the utmost limits and bounds of eternity! When the Godly find themselves landed in the Kingdom of their Father, where joys and triumphs, glory and inconceivable felicity attend them world without end, what a rapture of grateful exhilaration will seize upon them? And when the wicked find themselves thrust or hurled into the infer∣nal prison, where sorrow and misery in per∣fection must be their everlasting never cea∣sing or ending portion; what an overwhelm∣ing and heart-sinking flood of anguish horrour and dreadful amazement will seize upon them? Oh! how far will the Holy be from repenting of their duty and faithful∣ness to God and their Souls then, whatever hardships or extremities they here grapled with in pursuance of them? and how cer∣tainly and dolefully will the impious and finally impenitent repent of their wicked∣ness,
and neglects of CHRIST and their Souls then, how highly soever they were dignified or priviledged here by it? they will both find eternity presenting them with such weighty concerns as will bespeak all creatures, and earthly concerns to be but trifles. The Godly will be perfectly seli∣citous for ever and for ever: and the wicked will be completely and perfectly miserable, and eternally so. 11. What a vain conceit is the Doctrine of merit and works of Supererogation? Some Papists hold, that 'tis not only possi∣ble for the Religious to merit Heaven for themselves, but also for others: but alas! who can believe it, that doth soberly con∣sider the weightines of those mercies they say they merit? what proportion is there between their work and their wages? what is a few Years holiness or service to God to an eternity of Mercy and Glory? Surely 'tis amazing Grace that doth privi∣ledg the most righteous, holy and pious with Heaven's Everlasting Blessings. 'Tis Infinite Mercy that doth reward the short, finite and transitory performances and en∣deavours
of the Religious with never end∣ing consolation and felicity, Ephes. 2.8, 9. The worth of Christ may indeed hence be gathered, who really did merit these eter∣nal Mercies for us, and upon the account of whom the Saints are heirs of this stupen∣dious Reward: But alas! the Saints them∣selves are but finite Creatures, and their ser∣vice and duty but finite; and between fi∣niteness and infiniteness there is no propor∣tion. Oh! the best of Men cannot merit the joyes of Heaven, but must be beholden to an interest in amazing Grace for a par∣ticipation of them, because they are eter∣nal. Persons of this perswasion, that their works are meritorious of the inconceivably glorious Blessings of Eternity, do over∣value themselves and duties, and under∣value the Saints Triumphant and Eternal Blessings. 12. God is the best Master, and the worst enemy: God's love is most valuable, and his fury and frowns most dismal. This is he that can priviledg us with never end∣ing joy, or reward us with never ending misery. None can so well requite their
servants, as God can and will; and none can so dreadfully avenge themselves on their enemies, as God can and will. In God's favour there is eternal life, and in his wrath there is nothing but eternal death. Happy are the people that have GOD for their God and Friend, for they shall be felicitous world without end: and cur∣sed are the people that have GOD for their righteous adversary; for they will be miserable world without end. This is he that can save or destroy for ever, and will dispose of us Body and Soul to eter∣nity. Oh! there is none whose love can thus reward us; and there is none whose hatred can thus injure us, as Jehovah's will. So much by way of inference from the Doctrine. 2. To speak by way of Examination: Do you enquire whether you are bound for E∣ternal Life, or Eternal Death? Will the Unseen things of Heaven or Hell be your never ending portion? have you sow'd for everlasting joy or sorrow? for eternal com∣fort or discomfort? 'Tis certain you must
have your portion of Unseen things, which you hear are eternal: you are all marching toward an everlasting estate, and you do here sow the seed of an harvest of never end∣ing and never sading happiness or misery: And are you not then concerned to consi∣der what is like to be your portion? Oh! Sirs, enquire whether you are the heirs of happiness or misery, which shall last for ever. Consider whether you are like to triumph, or weep and howl to an endless eternity: Consider whether God will be your Friend, or your enemy for ever. Really this is no light or contemptible af∣fair; 'tis infinitely more considerable than all concerns here below. Be careful there∣fore to search impartially for satisfaction in this. The uncertainty of your lives, and the weightiness of this concern, should prompt you to faithfulness, diligence and speed in this enquiry. And indeed what greater concern have you to mind? what trifles, and how trivial are all concerns here to this? alas! 'tis nothing considerable whether you are high or low, rich or poor, in ad∣versity or prosperity here in comparison of
what shall be your eternal portion. You are inexpressibly foolish and mad in mind∣ing any thing here in the neglect of this weighty concern. Enquire after these things following, if you would be satisfied, and not deceived in this Affair. 1. What have you made your business? or what hath been the main bent and aim of your Souls during the daies of your vani∣ty here? what is it that all your Under∣takings and endeavours are subordinate to? Is it Heaven, the enjoyment of God in Glory; or the contents of time? can you say, that you are seekers for Glory and Im∣mortality in the main course of our lives, yea, or no? The generality mind Soul∣concerns, or what will or shall become of them for ever only by the by; whilst world∣ly or perishing concerns are most minded and chiefly pursued. Oh! enquire whether this be not your case. 2. Are you arrived beyond the attain∣ments of hypocrites in Grace and Holiness? can you say that you are got beyond the
bounds of common Grace and Sanctifica¦tion? have you not merely a common re¦pentance, a common Faith, and a common love to God, and fear of him, and a common obedience to him? The generality among us are deceived in this weighty affair by com∣mon Grace, which causeth them to think they are the Vessels and Heirs of Heaven, when they are not. 3. What delight have you in Holiness and duty to God? is it your meat and drink? is it your Element? could you be content∣ed with or take pleasure in an eternal Exer∣cise of holy love, duty and praise to the Infinite Jehovah? Alas! what should you do for ever in Glory, if you delight not in these exercises, which will be the eter∣nal work of Saints in the Kingdom of their Father? Heaven will be no Heaven to you, whilst obedience to God and Spiritual en∣joyments are your burden, and not your recreation and complacency. By this therefore do you enquire whether you are bound for Heaven and eternal Life; yea, or no.
3. We come to speak something by way f Dehortation. And is it so, that Unseen hings are eternal? then 1. Take heed of sowing the seed of sor∣ow, grief or misery in the other world; or you hear it will be eternal. Oh! take eed at any rate of plunging your selves un∣der the unseen wrath, fury and vengeance of the Great Jehovah; for you see it will be of everlasting duration. You read of some that treasure up for themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, Rom. 2.5. Oh! let not this be the case of any of you. Yea, the generality of Men, and most Professours do walk in the broad way leading to everlasting destruction, Matth. 7.13. do you take heed that you be not of their number. And for that end take heed of hypocrisy: for the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, Job 36.13. Watch also against every sin; for the wages or fruit of it is eternal death, Rom. 6.23. Get ac∣quaintance with the things of your eternal peace; for you find God himself complain∣ing sometimes that for want of knowledg
his people perish, Hos. 4.6. Be careful to be delivered from an evill heart of unbelief for he that believeth not w be damned Mark 16.16. Die not in impecy; for those that repent not will certa be de∣stroyed, Luke 13.3. Live not afer the flesh; for he that liveth after the flesh must die, Rom. 8,13. Take heed of pride; for this goeth before destruction, Prov. 16.18. Abhor unmercifulness and cruelty; for he shall have judgment without mercy, that sheweth no mercy, James 2.13. Especially neglect not the relief of Christ in his indigent Members; for you see this is given as the reason of that dreadful sentence, that will pass on the vessels of perdition at the last day, Mat. 25.41, 42. &c. And lastly dread dis-obedience to the Gospel of Christ; for Christ will come (ere long) to take everlast∣ing vengeance on those that obey not his Gospel, 2 Thess. 18. Oh Sirs, you are in fearful danger; be not in insensible of it, and do not further it. Live not in peril of eternal damnation: do not make sure ever∣lasting burnings for your selves: if you would not groan for ever under insuppor∣table
miseries, take heed of being heirs of them. 'Tis here that sinners prepare for their never ending horror in the other world; be not you guilty of this folly and madness. And for that end consider, 1. That most do sow for Hell and de∣struction, and accordingly will reap the doleful harvest thereof to all eternity; most are in the broad way leading to the cham∣bers of everlasting death; yea, multi∣tudes of those, that to others seem bound for Heaven, are certainly bound for per∣dition world without end. Oh! you have need to look about you, considering what abundance miscarry in this affair; and es∣pecially what abundance that seem to bid fair for Heaven, do yet eternally lose their Souls. There are many that pray and fast, and in some sort mourn for and repent of their sins, and live in the exercise of much holy duty; that yet remain in the gall of bitterness, and at length groan under the insupportable wrath of God for evermore. 'Tis but a very little flock, even among Professours, that effectually take heed of
the seed of Hell, and eternal damnation. Therefore you are fearfully concerned to look about you. 2. You have a wicked nature within you addicted to this Soul-undoing course. The hearts of Men and Women are desperately evill: The seed of Hell is in your breasts already. 'Tis very difficult for you to es∣cape the snares and entanglements of sin & death through the doleful propensity of your Souls to comply with them: 'Tis up∣on this account that the Righteous are scarcely saved; and that the best of Saints have so much ado to avoid the wrath to come. If you are not very watchful, the evill heart within you will be your eternal perdition without fail. The law in your members will certainly captivate you to your everlasting doleful prejudice. Oh! how natural is pride, flesh-pleasing and worldliness to sinful Man, which are the seed of Hellish misery? And how doth carnal interest covertly, secretly and in∣sensibly sway the Souls of multitudes to their utter destruction? you are in doleful peril of sowing for eternal misery. There∣fore
you are concerned to take heed. 3. Sorrow, and much less eternal sorrow in the other world, is not desirable; 'tis much less desirable unspeakably than a har∣vest of misery, and utmost extremities and calamities here: Yea, 'tis most abhor∣rent as the greatest evill. Alas! what is more dreadful to mortals than severe pu∣nishments? and what greater severity of misery is there, than what is the cursed fruit of sin in the eternal Ocean? The damneds roarings and heart-sinking lamentation in Hell do evidence that their portion there is most dismal. The stoutest heart will tremble (as the sinners in Sion are said to do) when they are to purpose sensible what they adventure on by sin in the other world; and cry, Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. De∣liberately none would choose destruction, and much less everlasting destruction. Sin∣ners know not what they do, when they treasure up wrath for their Souls in the Unseen world: They little dream that they store up such fearful and dreadful sorrows,
as they must reap when they have left the borders of time. Oh! Sirs, 'tis extremity of misery, or perfection of calamity, that you are now cautioned against. 'Tis that infelicity, which will be the most eminent display of God's hottest fury and indigna∣tion; and what can be imagined to be more dreadful? Be careful therefore at any rate to flie from the wrath to come, and not to make light of it, considering how dismal it is, and not desirable. 4. You have a better price in your hand; you may sow for Heaven, and the Blessings of God's Paradise. You may lay a foun∣dation for comfort, peace and glorious joy, instead of misery and dismal sorrow in the other world, if you will look about you: working out your Salvation is not impossible. Oh! you may live with God to your triumphant consolation, if not wanting to your selves. And should ra∣tional Creatures neglect this Prize, and choose astonishing horrour? Is Happiness contemptible, and misery eligible and to be preferr'd before it? How dolefully mad are the wicked and hypocrites in ne∣glecting
the Blessings, and sowing for the curses and calamities of the other world? God forbid, that any of you should be guilty of this folly and madness. Oh! Sirs, remember Life and Immortality is brought to light through the Gospel, and Heaven's Mercies and amazing enjoyments are obtainable by sinful dust and worms. You are capable of becoming the Heirs of the matchless and unspeakable triumphs of the Kingdom of God. And can you imagin that you shall not dolefully lament the loss of this Price, if you lose it, and sow for Hell, and its inexpressible miseries? 5. Consider the weight of Unseen things from this consideration in the Doctrine, that they are eternal: And let that prompt you to take heed of sowing for sorrow in the other world. Alas! what sad preju∣dice do you adventure Body and Soul up∣on by such a doleful seedness? If misery in perfection for a season were tolerable; yet surely eternal exquisite misery, and un∣cessant weeping and wailing for ever, will be intolerable: and believe it, if you look not about you, you will have an eternity
of time horribly to lament your stupendious and amazing folly. Oh! you that are im∣patient and restless under God's light af∣fliction for a season here, and that cannot quietly bear the pain of the head-ach, Gout, or Stone for a little time; how will you be able to endure the utmost revelation of God's most terrible indignation in Hell? Oh! to be howling incredibly a whole e∣ternity without intermission, and without ending, how horrible and dreadful is it? If you do not therefore like eternal burn∣ings and misery, take heed of sowing the seed of it, and become not the heirs thereof. 2. Take heed that the things of time do not jostle out your care of Unseen things. Let not this world's concerns cause you to neglect or be mindless of the Unseen world's concerns. This is the folly that the gene∣rality are guilty of: They prefer temporal riches before eternal, and momentany plea∣sures before everlasting. Let not this be the case of any of you. Oh! learn to look on all things here as vanity and nothing in comparison of the weighty affairs of
Heaven and Hell. Remember you shall be here but a little while, and all enjoyments here will be of use to you but for a very short season; take heed that you be not gulled, as the Rich man in the Gospel, by a fancied selicity in Creature-contents, Luke 12.19, &c. Alas! what is it that keeps persons from the power of Religion, but things that are seen? what coseneth the ge∣nerality out of their everlasting hope, but t things of time? They cannot live in self-den▪ or renunciation of visible com∣forts; that is the reason why eternal Mer∣cies are indiffely and lukewarly pur∣sued: Things that are seen have their hearts, that is the reason why Heaven and Eternal life is neglected. Oh! Sirs, take heed of this folly in doting upon things that are but temporal. Look upon them as they are, trample them under your seet in compari∣son of the stupendiously more weighty con∣cerns of Eternity. Live like strangers here with weaned affections from all terrene en∣joyments. 'Tis certain you will never sow for Hea∣ven else, you will never become the heirs
of everlasting Blessings; unless you are dead to the world and fleshly delights. All the portion of comfort and peace you shall ever have will be only in this world, unless you disengage your Souls from the vanities of time. What ever profession you make, or how ever any may flatter you, you shall never win CHRIST or Eternal Life, un∣less you can looke upon all things here as dross or dung in comparison of Unseen things, Phil. 3.8. And certain it is, that the stronger your Faith is, the more you will despise, and the less you will be impeded in your Chri∣stian course by, concerns here. The be∣lieving Soul will certainly be a self-deny∣ing Soul. Can you believingly view the Glorious and weighty enjoyments of Hea∣ven and Hell, and not have undervaluing thoughts and conceits of temporal enjoy∣ments? Oh 'tis an argument that you n∣believers, whilst ordinarily you permit earthly contents to rule and sway you. Alas! what trifles are all our subluy af∣fairs, to those that are arrived to the ele∣ment of Souls? and what fools do they ac∣count
mortals in setting such an estimation on them as they do? And if your Faith were strong, it would be equivalent to sense, and have the same impression on you. Oh! if you would be accounted Believers, and consequently Christians, you must slight temporal concerns, and let Heaven have chiefly your heart and affection. Remember also the cloud of Witnesses that have gone before you, that have lived like strangers here, and looked upon all the contents of this life as vanity and emptiness, and trampled visible enjoyments under their feet in pursuance of the more glorious hope before tn. Alas! there would have been no Martyrs in the world, if there had not been self-denying Men and Women abroad. Yea, there is not a person got to Glory, but what was mortisied to the World and the Flesh: All that ever entred GOD's eternal Kingdom, did march through the narrow gate of crucisixion to the vanities here be∣low. And as they were accounted fools and mad-Men by the worldly Wise; so must we expect to be censured, if ever we would sow for everlasting Mercies.
Add to this, that this is as plain a duty, as any the Scripture presseth, and its ne∣cessity is likewise as clear; they are stran∣gers to the Scripture, that are stangers to this necessary duty. 'Tis a wonder that any, that call themselves Christians, can over-look so plain a caution as this is. They are most palpably blinded by the god of this world, that enjoy the written Word, and are not convinced that they must live like strangers here. So, how deeply will you repent it, if your respect to Creatureconcerns cause you to lose Eternal Mercies? When Eternity hath opened your eyes to see your loss, and for what inconsiderable things you have lost everlasting joy and triumphs, you will dole∣fully lament it: Then you will know that Creature felicity was but a bubble, and that the highest and most valuable enjoy∣ments here were but a shadow or dream to those more substantial and neverfading con∣tents you have made shipwrack of. And you cannot now imagine how Conscience will then afflict you for such gross folly and madness: especially when it appears that
your loss of Heaven is irrecoverable, and you must for ever be shut out of the Habita∣tion of the Blessed: And especially when you find that your temporal felicity is your eternal bane, and for your short en∣joyment of these fading comforts you must be miserable, and roar under God's insup∣portable wrath for ever more. The Rich man in the Gospel that here enjoyed his good things to full content, when he had lost Heaven and his Soul, and was torment∣ed in these flames that were unquenchable, could not chuse but dolefully repent of his madness in taking up with, and doting up∣on such vanities as his portion. Yea, doubt∣less this doth fill Hell with roaring, to think for what trifles they lost Eternal Life, and purchased to themselves eternal death. Take heed therefore of this desperate mad∣ness. Prefer not in your practical judg∣ments or estimation temporal concerns, be∣fore eternal: and suffer not the things of time, to cause you to neglect, or be cold or indif∣ferent in your pursuit after Everlasting Mercies: rather live like strangers here, and trample under your feet all earthly
enjoyments; that you may be heirs of God's eternal Kingdom, and not be punished e∣verlastingly from his presence, and the glory of his power. 3. You that are Godly, take heed of be∣ing discontented or discouraged with the portion of evill things here attending you, considering that your reward is eternal. Be not offended with the sorrows or mise∣series way-laying you in your passage to Glory, considering the weightiness of the Prize before you, that will make amends for all. This was the great encouragement the Apostles had to bear all afflictions and suf∣ferings patiently; even because their light afflictions, which were but for a moment, did work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Oh! think it not much to groan a few daies or years, that you may eternally rejoyce; be content to weep for a season, that you may triumph for ever: Yea, think it no marvel, if a Prize so glorious and weighty, as Everlast∣ing Life, be attended with difficulties, and cost you some sharp, though very short, afflictions, Alas! what is worth your toil
and utmost suffering here, if Heaven and its never fading consolations are not? and what will uphold, support and keep you from sinking under the pressures and affli∣cting sorrows of this life, if the eternal weight of Glory, which you have or should have in your eye, will not? Nay, will you not judge your selves unworthy of this Glorious Prize, whilst you cannot patient∣ly bear small affliction in pursuance of it? The Mariner and worlding will resolutely pass through many a dismal and perillous storme for the poor prize of temporal riches, which they may lose as soon as they enjoy; and they will suffer much contented∣ly in order to the obtainment of them: And should not Christians much more willingly, cheerfully and patiently endure all con∣cts in order to the enjoyment of a Prize itely more weighty? What should not  hope of Everlasting Life be encourage∣ ough to undergo and adventure on?  (you find) in all Ages could  rejoyce under utmost suffer∣  of Eternal Life; and why ? Oh! you that are Christians,
learn of the Apostles, learn of the Martyr and Saints in all Ages patiently to bear th crosses of this life, which are but tempo¦ral; and to glory and triumph in suffering for CHRIST, considering the end o them, which is Eternal Life. 4. We come to speak something by way of Exhortation. And is it so, tha Unseen things are eternal? Then 1. Be exhorted to get sound convictions and believing apprehensions of the truth▪ and weightiness of these Unseen things. See that your judgment be fully satisfied about the verity, and that you are to purpose sensible of the Unspeakable ponderousness of these great concerns. Alas! there are but very few that do really believe that an eter∣nity of sorrow or joy will be their portion in the other world: And there are but few that in any tolerable measure are sensible; of the importance or consequence of eter∣nity. These things would otherwise in∣fluence their hearts and lives, and be more visible in all their carriage and deportment. How could they carelesly pursue these great concerns, if they had sound and convincing
apprehensions of their truth and weighti∣ess? how could they choose but live like trangers here, and in the contempt of all errene enjoments in comparison of these hings, if they did indeed look for the re∣elation of them? Could Men endure to pend their time for trifles, or vanishing nd fading contents, that knew that ever∣asting life or death would be their portion (ere long) according to their deportment ere? surely no. Oh! time would be more precious, and the word and ordinances of the Gospel would be more precious, and better husbanded, if these things were soundly believed and to purpose consider∣ed. Be careful therefore to get your Faith in these affairs strengthned; labour to be soundly convinced, that you shall be in Hea∣ven or Hell for ever; and be sure to under∣stand and be sensible of the weightiness of these things. This is the foundation of all Religion and practical Godliness, You'l never to purpose work out your salvation, or lay hold on Eternal Life, without this: therefore see to it. 2. Be exhorted to lament your hitherto
slight care & doleful lukewarmness in these weighty affairs. Lament your heartless pur∣suit after Eternal Life, and your lifeless en∣deavours to escape eternal death. Lament your mispent time, which might have been improved for your everlasting comfort. Mourn over especially your misimproved Sabboths, and golden opportunities and ad∣vantages for never ending felicity, which you have been fruitless or unprofitable un∣der. Oh! let your sad neglects of the things of your eternal peace be your shame, & pe∣nitent confusion, and heart-afflicting grief. Alas! what have you more reason to lament, than your regardlesness of eternity? wherein did you ever shew greater folly or madness, than in your slighting this weighty concern? Oh! what a mercy is it that you are not for∣ced to lament with desperation by the con∣vincing light of eternity, what now you are called upon to lament in a day of Grace be∣fore hope is gone? You do not know how soon you may be compelled to mourn over your folly in this affair in Hell, if you mourn not over it now in order to your future ad∣vantage and comfort. And alas! who is there
that hath not cause enough to be covered with confusion for their mindlesness of e∣ternity in the daies of their present vanity; & the inconsiderable preparation they have made for their comfort in that Ocean? We have too much reason to be ashamed for our dull prosecution of these weighty concerns. 3. Be exhorted to make sure work for Eternal Life; and to give diligence to lay hold on the everlasting Blessings of the Un∣seen world. Oh! build firmly for your peace and triumph in that Kingdom, which will last for ever: spare no expense of time, strength or cost in this weighty affair. Wherever you are slothful, unfaithful or careless, see that utmost unwearied dili∣gence and faithfulness be used here. Make this the buisiness of your daies to sow for E∣verlasting joy & comfort when time is gone. Yea, see that you have no Imployment or affair, but what is undertaken and managed in a due subserviency to this weighty affair. Alas! Sirs, what greater buisiness have you to mind? what an infinitely glorious prize doth the Unseen world set before you? and how poor and inconsiderable are all con∣cerns
of time to it? You spend your time and strength for trifles, whatever you pursue, if you neglect Heaven & Eternal Life. Earth∣ly Kingdoms and Crowns are but shadows and vanity to the everlasting substantial en∣joyments of the Paradise of GOD, which you are invited to secure for your Souls. 'Tis a wonder that the World should have in it a rational creature, that can find himself em∣ployment without reference to his comfort in the Eternal Ocean; the concerns thereof are so infinitely weighty above all the things of time. Oh; be not you so unreasonable, do not you thus neglect your own greatest, most necessary and most glorious mercies. For perishing fading contents let not never ending and everlasting triumphing Blessings be lost and jeoparded. Seriously consider the weightiness of these concerns, and surely they will influence you to utmost faithful∣ness for the assuring of them. Everlasting joy or sorrow what is there here that is any thing like it? Triumphs or howlings for evermore what on Earth bears any compa∣rison to them? If any thing here be worth your care or minding, surely eternity and
its concerns are infinitely more conside∣rable, and should be infinitely more influ∣encing. The Joyes of Heaven are Mercies indeed; they are the most inconceivable glorious Blessings. There's happiness in perfection, fulness of joy, peace, content and comfort, without a dram of sorrow, in glory. There God is to be enjoy'd, who is All in all. There are Rivers of pleasure, and an Ocean of the most Soul-satisfying goodness. So glorious are the Blessings of eternity, that eye never saw, ear never heard, and it never entred into the heart of Man to conceive their glory, 1 Cor. 2. 9. These are mercies that quite surpass and exceed the very thoughts and imagina∣tions of finite Men; so unspeakably do they excel all contents here, and infinitely more, if you were capable to set your ear at Hea∣ven's door, and could hear the Souls ra∣vishing Songs of the glorified quire in God's Paradise: If there were but a hole or a lit∣tle chink, through which you might view their triumphant Robes, or if by any means you could get a glimpse of that overflowing
consolation wherewith they do abound un∣to eternity; no temptation will ever be strong enough to make you neglect or slight the pursuit of their enjoyments; yea, you would certainly reach after an interest in them, whatever they cost you, and would not endure a diversion from a faithful pro∣secution of them. Add to this, that Eternal Life contains in it an eternal salvation from Hellish mi∣sery; if you make sure of Heaven, you shall not sip of the Lake of fire and brim-stone, wherein the wicked will be tormented for ever. This you are at present in danger of; and this you will escape if you become the Heirs of eternal Blessings. And what a rich Price is this, which yet Infinite Mercy en∣trusteth you with? How would the damned in Hell prize and improve it, now they have tasted hellish sorrows, if the privi∣ledg of hope of deliverance were yet before them? what would they not do or give for their redemption from those miseries? 'Tis not unlike but you have, or may have, all of you, some troubles, afflictions, crosses, pains or miseries to groan under here, re∣demption
from which you would be willing to purchase at the dearest rate: And is not redemption and deliverance from Hell much more desirable and necessary? Oh! how will you value this mercy, when the Eter∣nal Ocean hath effectually acquainted you with the worth of it? to be saved from these sorrows that are unspeakable and never ending is a prize inestimable: therefore spare no diligence or endeavour in pursuit of it. Moreover, remember you must and will be housed in Heaven or Hell for ever: you will unquestionably have your portion in everlasting joy or sorrow: there is no a∣voiding it, but you will be the vessels of amazing mercy in God's triumphant King∣dom; or the vessels of amazing wrath and indignation in unquenchable flames: And which of you can think of dwelling with devouring fire, or of being the fuell of e∣verlasting burnings, without horrour? how should the thoughts of your dreadful peril cause you to mend you pace in your Chri∣stian course; and double your diligence, watchfulness and faithfulness, that you may
inherit eternal mercies? especially if you consider the qualitie and nature of that misery, that otherwise will certainly over∣whelm you with the eternity of its dura∣tion? Remember, misery in perfection will be your inheritance for evermore, if you lose Heaven's Mercies and Blessings; extre∣mity of sorrow you will endure world without end, if you have no part nor lot in the triumphs of God's Paradise. Once have the gate of Heaven shut against you, and it will be shut against you for ever: and once be plunged into the Infernal Lake where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth without intermission, and you will be hope∣less of redemption from it forever. Christ's love and blood will be insignificant to you, and all the promises of the Gospel will be in vain to you; and your day of Grace will be utterly unprofitable to you, and have an everlasting period. And oh! Sirs, soberly consider the weight of this adjunct eternal and everlasting, and surely 'twill effectu∣ally render unseen things most incompara∣ble to you, and make them chiefly influen∣tial in heart and life. Upon serious consi∣deration
you will find eternity weighty beyond your conceptions. Remember, it notes not only lasting joyes and sorrows beyond the account of time inconceivably, and not only a continuance of happiness and misery without any intermission; but also an everlasting or never ceasing perma∣nency of felicity and calamity without any period or ending. When sinners have been groaning and roaring in Hell under un∣speakable torments as many millions of mil∣lions of Years as there be drops of water in the Sea, piles of grass in the field, small dust in the Earth, sand on the Sea shore, hairs on Men and Women's heads in the world, and Stars in the Firmament; yet their miseries, sorrows, & calamities are no nearer ending than at the beginning. And when the Saints have been triumphing in the Paradise of God as many more millions of millions of Years, yet still their joyes, happiness, and triumphs are no nearer expiring than at the first entrance into Glory. As long as God is just, holy and righteous, that is as long as God is God the damned must howl and roar under inexpressible miseries: and
the Glorified Saints must be swimming and rejoycing in triumphant Blessings. And how few to purpose consider the weighti∣ness of these things? If your danger were only to suffer God's hottest wrath, and lose his special love for a million of years; yea, for a year or a month, 'twere yet so consi∣derable as that you would forfeit your rea∣son to slight this concern upon the account of any earthly happiness whatever; and how much more unspeakably foolish will you be to make light of this concern which is eter∣nal, not only of inexpressible but incon∣ceivable length of duration? Oh Sirs, pause more frequently on the meaning and weighti∣ness of Eternity, that the Gospel-promises and threatnings of the Word may more in∣fluence you, and render temptations from worldly enjoyments and fleshly delights to byass you from holiness not only suc∣cesless, but contemptible, and whatever you do, be careful to make sure of eternal Life, and an escape from eternal misery. 4. Be exhorted to perform every duty as for eternity. Fast and pray, and humble your Souls for sin as for eternal Life, and an
escape from eternal death. Hear the Word, labour to profit by it, as persons that know eternity depends upon it; love and serve God as for eternity. As Solomon adviseth, Whatsoever thy hand sndeth to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nr device, nor knowledg, nor wisedom in the grave whi∣ther thou goest, Eccles. 9.10. Set all the powers of your Souls on work in every duty: for in Eternity you can't amend what is amiss, you must then reap the cursed fruit of your negligence, sloth and unfaith∣fulness in duty; but you will not have op∣portunity or ability to reform your mis∣carriages in order to one dram of comfort or consolation for your Souls. As Zeuxes therefore of old was used to draw his Pi∣ctures with singular exacteness, because (as he said) he painted for eternity: even so should we be industrious and exact in what we do, because all is for eternity. Oh! ask your Souls in all your undertakings and endeavours, Is this to work for eternity? do I now improve my self like a person sensible that an eternity of joy or sorrow, happiness or misery depends upon my pre∣sent
carriage and deportment? Shall I re∣flect back with heart-sinking remorse and regret, or with heart-ravishing content and satisfaction upon my present work in the Ocean of eternity? Say and think of every action, what if this should be my last? what if eternity should swallow me presently, and bring me to God's impartial and eternal Judgment? and accordingly with utmost vigour and faithfulness be found in your duty, and the exercise of your integrity in pursuit of everlasting Blessings. FINIS.
