B5590 14396378 102285
THE Resurrection of the Dead, AND Eternall Judgement: OR, The truth of the Resurrection of the Bodies, both of Good and Bad at the last day: Asserted, and proved by, Gods Word. Also, the manner and order of their coming forth of their Graves; as also, with what Bodies they do arise. Together, with a Discourse of the last Judge∣ment, and the finall Conclusion of the whole World. By John Bunyan, a Servant of the Lord's Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. Behold I shew you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, at the last Trump; (for the Trump shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.) John 5. 28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the houre is coming, in which all that are n their Graves, shall hear his Voyce, and shall come forth; they that have done good, to the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evill, to the Resurrection of damnation. London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle, without Temple-Barre.
Courteous Reader, THough this be a small Treatise, yet it doth present thee with things of the greatest, and most weighty concernment, even with a Discourse of Life and Death to Eternity: opening, and clearing, by the Scriptures of God, that the time is at hand, when, there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just and unjust; even of the Bo∣dies of both, from the Graves where they are, or shall be, at the approach of that day. Thou hast also in these few lines, the order and manner of the rising of these two sorts of People, wherein is shewed thee with what Body they shall then rise; as also their states and condition at this day, with great clearness. For here thou shalt see the truth, and manner of the terrible Judgement, the opening of the Books, the examining of Witnesses, with a finall conclusion upon good and bad. Which, I hope will be profi∣table to thy Soul that shall read it. For if thou art godly, then here is that which will through Gods blessing, incourage thee to go on in the faith of the truth of the Gospel; but if thou art ungodly, then here thou mayst meet with conviction: yea, and that of what will be without fail, thy end, at the end of the World: whether thou continue in thy sins, or re∣pent.
If thou continue in them, blackness, and darkness, and everlasting destruction; but if thou repent and believe the Gospel, then light and life, and joy, and comfort, and glory, and happiness, and that to Eternity. Wherefore let me here beg these things at thy hand. First, That thou take heed of that spirit of mockery, that saith, 2 Pet. 3. 4, 5. Where is the promise of his coming? Secondly, Take heed that thy heart be not over∣charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come upon thee unawares. Luke 21. 34, 35. Thirdly, But be diligent in making thy Call∣ing and Election sure; that thou in the day, of which thou shalt read more in this Book, be not found without that glorious Righteousness that will then stand thee instead, and present thee before his glorious presence, with exceeding joy; to him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, World with∣out end, Amen. John Bunyan.
OF THE Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgement But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresie, so worship I the God of my Father, believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, and have hope towards God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust, Acts▪ 24. 14, 15. MY Discourse upon this Text, will chiefly concern the Resurrection of the Dead: wherefore to that I shall im∣mediately apply my self not medling with what else is couched in the words.
You see here, that Paul, being upon his Ar∣raignment, accused of many things, by some that were violent for his blood; and being li∣cenced to speak for himself by the then Heathen Magistrate; he doth in few words tell them, that as touching the Crimes wherewith they charged him, he was utterly faultless, onely this he confessed, that after that way which they call Heresie, so he worshipped the God of his Fathers; believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, and that he had the same hope towards God, which they themselves did allow, that there should be a Re∣surrection of the dead, both of the just▪ and unjust. Whence note by the way, That an hypocri∣tical people, will persecute the power of those truths in others, which themselves in words profess. I have hopes towards God, and that such a hope which themselves do allow, and yet I am this day, and that for this very thing persecuted by them. But to come to my purpose, there shall be a Resurrection of the dead &c. By these words, the Apostle sheweth us what was the substance of his Doctrine, to wit, that there should be a Resurrection of the dead; and by these words also, what was the great argument with his Soul, to carry him through these temptations, afflictions, reproaches, and necessities he met
with in this World, even the Doctrine of a Resurrection. I have hope towards God, saith he, and there is my mind fixed, for there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. The reason why I cannot do what these Jews would have me; also why I cannot live as do the Gentiles, it is, because I have in my Soul, the faith of the Resurrection. This is the Doctrine I say, which maketh me fear to offend, and that is, as an undergirder to my Soul, whereby I am kept from destruction and confusion, under all the storms and tempests I here go through. In a word, this is it that hath more awe upon my Conscience, then all the Laws of men, with all the penalties they inflict. Vers. 17. And herein do I exercise my self to have alwayes a Conscience void of offence, both towards God and towards men. Now here, seeing this Doctrine of the Resur∣rection of the dead▪ hath that power, both to bear up and to awe; both to incourage and to keep within compass, the Spirit and Body of the People of God: It will be requisite, and pro∣fitable for us, to inquire into the true mening and nature of this word, the Resurrection of the dead. And for the better compassing of this matter, I shall briefly inquire. First, what this place is meant by the dead.
Secondly, What is meant by the Resur∣rection. Thirdly, Why the Apostle doth here speak of the Resurrection of the dead, as of a thing yet to come, there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. For the first, The dead in Scripture, go un∣der a five-fold Consideration, as, 1. Such as die a natural death, or as when a man ceaseth to be any more in this World, as David, whom Peter tells us, is both dead and buried, and his Sepulchre remaineth with us to this day. Acts 2. 29. 2. There is a People that are reckoned dead in trespasses and sins, as those are, who never yet were translated from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God. Such I say, who yet never felt the power of the Word and Spirit of God, to raise them from that state, to walk with him in the Regeneration: making a life out of Christ, and his present benefits. Ephes. 2. 1, 2. John 5. 25. 3. There is a death seizeth men often after some measure of light received from God, and some profession of the Gospel of Christ. These, for the certainty of their damnation, are said to be dead, dead; twise dead, and plucked up by the roots. Jude 12. 4. There is in Scripture mention made of a death to sin, and the lusts of the flesh; this
death is the beginning of true life and happi∣ness, and is a certain fore-runner of a share in Christ, and with him in another World, Rom. 6. 6, 7, 8. 2 Tim. 2. 11. 5. Lastly, there is also in the Word, a rela∣tion of eternal death. This is the death that those are in, and swallowed up of, that go out of this World Godless, Christless, and Grace∣less; dying in sin, and so under the curse of the dreadful God, who I say, because they have missed of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Saviour in this day of Grace: are fallen into the gulf and jaws of eternal death and misery, in the fire that never shall be quenched. Mark 9. 43, 44. Luk 16. 23, 24, 25, 26. Now then, seeing there is death, or to be dead, taken under so many Considerations in the Scripture; it is evident, that to be dead in Christ, the Text is not meant of them all: I then must distinguish, and inquire which of these deaths it is, that here the Apostle did look for a Resurrection from. First then, it cannot be meant a Resurrection from eternal death, for from that there is no Re∣demption. Psal. 49. 38. Secondly, Neither is it a Resurrection from that double death; for they that are in that, are past recovery also. Thirdly, And so for those that are dead to sin, it is non-sence, to say there shall, or can be
a Resurrection from that: for that it self is a Resurrection. Colos. 2. 12, 13. 20. which Re∣surrection also, the Apostle had then passed through. And also all the Brethren, as he saith, You hath he quickned, who were dead in trespasses and sins; and again, if ye then be risen with Christ▪ and again, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead. Col. 3. 1. Lastly, The dead therefore in this Scripture, must be understood of those that have departed this life, that have Body and Soul seperated each from the other; and so the Resurrection, a Resurrection of the Body out of the Grave; as Daniel saith, many that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall arise; and again, the hour is coming, when all that are in their Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, &c. Dan. 12. 2. John 5. 28. The Resurrection of the Just then, is the ri∣sing of the Bodies of the Just, and the Resur∣rection of the unjust, the rising of their Bodies at the last Judgement. This also is the mean∣ing of that saying of Paul, to Agrippa, I stand, saith he, and am Judged, for the hope of the pro∣mise made unto our Fathers, which promise at first began to be fulfilled in the Resurrection of the Body of Christ, Acts 13. 32, 33. and hat its accomplishment, when the dead, small and great, are raised out of their Graves: where∣fore,
though Paul saith in the 13th of the Acts, it is already fulfilled: yet here he saith, he hopes it shall come. Which promise, saith he, our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and might, hope to come, as God told Daniel, saying, go thy Way, for thou shalt stand in thy lot at the end of the dayes. Dan. 12, 13. Christ is already risen, and therefore so far the promise is fulfilled, but his Saints are yet in their Graves, and therefore that part of the fulfilling of it, is yet to come, as he saith, Why should it be an incredible thing with you, that God should raise the dead. Acts 26. 6, 7, 8. Again, That it is the Resurrection of the dead Bodies of both Saints and sinners that is here inserted, it is further evident, because the Apostle saith, it is the Resurrection, that the very Pharises themselves allowed. I have hope towards God, saith he, which themselves also allow, then what that hope is, he in the next words sheweth, namely, That there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, &c. Now we know, that the Pharises did not allow of a Resur∣rection from a state of Nature, to a state of Grace, which is the same with the new birth; but did confidently allow and teach, that they were the Children of Abraham, according to the flesh. Yea, when any of them began to ad∣here, or incline to Christ's Doctrine in some things, yet the Doctrine of the new Birth, or of
being raised from a state of Nature, to a state of Grace, they would very much stick at; though in the mean time, they utterly were against the Doctrine of the Sadduces, which de∣nyed the Resurrection of the Body, John 31. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. John 8. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Acts 23. 6, 7, 8. Further, the Resurrection here spoken of, must needs be the Resurrection of the Body, because it is called, a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust, that is, of both Saints and sinners, according to the saying of Christ, The hour is coming, when all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voyce, and shall come forth, they that have done good, to the Resurrection of life; and they that have done evill, to the Resur∣rection of damnation. Joh. 5. 28, 29. Again, the Resurrection here mentioned, is a Resurrection to come, not already injoyed, either by Saints or sinners, there shall be a Resur∣rection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust. Now I say, the Resurrection here being yet deferred by the just, and counted also the Re∣surrection of the dead, both of the just and un∣just: It must needs be the same Resurrection that is spoken of by Jobe, who saith, So man ly∣eth down, and riseth not again, till the Heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep, Job. 14. 12.
Having thus in few words opened this Scri∣pture unto you, I shall in the next place, for the further satisfaction of those that are yet wavering, and for the refreshment of those that are strong and stedfast: lay down before you, several undeniable Scripture demonstrati∣ons, of the Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust. I shall first begin with the Resurrection of the Just. The Just must arise, because Christ is risen from the dead. Christ is the head of the Just, and they are the members of his Body; and be∣cause of this union, therefore the Just must a∣rise. This is the Apostles own Argument, If Christ, saith he, be preached, that he rose from the dead, how say some among you, that there is no Re∣surrection of the dead; but if there be no Resur∣rection of the dead, then is not Christ risen. 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13. Now I say, the Reason why the A∣postle thus argueth the Resurrection from the dead, by the Resurrection of Christ. It is, be∣cause the Saints (of whose Resurrection he here chiefly discourseth, are in their Bodies, as well as in their Soul, the members of Christ; know you not, saith he, that your Bodies are the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15. A very weigh∣ty Argument; for if a good man be a member of Christ, then he must either be raised out of his Grave, or else sin and death must have
power over a member of Christ. I say again, if if this Body be not raised, then also Christ is not a compleat Conquerour over his enemies; for as much as death and the Grave, hath still power over his members. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death. Now though Christ in his own person, hath a compleat Conquest over Death, &c. yet Death hath still power over the Bodies of all that are in their Graves: now I say, Christ being considered with rela∣tion to his members, then he hath not yet a compleat Conquest over death, neither will he, until they every one be brought forth of their Graves; for then, and not till then, shall that saying be every way fulfilled: Death is swal∣lowed up of Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 26. and 53, 54. Secondly, As there must be a Resurrection of the Just, because Christ is their Head, and they his members: so also, because the Body of the Saints, as well as their Soul, is the pur∣chase of Christs blood. Ye are bought with a price, saith Paul: wherefore glorifie God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Christ will not lose the purchase of his blood, O Death, saith Christ, I will have them; O Grave, I will make thee let them go, I will ransom them from the power of the Grave, I will redeem them from death. (I have bought them, and they shall be mine) O Death, I will be thy plague, O
Grave, I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13, 14. Job 18. 13, 14. Revel. 1. 18. I say, though the power of the Grave be invincible, and death be the King of terrours, yet he who hath the Keys of Hell and of Death, at his Girdle, to him be∣longeth the issues from death. He that is our God, is the God of Salvation, and to God the Lord, belongeth the issues from death. Psal. 68. 20. and we the price of his blood, shall be de∣livered. Thirdly, As the Body is the member of Christ, and the price of his blood: so it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in us. What, know you not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? and you are not your own. The Body is no such rediculous thing in the account of Christ, as it was in the ac∣count of the Saduces. The Body is not for forni∣cation, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the Body, and that no onely in this World, but that which is to come: wherefore he saith, God hath both raised up the Lord Jesus, and will raise us up also by his power. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14. 19. that is, as he hath raised up the Body of Christ: so will he raise up ours also by Christ. Fourthly, The Bodies of the Just must arise again, because of that Similitude, that must be betwixt the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Bodies of the Saints. When he shall appear, we shall be like him. 1 John 3. 2. Now we have
it abundantly manifest in Scripture, that the Body of the Lord Jesus, was raised out of the Grave, caught up into Heaven, and that it ever remaineth in the holiest of all, a glorified Body, Luk 24. 3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8. 35. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. John 20. 24, 25, 26, 27. Acts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Acts 2. 31. Acts 17. 30, 31, 32. Mar. 16. 6, 7, 19. Heb. 7. 24, 25, 26. eb. 8. 2, 3. Heb. 10. 12. Now I say, it would be very strange to me, if Christ should be raised, ascended, and glo∣rified in that Body; and yet that his People should be with him, no otherwise then in their Spirits; especially, seeing that he in his Resur∣rection, is said to be but the first begotten from the dead, and the first fruits of them that sleep, Col. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 23. for we know, that a first begotten, doth imply more Sons, and that first-fruits do foreshew an after Crop: where∣fore we conclude, that as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, but every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits, and af∣terwards them that are his at is coming. 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23. And hence it is, that the Scripture saith, He shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious Body. And hence it is again, that the day of Christ is said to be the day of the manifestation of the Sons of God, and of the re∣demption of our body; for then shall the Saints
of God not onely be, but appear as their Savi∣our, being delivered from their Graves, as he is from his, and glorified in their Bodies, as he is in his. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Rom. 8. 21, 22, 23. Fifthly, There must be a Resurrection of the Body of the Saints, because the Body, as well as the mind, hath been a deep sharer in the afflictions that we meet with for the Go∣spel sake. Yea, the body is oft-times the grea∣ter sufferer, in all the Calamities, that for Christs sake we here undergo; it is the body that feels the stocks, the whip, hunger and cold, the fire and rack, and a thousand calamities: it is the body in which we have the dying marks of the Lord Jesus: that the life of Jesus, al∣so might be made manifest in our mortall slesh. Gal. 6. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. God is so just a God, and so merciful to his People, that though the bodies of his Saints should, through the malice of the enemy, be never so dishonourably tortured, killed and sown in the Grave: yet he will (as further will be shewed anon) raise it again in incorruption, glory and honour: as he saith also in another place, that we who have continued with Christ in his tempta∣tions; that have for his sake underwent the re∣proach and malice of the World; to you, saith Christ, I appoint a Kingdom as my Father hath appointed unto me. Luk. 22. 28, 29. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, & he that hateth
his life in this World, shall keep it to life eternall, 2 Tim. 2. 12. John 12. 29. all this is to be in∣joyed, especially at the Resurrection of the Just. But sixthly, There must be a Resurrection of the Just, otherwise, there will be the grea∣test disappointment on all sides that ever was, since man had a being on the Earth. A disappointment I say, First, Of the Will of God; for this is the will of the Father that sent me,saith Christ, that of all that he hath given me, I should lose nothing, (not a dust) but should raise it up again at the last day. John 6. 39. Secondly, A disappointment of the Power of God; for he that hath raised up the Lord Je∣sus, doth also intend to raise us up by his Power, even our Bodies, as Paul saith, the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body, and God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise us up by his Power. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14. Thirdly, If there should be no Resurrecti∣on of the Just, Christ also would be wonder∣fully disappointed of the fruits of all his suf∣ferings. As I told you before, his People are the price of his Blood, and the members of his Body, and he is now at the right hand of God (far above all Principalities and Powers, and every name that is named) expecting till his ene∣mies
be made his Footstool, and brought under Heb. 1. 13. the foot of the weakest Saint, which will not be, untill the last enemy Death is de∣stroyed. We know that he said, when he went away, that he would come again, and fetch all his People to himself, even up into Heaven, that where he is, there we may be also. Joh. 12. 26. Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 17. 24. But I say, how will he be disappointed, if when he comes, the Grave and Death should prevent and hinder him, and with its bars, keep down those, whom he hath ransomed with his blood, from the power thereof. Fourthly, If the Bodies of the Just arise from the dead, then they also will be disap∣pointed. 'Tis true, the Saints departed, have far more fellowship, and Communion with God and the Lord Jesus, then we have, or are not yet capable of having, Luke 23. 43. They being in Paradise, and we in this World; but yet, I say for all that, they are, though there, very much longing for the day of the Lords vengeance, which will be the day in which they will, and must arise from the dead. This I say, is the time that they long for, when they cry un∣der the Altar, How long O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood, on them that dwell on the Earth? When they died, they Heb. 11. 35. died, in hope to obtain a better Resurrection, and now they
are gone, they long till that day be come, Rev. 6. 10, 11. Till the day come, I say, when the dead, even all the enemies of Christ, shall be judged; for then will he give reward to his Ser∣vants the Prophets, and to his Saints, and to that fear his name, small and great. Revel. 11. 1. 8. Fifthly, If the Just arise not, great disap∣pointment also will be to the Saints yet alive in this World: for, notwithstanding they have already received the first-fruits of the Spirit, yet the wait, not onely for more of that, but also for the Resurrection, Redemption, and changing of this vile body, Rom. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. Phil. 3. 20, 21. For our Conversation is in Heaven, saith Paul, from whence we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body. But now I say, if the body riseth not, then how can it be made like to the glori∣ous Body of Christ Jesus: yea, what a sad dis∣appointment, infatuation, and delusion, are those poor Creatures under, that look, and that by Scripture warrant, for such a thing? They look for good, but behold evill; they expect to be delivered in their whole man from every enemy; but lo, both death and the Grave, their great enemies, do swallow them up for ever; But Beloved, be not deceived, Psal. 9. 10. Te needy shall not always be forgotten, the expecttion
of the poor shall not perish for ever, saith Christ, he that seeth the Son, and believeth on him that sent him, hath everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day, John 6. 40. Sixthly, If the Just arise not out of their Graves, then also is every Grace of God in our Souls defeated; for though the spirit of de∣votion can put forth a feigned shew of holi∣ness, with the denyal of the Resurrection, yet every Grace of God in the Elect, doth prompt them forward to live as becomes the Gospel, by pointing at this day, as First, 'Tis this that faith looks at, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we believed, and therefore speak, knowing that he that hath raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. 2 Cor. 4 13, 14. Secondly, Hope looks at this, We saith Pul, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adption, to wit, the redemption of our Body, that is, we expect this by hope: but hope which is seen, is not hope, for what a man seeth, or hath in present possession, why doth he yet hope for it. Rom. 8. 23, 24, 25. Thirdly, The Grace of self-denyal also woketh by this Doctrine, If after the manner of men, I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus; what advantageth it me, if the Dead rise not? As
who should say; wherefore do I deny my self of those mercies and priviledges, that the men of this World injoy? why do not I also, as well as they, shun persecution for the Cross of Christ? If the dead rise not, what shall I be the better for all my trouble that here I met with for the Gospel of Christ? 1 Cor. 15. 32. Fourthly, Both Zeal and patience, with all other the Graces of the Spirit of God in our hearts, are much, yea chiefly, incouraged, ani∣mated, and supported by this Doctrine, as James saith, Be patient therefore my Brethren, un∣to the coming of the Lord, (for then shall the dead be raised. 1 Thes. 4. 16, 17.) Behold, the Husbandman waiteth for the precious fruits of the Earth, and hath long patience, till he receive both the early and latter Rayn; be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Jam. 5. 7, 8. Seventhly, The Doctrine of the Resurrecti∣on of the Just, must needs be a certain truth of God, if we consider the devilish, and satanical errours and absurdities that must unavoidably follow the denyal thereof, as First, He that holdeth no Resurrection of our Body, he denyeth the Resurrection of the Body of Christ: this is the Spirits own Do∣ctrine; For if the Dead rise not, then is not Christ risen, 1 Cor. 15, 16. He that denyeth the Re∣surrection of the members, denyeth the Resur∣rection
of the Head; for seeing the Resurrecti∣on of the Saints is proved by the Resurrection of Christ, he that doth deny the Resurrection of the Saints, must needs deny the Resurrection of Christ, that proves it. Now this errour, as it is in it self destructive to all Christian Religion: so it, like an Adder, carrieth within its bowels, many other alike devilish and filthy, as 1. He that denyeth the Resurrection of the Saints, he concludeth, that to preach delive∣rance from sin and death, it is vain preaching; for how can he be freed of sin, that is swal∣lowed up for ever of Death, & the Grave? as he most certainly is, that is always contained ther∣in as Paul saith, if Christ be not risen, (whose Resurrection is the ground of ours) then our preaching is vain, and your faith is also vain; then we preach fables, and you receive them for truth. 1 Cor. 15. 14. 2. This errour, casteth the Lie in the face of God, of Christ, and the Scriptures, ye, and we also, saith Paul, are found false Witnesses of God, because we have testified of God, that he rais∣ed Christ up, if so be that the dead rise not. 1 Cor. 15. 15. Mark, before he said, Christ in his Re∣surrection, doth prove our Resurrection; but now he saith, that our Resurrection will prove the truth of his, and indeed, both are true; for
as by Christs rising, ours is affirmed: so by ours, his is demonstrated: o 3. The denyal of the Resurrection, it also damneth all those that have departed this World in the faith of this Doctrine. If Christ be not raised (as if he is not, we rise not) then is not onely your faith vain, and ye are yet in your sins that are alive; but then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18. 4 He that denyeth the Resurrection of the Just, he concludeth, that the Christian is of all men, the most miserable. Mark the words, If in this life onely, we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable. 1 Cor. 15. 19. First of all, men the most miserable, because we let go present injoyments of those that will never come if the dea rise not? of all men most mi∣serable, because our faith, our hope, our joy and peace, are all but a lie, if the dead rise not. But you will say, he that giveth up himself to God shall have comfort in this life. Ah, but if the dead rise not, all our comfort that now we think we have from God, will then be found presumption and madness, because we believe, that God hath so loved us, as to have us in his day, in Body and Soul to Heaven: which will be nothing so, if the dead rise not. If in this onely, we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. Poor Christian, thou
that lookest for the blessed hope of the Resur∣rection of the Body, at the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ: how wilt thou be deceived, if the Dead rise not? but now is Christ risen and become he first fruits of them that sleep; for since by man came death, by man came also the Resurrection from the dead. 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21. 5. But again, he that  the Resur∣rection of the dead, he setteth open a ud∣gate to all manner of impiety, he cutteth he throat of a truly holy life, and layeth the Reins upon the neck of the most outragius ust, For if the dead rise not, let us eat and drink▪ that is, do anything, though never so diabolical and hellish, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die; and there is an end of us, we shall not arise again, to receive either evill or good. 1 Cor. 15. 32. 6. To deny this Resurrection, nay if a man do but say, it is past either with him or any Christian: his so saying tendeth directly to the destuction and overthrow of the faith of them that hear him; and is so far from being ac∣cording to the Doctrine of God, that it eat∣eth out good and wholsome Doctrine, even as Cankers eat the face and flesh of a man: how ill favouredly do they look, that have their nose and lips eat off with the Canker? even so badly doth the Doctrine of no Resurrection of
the dead, look in the eyes of God, Christ, Saints and Scripture. 2 Tim. 2. 18. Lastly, I conclude then, that to deny the Resurrection of the Bodies of the Just, it ar∣gueth, First, Great ignorance of God, ignorant of his power to raise, ignorant of his promise to raise, ignorant of his faithfulness to raise; and that both to himself, Son, and Saints, as I shewed before: therefore saith Paul to those that were thus deluded, Awake to Righteousness, and sin not, for some have not the knowledge of God▪ I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 18. 32, 33, 34. as if he had said, Do you profess Chri∣stianity? and do you question the Resurrection of the Body? Do you not know, that the Re∣surrection of the Body, and glory to follow, is the very quintessence of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Are you ignorant of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and do you question the power and faithfulness of God, both to his Son and his Saints, because you say, there shall be no Resurrection of the Dead? you are ignorant of God; of what he can do, of what he will do, and of what he will by doing, glorifie him∣self. Secondly, As it argueth very great igno∣rance of Gods power, faithfulness, &c. so it argueth gross ignorance of the Tenor and cur∣ant of the Scriptures; for as touching the
Dead, that they are raised, have ye not read in the Book of Moses (saith Christ) how that God said unto him in the Bush, I am the God of A∣braham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living: ye do therefore greatly erre, Mark 12. 26, 27. To be the God of Abraham, Isaac and Ja∣cob, it is to be understood of his being their God, under a new Covenant-Consideration, as he saith, I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Heb. 8. 10, 11. John 8. 44. 1 John 38. 9, 10. Hos. 6. 2. Col. 3. 4. Ephes. 1. 4. Now thus he is not the God of the Dead, that is, of those that perish, whether they be Angels or men. Now, I say, they that are the Children of God, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they are counted the Living under a threefold Conside∣ration. 1. In their Lord and Head, and thus all the Elect may be said to live; for they are from Eternity chosen in him, who also is their life, though possibly many of them yet unconverted. I say, yet Christ is their life, by the eternal pur∣pose of God. 2. The Children of the new Covenant, do live both in their spirits in glory, by open vi∣sion, and here by Faith Gal. 2. 20. and the
continul Communication of Grace from Christ into their Souls. 3. They live also with respect to their ri∣sing again; for God calleth those things that are not, as though they were, Rom. 4. 17. to be born, dead, buried, risen and ascended, are all present with God, he liveth not by time, as we do, a thousand years to him, are but as the day that is past, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Heb. 4. 13. Isa. 46. 9, 10. Rom. 8. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. And again, one day is as a thousand years. Eternity, which is God himself, admitteth of no first, second, and third, all things are naked and bare before him, and present with him, all (his) live unto him. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just, and unjust. A Resurrection, of what? of that which is sown, or of that which was never sown; if of that which is sown, then it must be either of that nature that was sown, or else of the cor∣ruption that cleaveth to it; but it is the nature, and not the corruption that cleaveth unto it that riseth again. And verily, the very terme Resurrection, is a forcible Argument, to prove the Dead shall come forth of their Graves; for the holy Ghost hath alwayes spoke more pro∣perly, then to say, There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and unjust, when yet neither the good, nor the bad shall come
forth of their Graves, but rather something else to delude the World withall. Having thus in few words, shewed you the truth of the Resurrection of the Dead, I now come to the manner of their rising. The manner of the Resurrection of the Dead: And first of the Just. THE Apostle, when he had in the fifteenth of the first of the Corinthians, proved the truth and certainty of the Resurrection, he de∣scends to the discovery of the manner of it; and to the end, he might remove those foolish scruples that attend the hearts of the ignorant, he begins with one of their Questions; But some will say, saith he, how are the Dead raised? and with what Vers. 35. Body do they come? To which he answereth: first by a Si∣militude of Seed, that is sown in the Earth. In which Similitude, he inserteth three things. First, That our reviving or rising, must be after Death, That which thou sowest, is not quick∣ned, except it die. Vers. 36.
Secondly, That at our rising, we shall not onely revive and live, but be changed into a far more glorious state, then when we were sown. Vers. 37. That which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be, &c. But God giveth it a Body as it pleaseth him, that is, he giveth the Body more splendor, luster, and beauty, at its Resurrection. But Thirdly, Neither its quickning, not yet transcendent, splendor, shall hinder it from being the same Body, (as to the nature of it) that was sown in the Earth; for as God giveth it a Body, for Honour and Splendor, as it pleaseth him, so Vers. 38. to every Seed his own Body. And indeed, this Similitude by which he here reasoneth the manner of the Resurrection of the Just, is very natural, and fitly suiteth each particular; for, as to its Burial, First, The Corn of Wheat is first dead, and after sown and buried in the Earth, and so is the Body of Man. Secondly, After the Corn is thus dead and buried, then it quickneth, and reviveth to life: so also shall it be with our Body; for after it is laid in the Grave and buried, it shall then quicken, rise, and revive. Again, As to the manner of its change in its rising, this Similitude also doth fitly suit, as
First, It is sown a dead Corn, it is raised a living one. Secondly, It is sown dry, and without com∣liness, it riseth green and beautiful. Thirdly, It is sown a single Corn, it riseth a full Ear. Fourthly, It is sown in its husk, but in its rising it leaveth that Husk behind it. Further, Though the Curnel thus dy, be buried, and meet with all this change and alte∣ration in these things: yet none of them can cause the nature of the Curnel to cease; it is Wheat still. Wheat was sown, and Wheat ariseth, onely it was sown dead, drie, and ba∣ren Wheat; and riseth living, beautiful, and fruitful Wheat. It hath this alteration then, that it doth greatly change its resemblance, though yet it hath this power, as still to retain its own nature. God giveth it a Body, as it pleaseth him; but to every Seed his own Body. The Apostle having thus presented the manner of the Resurrection of the Saints, by the nature of Seed sown, and rising again: he pro∣ceedeth, for further illustration, to three more Similitudes. The first is, to shew us the variety and glory of flesh.
The second is, to shew us the difference of Glory that if between Heavenly Bodies, and those that are Earthy. The third is to shew us the difference that is between the Glory of the light of the Sun, from that of the Moon; and also how one Star differeth from another in Glory. And then concludeth, so is the Resurrection of the Dead. 1 Cor. 15. 39 40 41, 42. As who should say, at the Resurrection of the Bodies, they will be ablantly more aleed and changed, then if the flesh of Beasts and Fouls were made as noble as the flesh of men; or the Bodies of Earth, were made as excellent as the Heavenly Bodies; or as if the glory of the Moon should be made as bright, and as clear as the glory of the Sun; or as if the glory of the least Star was as glorious, and as shining, as the biggest in the Firmament of Heaven. It is a Resurrection indeed, a Resurrection every way. The Body ariseth as to the nature of it; the self-same nature; but as to the man∣ner of it: how far transcendant is it! there is a poor, dry, wrinkled Curnel cast into the ground, and there it lyeth, and swelleth, breatheth, and one would think, perisheth; but behold, it receiveth life, it chitteth, it putteth forth a blade, and groweth into a stalk; there also appeareth an Ear; it also sweetly Blos∣soms, with a full Curnel in the Ear, it is the
same Wheat, yet behold how the form and fashion of that which now ariseth, doth differ from that which then was sown, its glory also when 'twas sown, is no glory: when compa∣red with that in which it riseth. And yet it is the same that riseth that was sown, and no other: though the same after a far more glori∣ous manner, not the same with its husk, but without it. Our brun shall be left behind us when we rise again. The Comparison also be∣tween the Bodies Heavenly, and Bodies Earthly, hold forth the same. The glory of the Celestial is one, and the glory of the Terrestial is another. Now mark it, he doth not speak here of the natures of each of these Bodies: but of the transcendant glory of one above ano∣ther. The glory of the Heavenly is one, and the glory of the Earthly is another. Wherefore I say, at our rising, we shall not change our nature, but our glory, We shall be equal to the Angels, Luke 20. 36. Not with respect to their nature, but glory. The nature also of the Moon is one thing, and the glory of the Moon is another: and so, one Star also differeth from another in glory. A Beggar hath the same nature as a King, and Gold in the Ore, the same nature with that which is best refined; but the Beggar hath not the same glory with the King, nor yet the Gold in Ore, the same glory with that which is refi∣ned.
But our state will be far more altered, than any of these in the dayes when we like so many Suns in the Firmament of Heaven, arise out of the heart and bowels of the Earth. These things thus considered, do shew you how vainly they argue, that say, our humane nature consisting of Body and Soul, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, and also how far from their purpose, that saying of the Apostle is, which saith, [That flesh and blood shall not in∣herit the Kingdom of God.] And now also be∣cause I am fallen upon the Objection it self, I shall not passe it, but with a short dash at it. Wherefore Reader, whoever thou art, consi∣der, that frequently in Scripture, the word flesh and blood (as also in the place alledged) is not to be understood of that matter which God made; which flesh cleaveth to our bones, and blood runs in our veins: but is taken for that corruption, weakness, mortality, and evil that cleaveth to it. Which weakness and corrupti∣on, because it possesseth all men, & also wholy ruleth where the Soul is unconverted: there∣fore it beareth the name of that which is ruled, and acted by it, to wit, our whole man con∣sisting of Body and Soul; yet I say, is a thing distinct from that flesh and blood which is es∣sential to our being, and without which, we are no men. As for instance, he that is Christs, saith Paul, Gal. 5. 24. hath Crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts. Who is so vain as to think that the Apostle by these words, should mean our material flesh that hangeth on our bones, and that is mixed with our natural blood, sinews, and veins. And not rather of that inward fountain of sin, corruption and wickedness, which in another place he calleth the old man with his deceitful lusts, Ephes. 4. 22. Again, The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: Is it our flesh that hang∣eth on our bones, which lusteth against the spi∣rit? and that also against which the spirit lust∣eth? Certainly, if the spirit lusteth against our material flesh, then it is our duty not to nou∣rish it at all, because, by nourishing of it, we nourish that against which the Spirit of God fighteth, and warreth. Nay, if the spirit lust against the flesh on our bones, simply consi∣dered as flesh; and if it be our duty to follow the spirit, as it is, then we must needs kill our selves, or cut our flesh from our bones. For whatever the Spirit of God lusteth against, it must be destroyed, yea, it is our duty with all speed to destroy it. But wilt thou know O vain man, that by flesh here, is to be understood, not the nature that God hath made, but the corrupt apprehension, and wisdom, with those inclina∣tions to evil, that lodg within us. Which in another place is called, the Wisdom of the flesh. Yea, in plain termes, flesh and blood, where
Christ saith, flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. Mat. 16. 16. Nay, observe it, all these places, with many others, do rather point at a corrupt Soul, then a corrupt Body; for indeed, sin and all spiri∣tual wickedness, they have their seat in the heart and soul of a man, and by their using this or that member of the body, so defile the man; the weaknesses of the body, or that attend our material flesh and blood, they are weaknesses of another kind, as sickness, aches, pains, soars, wounds, defection of members, &c. Where∣fore, where you read of flesh and blood, as rejected of God; especially, when it speaks of the flesh and blood of Saints, you are not to understand it as ment of the flesh, which is their proper humane nature; but of that weak∣ness which cleaveth to it. Paul in another place, reckoneth up the works of the flesh, in many things, as in Witch∣craft, hatred, variance, strife, emulation, for∣nication, and many others. But can any ima∣gine, that he there, should strike at that flesh that hangeth on our bone? or rather at that malignity and rebellion that is in the mind of man against the Lord, Gal. 17, 18, 19, 20. by reason of which, the members of the Body are used this way, and also sometimes that, to ac∣complish
its most filthy and abusive deeds. They are Enemies in their Minds by wicked Works, Col. 1. 21. Thus you see that Flesh and Blood is not to be taken always for the Flesh, that is upon our hands and feet, and other parts of our Body; but for that sinne, weakness, and infirmity, that cleaveth to our whole man. Further then, touching our reall substantiall flesh, it may be either considered as God's Creature purely, or as corrupted with sinne and infirmity. Now if you consider it as corrupted, so it shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: but yet consider it as God's Creature, and so all that God hath converted to himself, through Je∣sus Christ, shall, even with that Body, when changed, inherit the Kingdom of God. The Woman whose Cloaths are foul, can yet distin∣guish between the Dirt and the Cloth on which it hangeth; and so deals God with us. 'Tis true, there is not one Saint, but while he liveth here, his Body is arrayed and infected with many corrupt and filthy things, as touch∣ing bodily weaknesses; yea, and also with many sinful infirmities, by reason of that body of Sin and Death that yet remains in us: But yet God I say, distinguisheth between our weaknesses, and his Workmanship, and can tell how to save the whole Man of his People, while he is de∣stroying
the Corruption and Weakness that cleaveth to them. And now to return to the place objected, Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. It cannot be truly understood, that that flesh which is Man's Nature, shall not enter the Kingdom: For then, as I said before, Christ must lose his Members, the purchase of his Bloud, the Vessels and Temples of his Spirit; for all this is our Body. Again, then Christ also in that his Body, which is also our Flesh and Blood, is not in Glory, contrary to the whole Current of the New Testament, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Heb. 7. 24, 25. Heb. 8. 3, 4. Heb. 10. 10, 11, 12. Rev. 1. 18. Rev. 2. 8. Yea, it would be Non-sence to say, there should be a Resurrection, and that our vile Body shall be changed, and made like to the Glorious Body of the Son of God; if this Body do not at all rise again, but some other thing, which is not in us, and our Nature. But to be short, the Apo∣stle here, when he saith, Flesh and Blood shall not inherit, &c. speaks properly of that Mortality and Weakness, that now attends our whole Man, and not of our reall substantial Bo∣dy it self. For after he had said, Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; he adds, Neither doth Corruption inherit in corrup∣tion: Which two sayings, are answerable to
what he presently adds; Saying, Behold! I shew you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinckling of an Eye, at the last Trump, for the Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead; mark, the Dead shall be raised incorruptible; that is, the Dead shall be so raised, as that in their rising, Incorruption shall possess them, in stead of Corruption, and Immortality, instead of that Mortality that de∣scended to the Grave with them. For this Cor∣ruptible; mark, this Corruptible, shall put on incorruption; and this mortal shall put on Mor∣tality: Mark, I say, it is this Corruptible, and this Mortal, that must be raised, though not Corruptible and Mortal, as it was buried; but immortal and incorruptible: it shall leave its Grave-Cloaths of Corruption and Mortality be∣hind it, Cor. 15. 50, 51. 52, 53. The manner of which their Rising, the Apo∣stle doth more distinctly branch out a little a∣bove in four particulars: Which particulars, are these that follow, 1. It is sown in Corruption; it is raised in Incorruption. 2. It is sown in Dishonour, it is raised in Glory. 3. It is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power. 4. It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15.
First, it is raised in Incorruption: We are brought into this World by Sin and Corrupti∣on; Corruption is our Father, and in Sin did our Mother conceive us, Job 17. 14. Psal. 51. 5. And hence it is, that we have our Life; nnt onely like a span, shadow, or post, for shortness, but also, that it is attended with so much vanity and vexation of spirit: But now being raised from the Dead incorruptible, (which is also called a Begetting and Birth) these Things that now in our Life annoy us, and at last take away our Life, are effectually destroy'd: And there∣fore we live for ever, as saith the Spirit; And there shall be no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Cry∣ing; neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things (that is, all our Corruptibleness) are passed away, Rev. 21. 4. There shall be in our Resurrection no Cor∣ruption, either of Body, of Soul; no weakness, nor sickness, nor any thing tending that way; as he saith, He will present us to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephes. 5. 25, 26, 27. Therefore when he saith, it is raised in Incorruption, it is, as if he had said, It is impossible that they should ever sin more, be sick more, sorrow more, or die more. They that shall be counted worthy of that World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry, nor are given in Marriage, (though 'twas thus with them in this World) neither can they
die any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of God, being the Children of the Resurrection, Luk. 20. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Secondly, It is raised in Glory; the Disho∣nour that doth attend the Saint at his depart∣ing this World, it is very great, he is sown in dishonour; he is so loathsom at his death, that his dearest friends are weary of him, stop their noses at him, see no beauty in him, nor set a∣ny price upon him. (I speak nothing here, how some of them are banged, starved, banished, and so die, torn to pieces, and not suffered to be put into Graves;) but it is raised in glory. Glory is the sweetness, comliness, purity, and perfection of a thing. The light is the glory of the Sun, strength is the glory of youth, and gray hairs is the glory of old Age. That is, it is the excellency of these things, and that which makes them shine. 1 Cor. 15, 40, 41. Prov. 20. 29. Therefore to arise in glory, it is first to arise in all the beauty, and utmost compleatness that is possible to possess a humane Creature, I say, in all its features & members, inconceivably beau∣tifull: sin and corruption hath made mad work in our bodies, as well as in our Souls; 'Tis sin commonly that is the cause of all that deformi∣ty, and ill-favouredness, that now cleaveth to us, and that also rendereth us so dishonourable
at our death; but now at our rising, we being raised incorruptible, we shall appear in such perfections, and that of all sorts belonging to the Body, that all the beauty and comeliness, sweetness and amiableness, that hath at any time been in this World, it shall be swallowed up a thousand times told with this glory. The Psalmist saith of Christ, That he was fairer than the Children of men, Psal. 45. 2. and that as I believe, in his outward man, as well as in his inward part, He was the exactest, purest, compleatest, and beautifullest Creature that ever God made, Isa. 42. 14. Col. 1. 18. Till his visage was so marred by his persecutions: for in all things he had, and shall have, the preheminence. Why our Bodies at our Resurrection, will not onely be as free from sin, as his was before he died; but also as free from all other infirmi∣ties, as he was after he was raised again. In a word, if incorruptibleness can put a beau∣ty upon our Bodies, when they arise, we shall have it. There shall be no lame legs, nor Crump-shoulders, no blare-eyes, nor yet wrinkled faces, Phil. 3. 20, 21. He shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body. Again, all the glory that a glorified Soul can help this Body to, it at this day shall en∣joy. That Soul that hath been these hundreds or thousands of years in the Heavens, soaking in
the Bosom of Christ, it shall in a moment come spangling into the Body again, and inhabit every member and vein of the Body, as it did before its departure. That Spirit of God also, that took its leave of the Body, when it went to the Grave, shall now in all perfection dwell in this Body again I tell you, the Body at this day, will shine brighter than the face of Moses or Stephen, even as bright as the Sun, the Stars, and Angels. When Christ who is our life shall ap∣pear, we shall appear with him in glory, Exod. 34. 29. 35. Acts 6. 15. Dan. 12. 3. Mat. 13. 42, 43. Luk. 20. 26. Col. 3. 3, 4. Thirdly, It is raised in Power. While we are here, we are attended with so many weak∣nesses and infirmities, that in time the least sin or sickness is too hard for us, and taketh away both our strength, our beauty, our dayes, our breath and life, and all. But behold, we are raised in power, in that power that all these things are as far below us, as a Grashopper is below a Gyant, at the first appearance of us, the World will tremble. Job 38. 17. Judges 16. 3. Behold the Gates of death, and the bars of the Grave are now carried away on our shoul∣ders, as Sampson carried away the Gates of the City. Death quaketh, and destruction fall∣eth down dead at our feet: What then can stand before us? We shall then carry that Grace, Majesty, Terrour, and commanding
power in our souls, that our countenances shall be like Lightning, compare Luke 20. 36. with Mat. 28. 2, 3. For this mortall must put on im∣mortality, and this corruptible must put on incor∣ruption: So when this corruptible, shall have put on incorruption, and this mortall, shall have put on immortality: then shall be brought to passe that saying which is written, Death is swallowed up of Victory. 1 Cor. 15. 53, 54. Fourthly, It is raised a spiritual Body. This is the last particular, and is indeed the reason of the other three; it is an incorruptible Body, because it is a spiritual one; it is a glorious Body, because it is a spiritual one; it doth rise in power, because it is a spiritual Body. When the Body is buried, or sown in the Earth, it is a Body corruptible, dishonourable, weak and natural: but when it ariseth, it doth rise incorruptible, glorious, powerfully, and Spiritual. So that so far as incorruption is a∣bove corruption, glory above dishonour, pow∣erfull above weakness, and spiritual above na∣turall: So great an alteration will there be in our Body, when raised again. And yet it is this Body and not another, this in nature, though changed into a far more glorious State; A thousand times further, then if a Hoggard was changed to be an Emperour. Mark, It is sown a natural Body: a very fit word; for
though there dwell never so much of the Spirit and Grace of God in it while it liveth, yet so soon as the Soul is separate from it, so soon also doth the Spirit of God separate from it; and so will continue while the day of its rising be come. Therefore it is laid into the Earth, a meer Lump of Man's Nature: It is sown a Na∣tural Body: But now at the day, when the Hea∣vens shall be no more, as Job saith, Job 14. 12. Then the Trump shall sound, even the Trump of God, and, in a moment, the Dead shall be raised in∣corruptible, glorious, and spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 52. 1 Thes. 24. 16, 17. So that I say, the Body when it ariseth, will be so swallowed up of life and immortality, that it will be, as if it had lost its own Humane Nature; though, in truth, the same substantial real Nature is every whit there still. 'Tis the same [it] that riseth, that was sown; it is sown, it is raised: it is sown, it is raised, saith the Apostle. You know, that things which are candied, by the Art of the A∣pothecary, they are so swallow'd up with the sweetness and vertue of that in which it is can∣died, that they are now, as though they had no other Nature, than that in which they are boil∣ed: When yet, in truth, the thing candied doth still retain its own proper Nature and Essence; though by vertue of its being candied, it loseth its former sourness, bitterness, stinking, smell, or the like. Just thus, at the last day, it will be
with our Bodies; We shall be so candied, by being swallow'd up of Life, as before is shewed, That we shall be, as if we were all Spirit, when in truth, it is but this Body that is swallowed up of Life: And it must needs be, that our Nature still remain, otherwise it cannot be Us that shll be in Heaven, but something besides Us. Let us lose our proper Humane Nature, and we lose absolutely our Being & so are annihalated into nothing. Wherefore, it, the same it, that is sown a Natural Body, it shall rise a Spiritual Body. But again, as I said, concerning Things that are candied; our Body, when thus risen, it shall lose all that sourness and stinck, that now, by reason of sinne and infirmity, cleaveth to it: neither shall its lumpishness, or unweildiness, be any impediment to its acting after the man∣ner of Angels. Christ hath shewed us, what our Body at our Resurrection shall be, by shewing of us, in his Word, what his Body was at, and after, his Resurrection: We read, that his Body, after he was risen from the Dead, though it yet retained the very same Flesh and Bones, that did hang upon the Cross, yet how Angelical was it at all times, upon all occasions! He could come in to his Disciples with that very Body, when the Doors were shut upon them: He could, at pleasure, to their amazement, appear in the twinckling of an Eye, in the midst of
them: He could be visible and invisible as he pleased, when he sat at meat with them. In a word, he could pass and re-pass, ascend and descend in that Body, with far more pleasure and ease, than the Bird by the Art of her Wing, Luk 24. 38, 39, 40, 41. Joh. 20. 24, 25. Luk. 24. 31, 32, 50, 51. Joh. 20. 19, 26. Act. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Mark 16. 19. Eph. 4. 7, 8, 9. Now, I say, as we have in this World born the Image of our first Father; so, at that Day, we shall have the Image of Jesus Christ, and be as he is. As is the Earthly, such are they that are Earthly; and as is the Heavenly, such are they that are Heavenly; and as we have been the Image of the Earthly, we shall (at our Resurrection) bear the Image of the Heavenly: It is so in part now, but shall so be in perfection then, 1 Cor. 15. 48, 49. To mount up to Heaven, and to descend a∣gain at pleasure, shall, with us, in that Day, be ordinary. If there were Ten Thousand Bars of Iron, or Walls of Brass, to separate between us, and our pleasure and desire, at that Day, they should as easily be pierced by us, as is the Cob∣web, or Air by the Beams of the Sun: And the Reason is, Because to the Spirit, wherewith we shall be unconceiveably filled at that Day, no∣thing is unpossible, Mat. 10. 27. And the working of it at that Day, shall be in that nature and
measure, as to swallow up all impossibilities. He shall change our vile Body, and fashion it like unto his glorious Body; Now mark, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21. As who should say, I know that there are many things, that in this World hinder us from having our Bodies like the Body of Christ; but when God shall raise us from the Dead, because he will then have our Body like the Body of his Son: He will stretch forth such a power to work upon, and in our Body, that he will remove all impossibi∣lities and hinderances. Nay further, we do not onely see what ope∣ration the Spirit will have in our Body, by the carriage of Christ, after his Resurrection; but even by many a Saint before their Death. The Spirit used to catch Elijah away, no man could tell whether. It carryed Ezekiel hither and thither: It carryed Christ from the Top of the Pinacle of the Temple into Galilee; through it he walked on the Sea; the Spirit caught away Philip from the Eunuch, and carryed him as far as Azotus, 1 King. 17. 11, 12. 2 King. 2. 11. Ezek 3. 14. Luke 4. 14. Matth. 14. 25. Act. 8. 39. 40. Thus the great God hath given us a Tast of the power and glory that is in himself, and how easily it will help us, by its possessing of us at the Resurrection, to act and do like Angels; as
Christ sith, They that shall be counted worthy of that World, and of the Resurrection from the Dead, they shall not die, but be equal to the Angels, Luk. 23. 36. Further, as the Body by being thus spiritua∣lized, shall be as I have said; so again it must needs be, that hereby all the Service of the Bo∣dy, and Faculties of the Soul, must be infinitely inlarged also. Now we shall see him as he is, and now we shall know, even as we are known, 1 Joh. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 13. 12. First, now we shall see him; to wit, Christ in his Glory: Not by Revelation onely, as we do now, but then Face to Face; and he will have us with him, to this very end, Joh. 17. 24. Though John was in the Spirit, when he had the Vision of Christ, Rev. 1. 17. yet it made him fall at his Feet as dead; and also turned Da∣niel's Beauty into Corruption, Dan. 10. 8. It was so glorious, and so over-weighing a Glory, that he appeared in; but we shall, at the Day of our Resurrection, be so furnished, that we shall with the Eagle, be able to look upon the Sun in his strength: We shall then, I say, see Him as he is; who now is in the Light, that no Eye hath seen, nor any man can see till that Day, 1 Tim. 6. 16. Now we shall see into all Things: There shall not be any thing hid from us; there shall not be a Saint, a Prophet, or saved Soul, small
or great; but we shall then perfectly know them: Also, all the Works of Creation, Electi∣on, and Redemption, and shall see and know as throughly, all the Things of Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, even as perfectly, as now we know our A, B, C. For the Spirit, with which we shall in every Crany of Soul and Body, be filled, I say, that searcheh all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. We see that strange Things have been known by the Prophets and Saints of God, and that when they knew but in part. Abraham could, by it, tell to a day, how long his Seed should be under Persecution in E∣gypt, Gen. 15. 13. Elisha, by it, could tell what was done in the King of Assyria's Bed-Cham∣ber, 2 King. 6. 12. Ahijah could know by this, Jeroboam's Wife, so soon, yea before her Feet entred within his Door, though he saw her not, 1 King. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The Prophet of Judah could tell by this, what God would do to Bethel, for the Idolatry there committed; and could also point out the man by name that should do the Execution, long before he was born, 1 Kin. 13. 2. What shall I say, Enoch by it could tell, what should be done at the end of the World, Jud. 14, 15. How did the Prophets, to a circumstance, prophecie of Christ's Birth, his Death, his Burial, of their giving him Call and Vinegar, Of their
parting his Raiment, and piercing his Hands and Feet, Isa. 53. Of his riding on an Ass, Also, all this they saw, when they spake of him, Joh. 12. 41. Peter also, though half asleep, could at the very first word, call Moses and Elias by their Names, when they appeared to Christ in the Holy Mount, Luk. 9. 33. He is very igno∣rant of the operation of the Spirit of God, that scrupleth these Things: But now, I say, if these Things have been done, seen, and known, by Spiritual men, while their knowledge hath been but in part, how shall we know, see, and dis∣cern, when that which is perfect is come? Which will be at the Resurrection; It is raised a Spiritual Body. Thus, in few words, have I shewed you the truth of the Resurrection of the Just, and also the manner of their Rising: Had I judged it convenient, I might have much inlarged on each particular, and have added many more: For the Doctrine of the Resurrection, however question'd by Hereticks, and Erroneous Per∣sons; yet is such a Truth, that almost all the Ho∣ly Scriptures of God point at, and center in it. God hath, from the beginning of the World, shewed to us, that our Body must be with him, as well as our Soul, in the Kingdom of Heaven. I say, he hath shew'd; first he hath shewed us, how he will deal with those that are alive at Christs
coming, by his translating of Enoch, Gen. 5. 24. Heb. 1. 5. and taking him Body and Soul to himself: As also, by his catching of Elias, 1 King. 2. 10, 11. up Body and Soul into Hea∣ven, in a Fiery Chariot. Secondly, He hath often put us in remem∣brance of the Rising of those that are Dead, at that Day. First, By the Faith he gave Abraham, con∣cerning the Offering of his Son: For when he offered him, he accounted that God was able to raise him up, even from the Dead: From whence also he received him in a Figure. In a Figure of the Resurrection of Christ, for Abraham's Ju∣stification, and of Abraham's Resurrection by Christ at the last Day, for his Glorification, Heb. 11. 19. Secondly, By the Faith he gave Joseph, con∣suming his Bones; which Charge, the Godly in Egypt did diligently observe, and to that end, did keep them four hundred years; and, at length, carryed them, I say, from Egypt to Ca∣naan, Heb. 11. 22. which was a Tipe of our be∣ing carryed in our Body, from this World to Heaven. Besides, How oft did God give power to his Prophets, Servants, and Christ Jesus, to raise some that was now dead, and some that had been long so; and all, no doubt, to put the present Generations; as also the Generations
yet unborn, in mind of the Resurrection of the Dead. To this end, I say, how was the Shu∣namites Son raised from the dead? 2 King. 4. The man also at the touching of the bones of Elisha, 2 King. 13. 20, 21. Together with the body of Lazarus, with Jairus Daughter, and Tabitha, and many others, Luke 8. 53, 54, 55. Joh. 11. 43, 44, 45. Acts 9. 40, 41. who after their Soul was departed from them, Lazarus lying in his grave four dayes, were all raised to life again, and lived with that very Body out of which the Soul, at their death, had departed. But above all, that notable place in Matthew, at the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, gives us a notable fore-word of the Resurrection of the Just: Saith the Text, And the graves were opened, and many BODIES of Saints which slept, arose, and came out of their graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many, Matth. 27. 50, 51, 52, 53. When the Authour to the Hebrews had given us a Catalogue of the Worthies of the Old Testament, he saith at last, These all died in Faith. In the faith of what? That they should lie and rot in their graves eternally? No, verily this is the Faith of Ranters, not
of Christians. They all died in faith, that they should rise again; and therefore counted this World not worth the living in [upon un∣worthy terms] that after death they might obtain a better Resurrection, Heb. 11. 13, 35. 'Tis also worth the Considering, that of Paul to the Philippians, where he saith, That he was Confident, that that God, that had be∣gun a good work in them, would perform it un∣till the day of Christ, Phil. 1. 6. Which day of Christ, was not the day of their Conversion, for that was past with them already, they were now the Children of God; but this Day of Christ, it is the same which in other places is called the Day when he shall come with the sound of the last Trump to raise the Dead. For you must know, That the Work of Salvation is not at an end with them that are now in Heaven; no, nor ever will, untill (as I shewed you before) their Bodies be raised again. God, as I have told you, hath made our Bodies the Members of Christ, and God doth not count us thoroughly saved, untill our Bodies be as well redeemed and ransomed out of the grave and death, as our Soul from the Curse of the Law, and domi∣nion of Sin,
Though Gods Saints have felt the power of much of his grace, and have had many a sweet word fulfilled on them; yet one word will be unfulfilled on their particular person, so long as the grave can shut her mouth upon them: But, as I said before, when the gates of death do open before them, and the barrs of the grave do fall asunder; then shall be brought to pass that saying that is written, Death is swallowed up of Victory: and then will they hear that most pleasant voyce, Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the Earth shall cast forth her dead, Isa. 26. 19. Thus much touch∣ing the truth of the Resurrection of the Just, with the manner of their rising. Now you must know, That the time of the rising of these Just, will be at the Coming of the Lord: For when they arise, nay just before they are raised, the Lord Jesus Christ will appear in the Clouds in flaming fire with all his mighty Angels; the effect of which appearing, will be the rising of the dead, &c. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, saith Paul, and with the voice of the Arch-Angell, and with the Trump of God, and the dead shall rise, 1 Thess. 7, 8. 2 Thess. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 52.
Now at the time of the Lords Coming, there will be found in the World alive both Saints and Sinners. As for the Saints that then shall be found alive, they shall so soon as all the Saints are raised out of their graves, not die, but be changed and swallowed up of in∣corruption, immortality, and glory; and have the Soul-spiritual Translation, as the raised Saints shall have; as he saith, We shall not all die, or sleep, but we shall all be changed in a mo∣ment, in the twinkling of an eye; For the Trump shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorrup∣tible, and we shall be changed. And again, For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Arch-Angel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Ayr, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. As he saith also in another place, He shall judg the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdome, 1 Cor. 15. 52. 1 Thess. 4. 15, 16, 17. and 2 Tim. 4. 1. Now when the Saints that sleep shall be raised thus incorruptible, powerful, glorious, and spiritual; and also those that then shall be found alive, made like them: Then forthwith, before the unjust are raised, the Saints shall
appear before the Judgment Seat of the Lord Jesus Christ, there to give an account to their Lord the Judge, of all things they have done; and to receive a reward for their good accord∣ing to their labour. They shall rise, I say, before the Wicked, they being themselves the proper Children of the Resurrection; that is, Those that must have all the glory of it, both as to preheminencie, and sweetness; and therefore they are said, when they rise, to rise from the dead; that is, in their rising, they leave the reprobate World behind them, Luke 20. 35, 36. Acts 3. 15. Acts 4. 10. Acts 13. 30. Joh. 12. 1, 9, 17. And it must be so, because also the Saints will have done their Account, and be set upon the Throne with Christ as Kings and Princes with him, to Judge the World, when the wicked world are raised. The Saints shall Judg the World; they shall judge Angels: yea, they shall sit upon the Thrones of Judgment to do it. But to pass that, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. Psal. 122. 5. Now when the Saints are raised, as ye have heard, they must give an account of all things, in general, that they have done, while they were in the World: Of all things, I say, whe∣ther they be good or bad.
First, of all their bad; but mark, not un∣der the Consideration of Vagabonds, Slaves and Sinners, but as Sons, Stewards, and Ser∣vants of the Lord Jesus. That this shall be, it is evident from divers places of the Holy Scriptures: First Paul saith, We must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, We Saints. For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every Knee shall bowe to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. Again, Wherefore we labour, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him: for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one of us may receive the things done in his body, according to what he hath done, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, Rom. 14. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 'Tis true, God loveth his People, but yet he loveth not their sins, nor any thing they do, though with the greatest zeal for him, if it be contrary to his Word; Wherefore as truly as God will give a reward to his Saints and Children for all that they have indeed well done. So truly will he at this day distinguish
their good and bad: and when both are mani∣fest by the righteous Judgment of Christ: he will burn up their bad, with all their labour, travail, and paints in it for ever. He can tell how to save his people, and yet take vengeance on their Inventions, Psal. 99. 8. That is an observable place, in the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, and the third Chapter, If any man build, saith he, upon this foundation (Christ) Gold, Silver, Pretious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble, eve∣ry mans work shall be manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every mans work of what sort it is. If any mans work shall abide that he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any mans work shall be burnt, that man shall suffer losse, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Now observe first, as I said before, the Foundation is Christ, Vers. 11. 2. The Gold, Silver, and Pretious Stones, that here are said to be built upon him, are all the actings in Faith and Love according to the Word, that the Saints are found doing for
his sake in the World, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Rev. 3. 18. 3. To build on him Wood, Hay, and Stubble, it is to build, together with what is right in it self, humane Inventions, and carnall Ordi∣nances; fathering them still on God and his allowance. 4. The Fire that here you read of, it is the pure Word and Law of God, Jer. 23. 29. Joh. 12. 48. 5. The day that here you read of, it is the day of Christ's coming to Judgment, to reveal the hidden things of darkness, and to make manifest the Counsels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. 6. At this day, the Gold, Silver, pretious Stones, Wood, Hay, and Stubble, and that of every man, shall be tryed by this fire, that it may be manifest of what sort it is; the Wind, the Rain, and Flouds, beat now as vehemently against the house upon the Rock, as against that on the Sand, Luke 6. 48, 49. Observe again, 1. That the Apostle speaks here of the sa∣ved, not of the reprobate, He himself shall be saved. 2. That this saved man may have Wood, Hay, and Stubble; that is, things that will not abide the tryal.
3. That neither this mans goodness, not yet Gods love to him, shall hinder all his Wood; Hay, or stubble for coming on the stage, Every mans work shall be manifest: the fire shall try every mans work, of what sort it is. 4. Thus, a good man shall see all his Wood, Hay, and stubble burnt up in the tryal before his face. 5. That good man then shall suffer loss, or the loss of all things that are not then accord∣ing to the Word of God. If any mans works shall be burnt (or any of them) he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire, that is, yet so as that all that ever he hath done, shall be tryed, and squared by the Word of God. From all which, it must be unavoidably con∣cluded, that the whole Body of the Elect must count with their Lord for all things they have done, whether good or bad, and that he will de∣stroy all their bad, with the purity of his word, yea, and all their pains, travel, and labour that they have spent about it. I am perswaded, that there are now many things done by the best of Saints, that then they will gladly dis∣own and be ashamed of: yea, which they have and do still do with great devotion. Alas, what gross things do some of the Saints in their de∣votion father upon God, and do reckon him the
Authour thereof, and so he also prompts them forward to the doing thereof, and doth give them his presence in the performance of them! yea, and as they father many superstitions and Scriptureless things upon him: so they die in the same Opinion, and never come in this World, to the sight of their evill and ignorance herein. But now the Judgment day is the prin∣cipall time wherein every thing shall be fet in its proper place; that which is of God in its place, and that which is not, shall now be dis∣covered, and made manifest. In many things now, we offend all, and then we shall see the many offences we have committed, and shall our selves judge them as they are. The Chri∣stian, is in this World, so candid a Creature, that take him when he is not under some great temptation, and he will ingeniously confess to his God, before all men, how he hath sinned and transgressed against his Father; and will fall down at the feet of God, and cry, Thou art righteous, for I have sinned; and thou art graci∣ous, that notwithstanding my sin, thou shouldest save me: now I say, if the Christian is so simple and plain-hearted with God, in the days of his imperfection, when he is accompanied with many infirmities and temptations: how freely will he confess and acknowledge his miscarriages, when he comes before his Lord
and Saviour: absolutely stript of all tempta∣tion and imperfection. Rom. 14. 11. Phil. 2. 10, 11. As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall how to me, and every Tongue shall confess to God. Every knee shall bow, and reverence God the Creator, and Christ the Redeemer of the World; and every Tongue shall confess, that his will alone ought by them to have bin obeyed in all things; and shall confess also, and that most naturally and freely. I mean, the Saints shall in how many things they were de∣ceived, mistaken, deluded, and drawn aside in their intended devotion and honour to God. But yet take notice, that in this day, when the Saints are thus counting for their evill be∣fore their Saviour and Judg: they shall not then, as now, at the remembrance and confessi∣on of sin, be filled with that guilt, confusion and shame that now through the weakness of Faith attendeth their Souls: neither shall they in the least be grieved or offended, that God hath before the Angels and the rest of their holy Brethren, laid open to a tittle their infir∣mities from the least and first, to the biggest and last. For first, the God to whom they confess all, they will now more perfectly then ever, see he doth love them, and free them from all, even
when and before they confess and acknowledg them to him, and they shall, I say, have their Soul so full of the ravishing raptures of the life and glory that now they are in, that they shall be of it swallowed up in that measure, and manner, that neither fear nor guilt, nor confusion can come near them, or touch them. Their Judge is their Saviour, their Husband, and Head: who, though he will bring every one of them for all things to Judgment, yet he will keep them for ever out of condemnation, and any thing that tendeth that way. Perfect love casts out fear, even while we are here: much more then, when we are with our Saviour our Jesus, being passed from death to life. John 5. 24. 1 John 4. 18. Secondly, The Saints at this day, shall have their hearts and Souls so wrapped up in the pleasure of God their Saviour, that it shall be their delight, to see all things, though once never so near and dear unto them; yet now to perish, if not according to his word and will: Thy will be done, is to be always our Lan∣guage here; but to delight to see it done in all things, though it tend never so much to the distruction of what we love: to delight, I say, to see it done in the height and perfection of delight: it will be when we come to Heaven,
or when the Lord shall come to judge the World. Mat. 6. 10. But thirdly, The sole end of the counting of the Saints at the day of God, it will be, not onely for the vindication of the righteousness, holiness, and purity of the Word, neither will it center onely in the manifestation of the knowledg and heart-discerning nature of Christ (though both these will be in it. Revel. 2. 22, 23.) But their very remembrances and sight of the sin and vanity that they have done while here: it shall both set off, and heighten the tender affections of their God unto them; and also increase their joy and sweetness of Soul; and clinging of heart to their God. Saints while here, are sweely sensible, that the sense of sin, and the assurance of pardon, will make famous work in their poor hearts. Ah; what meltings without guilt! what humility with∣out casting down! and what a sight of the creatures nothingness yet without fear! will this sense of sin work in the Soul. The sweetest frame, the most heart-indearing frame, that possibly, a Christian can get into, while in this World, is to have a warm sight of sin, and of a Saviour upon the heart at one time. Now it weeps not for fear, and through torment, but by vertue of constraining grace and mercy, and is at this very time, so far off of disquietness of
heart, by reason of the fight of its wickedness, that it is driven into an extasie, by reason of the love and mercy that is mingled with the sense of sin in the Soul. The heart never sees so much of the power of mercy as now, nor of the vertue, value, and excellency of Christ in all his Offices as now, and the Tongue so sweetly inlarged to proclaim and cry up grace as now; now will Christ come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that believe. 2 Thes. 1. 10, 11. Wherefore, though the Saints receive by Faith the forgiveness of sins in this life, and so are passed from death to life; yet again, Christ Jesus, and God his Father, will have every one of these sins reckoned up again, and brought fresh upon the stage in the day of Judgment, that they may see and be sensible for ever, what grace and mercy hath laid hold upon them. And this I take to be the Reason of that remarkable saying of the Apostle Peter. Repent therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of re∣freshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, who before was preached unto you, whom the Heaven must receive till the restitution of all things, spoken of by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the World be∣gan. Acts 3. 19, 20, 21.
If a sense of some sin (for who sees all? Psa. 19. 12.) and a sight of the love of God, will here so work upon the spirit of the godly: What will a sight of all sin do, when together with it they are personally present with their Lord and Saviour? Yea, if a sight of some sins, with a possibility of pardon, will make the heart love, reverence, and fear with guiltless and heart-affecting fears: what will a general sight of all sin, and together with them an eternall acquittance from them, work on the heart of the Saint for ever? Yea, I say again, if a sight of sin, and the love of God, will make such work in that Soul where yet there is unbelief, blindness, mistrust, and forgetfulness: what will a sight of sin do in that Soul, who is swallowed up of love, who is sinless, and temptationless; who hath all the faculties of Soul and Body strained, by love and grace, to the highest pin of perfection, that is possible to be in glory injoyed and posses∣sed? O the wisdom and goodness of God, that he at this day, should so cast about the worst of our things, even those that naturally tend to sink us, and damnus, for our great advantage! All things that shall work together for good, in∣deed, to them that love God. Rom. 8. 28. Those sins that brought a curse upon the whole
World, that spilt the heart-blood of our dearest Saviour, and that laid his tender Soul under the flaming wrath of God, shall by his wisdom and love, tend to the exaltation of his Grace, and the inflaming of our affections to him for ever and ever. Revel. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 'Twill not be thus with Devils, 'twill not be thus with Reprobates; the saved onely have this priviledge peculiar to themselves: (where∣fore to vary a little from the matter in hand, will God make that use of sin, even in our counting for it, that shall in this manner work for our advantage? why then, let Saints also make that advantage of their sin, as to glorifie God thereby, which is to be done, not by say∣ing, Let us do evill that good may come, or, let us sin that Grace may abound; but by taking occa∣sion by the sin that is past to set the Crown up∣on the Head of the Christ for our justification. Continually looking upon it, so as to press us to cleave close to the Lord Jesus, to grace and mercy through him, and to the keeping of us humble for ever, under all his dispensations and cariages to us. Now having counted for all their evil, and confessed to Gods glory, how they fell short, and did not the truth in this, or that, or other particulars; and having received their eter∣nall
acquittance from the Lord and Judg, in the sight of both Angels and Saints: forthwith the Lord Jesus will make inquiry into all the good and holy actions and deeds they did do in the World. Now there shall all things be reckoned up, from the very first good thing that was done by Adam or Abel, to the last that will fall out to be done in the World. The good of all the holy Prophets, of all Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, and helps in the Church: here also will be brought forth and to light, all the good Cariages of Masters of Families, of Parents, of Children, of Servants, of Neigh∣bours, or what ever good thing any man doth; but to be general and short, first, here will be a recompence for all that have sincerely labour∣ed in the Word and Doctrine, I say, a recom∣pence for all the Souls they have saved by their Word, and watered by the same. Now shall Paul the Planter, and Apollo the Waterer, with every one of their Companions, receive the reward that is according to their works. 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8. Now all the Preaching, praying, watching, and labour thou hast been at, in thy endeavou∣ring to catch men from Satan to God, shall be rewarded with spangling glory. Not a Soul thou hast converted to the Lord Jesus, nor a Soul thou hast comforted, strengthned, or
helped by thy wholsom Counsel, admonition, and comfortable speech; but it shall stick, as a Pearl in that Crown which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give thee at that day. 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. That is, if thou dost it willingly, delighting to lift up the name of God among men; if thou doest it with love, and longing after the Salvation of sinners, (otherwise thou wilt have onely thy labour for thy pains, and no more: if I do this willingly, I have a re∣ward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed to my charge. 1 Cor. 9. 17. Phil. 1. 15. But I say, if thou do it graciously, then a reward followeth; for what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoycing, are not even ye, saith Paul, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, for ye are our glory and joy. 1 Thes. 2. 19, 20. Let him there∣fore that Christ hath put into this Harvest, take comfort in the midst of all his sorrow, and know, that God acknowledgeth that he that converteth a sinner from the errour of his way, doth even save that Soul from death, and cover∣eth a multitude of sins. Wherefore labour to convert, labour to water, labour to build up, and to feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint; but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; and when the chief Shepheard shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fadeth not away Jam. 5. 20. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. Secondly, And as the Ministers of Christs Gospel shall at this day be recompensed: so shall also those more private Saints be with ten∣der affections, and love looked on, and re∣warded for all their work and labour of love, which they have shewed to the name of Christ, in ministring to his Saints, and suffering for his sake. Whatsoever good thing any man doth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Heb. 6. 10. Ephes. 6. 8. Ah! little do the People of God think, how largely and thorowly, God will at that day, own and re∣compence all the good and holy acts of his People. Every bit, every drop, every rag, and every nights harbour, though but in a wisp of straw, shall be rewarded in that day before men and Angels. Whosoever shall give to drink, to one of these little ones, a Cup of cold water, onely in the name of a Disciple: verily I say unto you, saith Christ, He shall in no wise loose a Disciples reward. Mat. 10. 40, 41, 42. Therefore when thou makest a Feast, saith he, Call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind, and thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompence thee, for thou shalt be recompenced at the Resurrection of the Just. Luk. 14. 13, 14. If there be any repen∣tance among the godly at this day, it will be,
because the Lord Jesus in his person, members, and word, was no more owned, honoured, en∣tertained, and provided for by them, when they were in this World: For it will be ra∣vishing to all, to see what notice the Lord Je∣sus will then take of every Widows mite. He, I say, will call to mind, even all those acts of mecy and kindness, which thou hast shewed to him, when thou wast among men. I say, he will remember, cry up, and proclaim before Angels and Saints, those very acts of thine, which thou hast either forgotten, or through bashfulness wilt not at that day count worth the owning. He will reckon them up so fast, and so fully, that thou wilt cry Lord, When did I do this? and when did I do the other? When saw we thee a hungry, and fed thee? or a thirst, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and cloathed thee? or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? and the King shall an∣swer and say unto them, verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye did it unto me. Mat. 25. 37, 38, 39, 40. The good works of some are manifest before hand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.
1 Tim. 5. 25. Whatever thou hast done to one of the least of these my Brethren, thou hast done it unto me. I felt the nourishment of thy food, and the warmth of thy fleece. I remem∣ber thy loving and holy visits, when my poor members were sick, and in prison, and the like. When they were strangers, and wanderers in the World, thou tookest them in. Well thou good and faithful Servant, enter Thou into the Joy of thy Lord. Matth. 25. 21, 22, 23, 34, 35, 36. Thirdly, Here also will be a reward for all that hardness, and Christian induring of af∣fliction that thou hast met with for thy Lord, while thou wast in the World. Here now will Christ begin from the greatest suffering, even to the least, and bestow a reward on them all: from the blood of the suffering Saint, to the loss of an hair: nothing shall go unrewarded. Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. For these light afflictions which are but for a moment, they work out for us, a far more exceeding, and eternall weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Behold by the Scriptures, how God hath recorded the sufferings of his People, and also how he hath promised to reward them. Blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the King∣dom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you, falsly for my sake, re∣joyce, Luk. 6. 22, 23. leap for joy, and be ex∣ceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. Mat. 5. 16, 17, 18. And every one that hath forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Laws for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Matth. 19. 29. Fourthly, There is also a reward at this day, for all the more secret, and more retired works of Christianity: there is not now one act of faith in thy Soul, either upon Christ, or against the Devil, and Antichrist; but it shall in this day be found out, and praysed, honoured and glorified; in the face of Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 7. 2. There is not one groan to God in secret, against thy own lusts, and for more grace, light, spirit, sanctification, and strength to go thorow this World like a Christian; but it shall even at the coming of Christ, be rewarded openly. Matth. 6. 6.
3. There hath not one tear dropped from thy tender eye against thy lusts, the love of this World, or for more Communion with Jesus Christ, but as it is now in the bottle of God; so then it shall bring forth such plenty of reward, that it shall return upon thee with abundance of increase. Blessed are ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh. Thou tell est my wonderings, and puttest my tears into thy Bottle, are they not in thy Book? They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed shall doubt∣less come again, bringing his sheaves with him. Psal. 56. 8. Psal. 126. 5 6. Luk. 6. 21. Having thus in brief shewed you something concerning the Resurrection of the Saints, and that they shall count with their Lord at his coming, both for the burning up what was not according to the truth, and rewarding them for all their good. It remains, that I now in few words, shew you something also of that with which they shall be rewarded. First then, those that shall be found in the day of their Resurrection, when they shall have all their good things brought upon the stage; they I say, that then shall be found the People most laborious for God while here: they shall at that day injoy the greatest portion of God, or shall be possessed with most of the glory of the God-head then. For that is the portion of
Saints in general. Rom. 8. 17. Lam. 3. 24. And why shall he that doth most for God in this World, injoy most of him in that which is to come? but because by doing and acting, the heart, and every faculty of the Soul is inlarged, and more capatiated, whereby more room is made for glory. Every Vessel of Glory shall at that day be full of it; but every one will not be capable to contain a like measure. And so if they should have it communicated to them, would not be able to stand under it; for there is an eternall weight in the glory that Saints shall then injoy; and every Vessel must be at that day filled, that is, have its heavenly load of it. 2 Cor. 4. 17. All Christians have not the same injoyment of God in this life, neither indeed were they able to bear it, if they had it. 1 Cor. 3. 2. But those Christians that are most laborious for God in this World, they have already most of him in their Souls, and that not onely because diligence in Gods wayes, is the meanes whereby God communicates himself; but also because thereby the senses are made more strong, and able, by reason of use to under∣stand God, and to discern both good and evill. Heb. 5. 13, 14. Mat. 13. 11, 12. To him that hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance. He that laid out his pound for his
Master, and gained ten therewith, he was made Ruler over ten Cities; but he that by his pound gained but five, he was made Ruler over but five. Luk. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19. Dan. 1. 3, 4. Often, he that is best bred in his youth, he is best able to manage most, when he is a man touching things of this life) but alwayes he that is best bred, and that is most in the Bo∣som of God, and that so acts for him here: he is the man that will be best able to injoy most of God in the Kingdom of Heaven. It is observ∣able, that Paul saith, Our afflictions work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Our afflictions do it, not onely because there is laid up a reward for the afflicted; ac∣cording to the measure of affliction; but be∣cause afflictions, and so every service of God, doth make the heart more deep, more experi∣mentall, more knowing, and profound; and so more able to hold, contain, and bear more. Every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own labour. 1 Cor. 4. 17. Psal. 119. 71. 1 Cor. 3. 8. And this is the reason of such say∣ings as these; Lay up for your selves a good foundation against the time to come, that you may lay hold on eternall life: which eternall life, is not the matter of our Justification from sin in the sight of God; for that is done freely by Grace, through Faith in Christs bloud; (but
here the Apostle speaks of giving of Alms) but it is the same that in the other place he calls the far more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. And hence it is, that he in his stirring them up to be diligent in good works, doth tell them, that he doth not exhort them to it, be∣cause he wanted, but because he would have fruit that might abound to their accon, as he saith also in another place, Belov∣ed Brethren, be stedfast, unmoveable, al∣wayes abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Tim. 6. 18, 19. Phil. 4. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore I say, the reward that the Saints shall have at this day for all the good they have done, it is the injoyment of God, according to their works: though they shall be freely justified and glori∣fied without works. Secondly, As the injoyment of God at that day, will be to the Saints, according to their works and doings. (I speak not now of Justification from sin) so will their prayse and commendations at that day, be according to the same, and both of them their degrees of glory; for I say, as God by communicating of himself unto us at that day, will thereby glo∣rifie us, so also he will for the adding all things
that may furnish with glory every way, cause to be proclaimed in the face of Heaven, and in the presence of all the holy Angels: every thing that hath for God, his ways, and people, been done by us while here we have been. Whatsoever hath bin spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the light: and that which ye have spoken in the ear in Closets, shall be proclaimed upon the House tops. Again, he that shall confess me, saith Christ, be∣fore men, him will I confess before the An∣gels of God. Now as he of whom Christ is ashamed when he comes in his glory, and in the glory of the holy Angels, will then lie under uncon∣ceiveable disgrace, shame, dishonour, and con∣tempt: so he whom Christ shall confess, own, commend, and prayse at that day, must needs have very great Dignity, Honour, and Re∣nown; for then shall every man have prayse of God, to wit, according to his works. Luke 12. 2, 3. Mark 8. 38. Mat. 10. 32. 1 Cor. 4, 5. Now will Christ proclaim before thee, and all others, what thou hast done, and what thou hast suffered, what thou hast owned, and what thou hast withstood for his name. This is he that forsook his goods, his Relations, his Country, and life for me: this is the man that overcame
the flatteries and threats, allurements and in∣ticings of a whole World for me; behold i, he is an Israelite indeed, the top man in his Generation, none like him in all the Earth. It is said, that when King Ahasuerus, had under∣standing of how good service Mordeeai the Jew had done to, and for him, he commanded that the royall Apparel, and the Crown, with the Horse that the King did ride on, should be given to him, and that he should with that Crown, Apparel, and Horse, be had through the City, in the presence of all his Nobles, and that Proclamation should be made before him: thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour. Esth. 6. 9, 10, 11. Ahasuerus in this was a Type, to hold forth to the Children of God, how kindly he will take all their labour and service of love, and how he will honour and dignifie the same, as Christ saith, Let your loins be girded a∣bout, and your lights burning, and you your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the Wed∣ding: that when he cometh and knocketh, ye may open to him immediately, blessed are those servants, whom their Lord when he cometh, shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and
shall make them sit down to meat, and shall come forth and serve them. Luke 12. 35, 36, 37. The meaning is, that those souls that shall make it their business to honour the Lord Jesus Christ, in the day of their tempta∣tion, he will make it his business to honour and glotifie them in the day of his glorification. Verily, I say unto you, that he will make them sit down to meat, and shall come forth and serve them; if any man will serve me, saith he, him will my Father honour. Joh. 12. 26. Job 1. 8. Joh. 1. 47. Mark 14. 9. Rev. 3, 4. Rev. 14. 12. 3, 4, 5. It hath bin Gods way in this World, to proclaim the acts and doing of his Saints in his Word, before all in this World, and he will do it in that which is to come. Thirdly, Another thing that shall be yet added to the glory of the Saints, in the King∣dom of their Saviour, at his coming, is, they shall every one of them then have his Throne and place of degree on Christs right hand, and on his left, in his glorious Kingdom, according to the relation they stand in to Christ, as the members of his Body; for as Christ will have a special eye on us, and a tender and affectio∣nate heart, to recompence to the full every
good thing that any man doth for his name in this World: so also he will have as great re∣gard, that there be to every member of his body, the place, and state that is comely for every such member. When the Mother of Zebedees Children petitioned our Saviour, that he would grant to her, that her two Sons might fit the one on his right hand, and the other on his left in his Kingdom: though he did not grant to her the request for her Children, yet he affirmed, that there would be places of de∣grees and honour in Heaven, saying, To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepa∣red of my Father. See Mat. 20. 20, 21, 22, 23. In the Temple, there were Chambers bigger, and lesser, higher and lower, more inward and more outward: which Chambers were types of the Mansions that our Lord when he went a∣way, told us he went to prepare for us. In my Fathers House are many mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, &c. Joh 14. 1, 2, 3. The foot here, shall not have the place prepared for the eye, nor yet the hand, that which is prepared for the ear; but every one shall have his own place in the Body of Christ, and the glory also pre∣pared for such a relation: order, as it is comely in Earth, so much more in the Kingdom of the
God of Order, in Heaven; where all things shall be done in their utmost perfections. Here shall Euoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joshuah, David, with the Prophets, have every one his place, according to the degree of old Testament Saints. As God said to Daniel, Go thy way till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and stand in the lot at the end of the days. Dan. 12. 13. And here also, shall Peter, Paul, Timothy, and all other the Church-Officers have their place, and Heavenly state, according as God hath set them in the Church in the New Testament. As Paul saith of the Deacons, They that use the Office of a Deacon well, they purchase to them∣selves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ. 1 Tim. 3. 13. And so of all other Saints, be they here of what Ranck, Quality, or place in the Church soever, they shall have every one his state, his Heavenly State, according as he standeth in the Body. As he saith, seeing those members that are most feeble, are necessary, to them shall be given more abundant honour. 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23. Of this Heavenly Order in the Kingdom of Christ, when his Saints are risen from the dead, was Solomon a notable Type in his Family, and a∣mong his Servants and Officers, who kept such exactness in the famous order, in which he had placed all about him, that it did amaze and
confound beholders. For when the Queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solo∣mon, and the House which he built, and the meat of his Table, the sitting of his Servants, and the attendance of his Mi∣nisters, and their Apparel, his Cup-bearers also, and their Apparel, and the ascent by which he went up into the House of the Lord: there was no more spirit in her. 2 Chron. 9. 3, 4. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. Having gone thus far, I shall now come to the second part of the Text, to wit, that there shall be a Resurrection of the wicked. There shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the Just and unjust. For as the Just go before the unjust, in Name and Dignity, and Honour, so they shall in the last day, go before them in the Resurrection. Now then, when the Saints have thus risen out of their Graves, given up their accounts, received their glory, and are set upon the Thrones, (for there are set Thrones of Judge∣ment, the Thrones of the House of David.) Psal. 122. 5. When I say, they are all of them in their royall Apparel, with Crowns of glory, every one presenting the Person of a King: then come the unjust out of their Graves,
to receive their Judgment for what they have done in the body. As Paul saith, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one, (both Saints and sinner) may receive the things done in the body, whether it be good, or whether it be bad. But now because I would prove by the words, whatever I would have others receive for a truth: therefore I shall in few particu∣lars, prove the Resurrection of the wicked. First then, it is evident, that the wicked shall rise from the very termes and names that the raised shall then go under, which is the very same names that they did go under when they lived in this World. They are called the Hea∣then, the Nations, the World, the wicked, and those that do iniquity; they are called Men, Women, Sodom, Sidon, Bethsaida, Capernaum, and Tire. The Men of Ninive shall rise up in Judgment, the Queen of the South shall rise up in the Judgment, and it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of Judgment, then for other sinners that have resisted more light. The Heavens and the Earth that now are, are kept in store, re∣served unto fire against the day of Judge∣ment, and perdition of ungodly men.
2 Pet. 3. 7. Mat. 12. 41, 42. Mat. 11. 21, 22, 23, 24. Luk. 10. 12, 13, 14. Joel 3. 12, 13, 14. Mat. 25. 32. Jud. 14. 15. Now these Termes, or Names, are not given to the spirits of the wicked onely; but to them as consisting of Body and Soul. Further, Christ tells his ad∣versaries, when they had apprehended him, and shamefully intreated him, that yet they should see him sit on the right hand of power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven, as John also doth testifie, saying, Behold he cometh with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they also that pierced him, and all the kinreds of the Earth shall wail because of him. Mat. 26. 64. Revel. 1. 7. Now none of these sayings are yet fulfilled, neither shall they, untill his second coming; for though the Jews did many of them see him, when he did hang upon the Cross, yet then he was not coming in the Clouds of Heaven, nei∣ther did then all kinreds of the Earth wail be∣cause of him. No, this is reserved till he comes to judge the World; for then shall the ungodly be so put to it, that gladly they would creep into the most invincible Rock or Moun∣tain under Heaven, to hide themselves from his Face, and the Majesty of his Heavenly pre∣sence. Rev. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. There shall there∣fore,
that this may be brought to passe, be a Re∣surrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. For though an opinion of no Resurrection may now lull men asleep, in security and impiety, yet the Lord, when he comes, will rouse them, and cause them to awake; not onely out of their security, but out of their Graves, to their doom, that they may receive for their errour, the recompence that is meet. Secondly, The Body of the ungodly must, at the last, arise out of the Grave, because that Body and their Soul, while they lived in the World, were Co-partners in their lusts and wickedness. God is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. 1 Sam. 2, 3. Eccles. 12. 14. He will therefore bring every work into Judgement, with every secret thing. And as he will bring into Judgement every work, so will he also the worker thereof, Revel. 20. 12, 13, 14. even the Dead, small and great. It is not in God to lay the punishment where the fault is not, nei∣ther to punish a part of the damned for the whole. With righteousness shall be judge the World, and the People with Equity, shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Psal. 98. 9. Gen. 18. 25. As therefore the Body was Co∣partner with the Soul in sinning, so shall every man receive the things done in his Body, ac∣cording
to what he hath done. Wherefore he saith in another place, Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give every man ac∣cording as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 12. There shall therefore be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust. 3. The body of the wicked must rise again, because as the whole man of the just also that is the Vessel of mercy & glory: so the whole man of the unjust, is the Vessel of wrath and de∣struction. There are, saith Paul, in a great House, not onely. Vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of Wood and of Earth, and some to Honour, and some to dishonour. Now as he sheweth us these Vessels to honour, they are good men, and the vessels to dishonour are the bad. 2 Tim. 2. 20, 21. Now as these vessels to dishonour, are called the vessels of wrath: so it is said, that God with much long suffering, doth suffer them to be fitted to destruction. Rom. 9. 22. how they are thus fitted, he also further sheweth, where he saith, They do after their hardness and impenitent heart, treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the Reve∣lation of the righteous Judgement of God. Rom. 2. 5. Which treasures of wickedness, James saith, it is treasured up against the last dayes, (which is the time of Judgement,) and ob∣serve
it, He saith, that then it shall eat their flesh, as it were fire. Jam. 5. 12. 3. Now then their Bodies being the vessels of the wrath of God, and again, seeing with this wrath they must be possessed at the last day, that their flesh must with it be eaten, it is evident, that their body must rise again out of their Graves, and before the Judgement Seat appear; for it is from thence, that each of them must go with his full load to their long and eternal home, where their Worm dieth not, and their fire is not quenched. Mark 9. 47, 48. Fourthly, The severity of the hand of God towards his Children, with his forbearance of his enemies, doth clearly bespeak a Resurrection of the ungodly, that they may receive the re∣ward for their wickedness which they have committed in this World. We know, that while the eyes of the wicked start out with fat∣ness, the godly are plagued all the day long, and chastned every morning. Psal. 73. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Wherefore it is evi∣dent, that the place and time of the punish∣ment of the ungodly, it is another World. If Judgement begin at the House of God, what will the end of them be, that obey not the Gospel of God? and if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.
17, 18. Alas, poor Creatures! they now plot against the Righteous, and gnash upon them with their teeth; but the Lord laugheth at them, for he seeth their day is coming; for as he saith, the wicked is reserved, or let alone in his wickedness, to the day of destruction, and shall then be brought forth to the day of wrath, Psal. 37. 12, 13. though in the mean time, he may go to his Grave in his banner, and rest within his Tomb. As Peter saith again, Job 21. 29, 30, 31, 32. the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, but to re∣serve the unjust to the day of Judgement to be pun∣ished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. And Jude saith, for them is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Jude 13. The punishment of the ungodly, it is re∣served till the day of Judgement, which will be the time of their Resurrection. Observe, first, The wicked must be pun∣ished. Secondly, The time of their punishment, is not now, but at the day of Judgement. Thirdly, This day of Judgement, must be the same with the Resurrection of the Dead, at the end of this World. As therefore the Tares
are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this World. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall cast them into a Furnace of fire, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth. Mat. 13. 40, 41. There shall then be a Resur∣rection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust. Fourthly, The Soveraignty of the Lord Je∣sus over all Creatures, doth plainly foreshew a Resurrection of the bad, as well as of the good. Indeed, the unjust shall not arise, by vertue of any relation they stand in to the Lord Jesus, as the Saints shall; but yet, because all are deli∣vered into his hand, and he made Soveraign Lord over them: therefore, by an Act of his Soveraign Power, they that are ungodly, shall arise, this is Christs own Argument, The Father judgeth no man, saith he, but hath committed all Judgment unto the Son, that is, Count him, and fall before him as their Soveraign Lord, even as they honour the Father, and he hath given him authority, to execute Judgement also, because he is the Son of Man. And then
he adds, Marvel not at this, for the hower is coming, that all that are in their graves shall hear his Voyce, and shall come forth, they that have done good, to the Resur∣rection of life; and they that have done evill, to the Resurrection of damnation. Joh. 5. 22, 23, 27, 28, 29. From hence also Paul argueth, saying, For this cause he both dyed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and liv∣ing. And then adds, We must all stand before the Judgement Seat of Christ. Rom. 14. 9. 10. Pray mind these words, Jesus Christ by his Death and Resurrection, did not onely pur∣chase Grace, and Remission of sins, for his Elect, with their Eternal Glory; but did thereby also obtain of the Father, to be Lord, and Head over all things, whether they be things in Heaven, or things on Earth, or things under the Earth, All Power, saith he, in Heaven and in Earth, is given unto me, and I have the Keys of Hell and of Death. Mat. 28. 18. Rev, 1. 18. So that all things, I say, whether they be visible, or invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers; all things were created by him, and
for him. Col. 1. 16. This being thus, at the Name of Jesus, every knee must bow, and every Tongue confess that he is Soveraign Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Now that this may be done, He hath his Resolutions upon a Judge∣ment-day,See more of this in their Judgement. in which, he to shew himself his People, his Way, and Word in their Glory, will have all his Enemies raised out of their Graves, and brought before him, where he will sit upon them in the Throne of his Gloy, and will shew them then, who is the onely Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Mat. 25. 31, 32. 1 Tim. 6. 14, 15. Beloved, He comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgement upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have committed, and of all their wicked speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Jude 14, 15. Fifthly, The great preparation that God hath made for the Judgement of the wicked, doth clearly demonstrate their rising forth out of their Graves. First, He hath appointed the day of their rising.
Secondly, He hath appointed their Judge, to judge them. Thirdly, He hath Recorded all their acts and doings against that day. Fourthly, He hath also, already appointed the Witnesses to come in against them. Fifthly, The Instruments of death and mi∣sery, are already prepared for them. For the first, he hath appointed the day of their rising, which day, John calleth the time of the dead, that they should be judged. Which time, Paul saith, is a time fixed; he hath ap∣pointed a day, in which he will judge the World, &c. This time and day, Christ brings down to an houre, saying, The hour is coming, when all that are in their Graves, shall hear his Voyce, and shall come forth, &c. Revel. 11. 18. Acts 17. 30, 31. Joh. 5. 28, 29. Secondly, As he hath appointed the day, so he hath appointed the Judge, He hath ap∣pointed a day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he hath ordain∣ed, of which he hath given assurance to all men, in that he hath raised him from the Dead. This Man
is Jesus Christ;for it is He that is ordained of God, to be the Judge of the Quick and the Dead. Acts 17. 30, 31. Acts 10. 40 41, 42. Thirdly, All their deeds and works, to a word and thought, and every one already Re∣corded and Inrolled in the Books of the Laws of Heaven against that day. The sin of Judah, is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, upon the Tables of their heart. And again, saith God, Write it in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for the time to come, even for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious House, &c. Jer. 17. 1. Isa. 30. 8, 9. Fourthly, God hath prepared his Witnes∣ses against this day, James 5. 1. Job 20. 27. Mat. 24. 14. Rom. 2. 14, 15. Malac. 3. 5. Fifthly, The Instruments of Death, and Eternal misery, are all already prepared, He hath prepared for them the Instruments of Death, he hath ordained his Arrows against the face of persecutors, Psal. 7. 11, 12, 13. Psal. 21. 12. Hell is of old prepared, he hath made it deep and large, the fire, the everlasting fire is also now of a long time prepared; the heavy weights of Gods Curse, are also ready, and their damnation now of a long time slumbereth not. Isa. 30, 33. Mat.
25. 41. Deut. 29. 19, 30. 2 Pet. 2, 3. But now I say, how rediculous a business would all this be, if these things should be all prepared of the onely wise God, and there should be none to be judged; or if he that is ordained Judge, should not either through want of power, or will, Command these Rebels, and force them before his Judgement-Seat. Glad indeed, would the sinners be, if these things might be true. Glad I say, at very heart, if they might be in their secret places of darkness, and the Grave for ever; but it must not be, the day of their rising is set; the Judge is appointed, their deeds are written; the deep Dungeon is with open mouth, ever waiting for them; where∣fore at the day appointed, neither Earth, nor Death, nor Hell can hinder: There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and un∣just. Lastly, Besides what hath been said, I can∣not but believe, there shall be a Resurrection of the wicked at the last day, because of the un∣godly consequences, and errours that do most naturally follow the denyal thereof. For first, He that taketh away the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the wicked: he taketh away one of the main Arguments that God
hath provided for to convince a sinner, of the evill of his wyes; for how shall a sinner be convinced of the evill of sin, if he be not con∣vinced of the certainty of eternall Judgement? and how shall be he be convinced of eternall Judgement, if you perswade him, that when he is dead, he shall not at all arise? (especially seeing the Resurrection of the Dead, and eternall Judgement, must unavoidably be one the fore∣runner of the other. Heb. 6. 2. It was Pauls reasoning of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgement to come, that made Felix tremble. 'Tis this also he calleth the Argument of ter∣rour, wherewith he perswaded men. This was Solomons Argument, and Christs also, where he saith, That every idle word that man shall speak he shall give an account thereof, in the day of Judgement. Acts 24, 25. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. Eccles. 11. 9. Mat. 12. 36. Secondly, They that deny the Resurrection of the wicked, they do both allow and main∣tain the chief Doctrine of the Ranters, with most of the debauched persons in the World. For the Ranters deny it both in principle and practice, and the other in practice, at least. Now to me it is very strange, that these men above all other, should both know and live in the Doctrines of the Kingdom of God: especi∣ally,
seeing the denyal hereof is an evident token of one appointed to wrath and destructi∣on. 2 Tim. 2. 18. But to be plain, There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust: Wherefore, whatever others may say, or profess, being beguiled by Satan, and their own hearts, yet do thou fear him that can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. Matth. 10. 28. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just, and unjust. Rev. 20. 13. And the Sea gave up the Dead that were in it, and Death and Hell delivered up the Dead that were in them. Having in the first place shewed you, that the wicked must arise; I shall in the next place shew you the manner of their rising. And ob∣serve it, as the very Title of the just, and unjust, are opposites, so they are in all other matters, and in their Resurrections. First then, as the just in their Resurrection do come forth in incorruption: the unjust in their Resurrection, shall come forth in their cor∣ruptions; for though the ungodly at their Re∣surrection, shall for ever after, be incapable of having Body and Soul separate: or of their be∣ing annihilated into nothing, yet it shall be far from them to rise in incorruption; for if they
arise in incorruption, they must arise to life, and also must have the Conquest over sin and death; 1 Cor. 15. 54. But that they shall not; for it is the Righteous onely, that put on incor∣ruption, that are swallowed up of life. The wickeds Resurrection, it is called the Resur∣rection of damnation. Joh. 5. 28. These in their very Resurrection, shall be hurt of the second Death. They shall arise in death, and shall be under it, under the gnawings, and ter∣rours of it, all the time of their Arraignment. As it were, a living death shall feed upon them, they shall never be spiritually alive, nor yet absolutely dead; but much after that manner, that natural death, and Hell, by reason of guilt, doth feed on him, that is going be∣fore the Judge, to receive his Condemnation to the Gallows. You know, though a Felon go forth of the Goal, when he is going to the Bar for his Arraignment, yet he is not out of prison, or out of his Irons for that; his Fet∣ters are still making a noise on his heels, and the thoughts of what he is to hear by and by from the Judge, is still frighting and afflicting his heart, Death, like some evil Spirit of Ghost, doth continually haunt him, and playeth the Butcher continually in his Soul and Consci∣ence, with frights and fears about the thoughts
of the sudden, and unsupportable after-clap, by and by he is to meet withall. Thus I say, will the wicked come out of their Graves, having yet the Chains of eternal death hanging on them, and the talons of that dreadful Ghost fastned in their Souls. So that life will be far from them, even as far as Hea∣ven is from Hell. This morning to them, is even as the shadow of death. They will then be in the very terrours of the shadow of Death. Job 24. 17. As Christ saith, Their Worm never dies, and their fire is never quenched. Mark 8. 43, 44. From Death to Eternity, it never shall be quenched, their bed is now among the flames; and when they rise, they will rise in flames; while they stand before the Judge, it will be in flames, even in the flames of a guilty Consci∣ence: they will in their coming before the Judge, be within the very Jaws of death and destruction. Thus I say, the ungodly shall be far off from rising as the Saints; for they will be even in the Region and shadow of Death. The first moment of their rising, Death will be ever over them, ever feeding on their Souls; and ever presenting to their hearts, the heights, and depths, of the misery that now must seize them, and like a bottomless Gulf▪ must swallow them up. They shall come out of their holes, like
worms of the Earth, and be afraid of the Lord our God. Micah 7. 17. Secondly, As the Resurrection of the godly, shall be a Resurrection in Glory: So the Resur∣rection of the wicked, it will be a Resurrection in dishonour. Yea, as the glory of Saints, at the day of their rising, will be glory un∣speakable: so the dishonour of the ungodly at that day, it will be dishonour beyond expressi∣on. As Daniel saith, The good shall, arise to everlasting life; but the wicked to shame, and everlasting contempt. Dan. 12. 2. And again, When thou, O God, awakest, that is, to judge them, Thou shalt despise their Image. Psal. 73. 20. Never was Toad or Serpent more loath∣some to any, then these will be in the eyes of God, in their rising forth of their Graves. When they go to their Graves, saith Job, their bones are full of the sin of their youth, which lyeth down in the dust with them. Job 20. 11. And a rise they shall, in the same noisom and stinking condi∣tion; foras Death leaves, so Judgment finds them. At the Resurrection then of these ungod∣ly: they will be in a very loathsom condition. The ungodly at their death, are like the Thistle-seed; but at their rising, they will be like the Thistle grown; more noysom, offen∣sive, and provoking to rejection abundance. Then such dishonour, shame and contempt,
will appear in them: that neither God nor Christ, Saints nor Angels, will so much as once regard them, or vouchsafe one to come near them. He beholdeth the wicked a far off; because in the day of Grace, they would not come to hand, and be saved, therefore now they shall, all as thorns, be thrust away, as with fences of Iron. 2. Sam. 23. 6, 7. Their rising, is called the Re∣surrection of the unjust, and so they at that day will appear, and will more stink in the nostrils of God, and all the Heavenly Hosts: then if they had the most irksome Plague-soars in the World running on them. If a man at his Birth, be counted as one cast forth to the loath∣ing of his person: how loathsom, and irksom, dishonourable, and contemptible, will those be that shall arise Godless, Christless, Spiritless, and Graceless, when the Trumpet sounds to their Judgement, they coming out of their Graves, far more loathsom, and filthy, then if they should ascend out of the most filthy hole on Earth. Thirdly, As the Just shall arise in power, so the wicked and unjust, in weakness and asto∣nishment. Sin and guilt bringeth weakness, and faintness in this life: how much more, when both with all their power and force, like a Gyant, fasten on them, as God saith, Can thy
hands be strong, and can thy heart indure in the day that I shall deal with thee? Eccless. 22. 14. Now will the gastly Jaws of despair gape upon thee, and now will condemnings of Consci∣ence, like Thunder-claps, continually batter against thy weary Spirit. It is the Godly that have boldness in the day of Judgement; but the wicked will be like the Chaffe which the Wind driveth away. 1 John 4. 17. Psal. 1. 4. O the fear, and the heart-aking that will seiz them in their rising! the frightful thoughts that then will fill their throbbing hearts! Now must that Soul that hath been in Hell-fire a∣mong the Devils, possess the body again. Pos∣sess it I say, with the hot scalding stink of Hell upon it. They shall not be able to lift up the head for ever, pangs shall take hold on them, all their hands shall faint, and every mans heart shall melt, They shall be amazed one at ano∣ther, their faces shall be as flames. Isa. 13. 6, 7, 8. Every thing they see, hear, or think of, shall tend to their discomfort. They must needs be weak, whom God hath left, whom guilt hath seized, and whom death is swallowing up for ever. Fourthly, As the Just shall arise spiritual Bodies, so the unjust shall arise onely as meer and naked lumps of sinful nature: not having the least help from God, to bear them up under
this condition. Wherefore, so soon as ever they are risen out of their Graves: they will feel a continual sinking under every remem∣brance of every sin, and thoughts of Judge∣ment, in their rising they fall, fall I say from thenceforth, and for ever. And for this Reason, the Dungeon into which they fall, is called bottomless, Rev. 20. 1. Because, as there will be no end of their misery, so there will be no stay or prop, to bare them up in it. Onely, as I said before, they shall not now, as afore, be sepa∣rate Body from Soul; but both together, be bound in the cords of sin and iniquity, in which they shall now tremble as Theeves and Murderers, &c. as they go before the Judge, to hear what he will say unto them. Now when the wicked are thus raised out of their Graves, they shall, together with all the Angels of darkness, their fellow Prisoners; be brought up, being shackled in their sins, to the place of Judgement; where there shall fit upon them Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lord chief Judge of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things un∣der the Earth. On whose right hand, and left, shall fit all the Princes, and Heavenly Nobles; the Saints and Prophets, the Apostles, and Witnesses of Jesus: every one in his Kingly Attire, upon the Throne of his Glory.
Joel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, As for these my enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, bring them before me to slay them. Luk. 19. 27. When every one is thus set in his proper place, the Judge on his Throne, with his At∣tendants, and the prisoners coming up to Judgement: forthwith there shall issue forth a mighty fire and tempest from before the Throne, which shall compass it round about. Which fire, shall be as Bars and bounds to the wicked, to keep them at a certain distance from the Heavenly Majesty. As David saith, Psal. 50. 3. Our God will come, and not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round a∣bout him. And again, Dan. 7. 9. His Throne was like the fiery flame, and his Wheels like burning fire. A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him, &c. This Preparation being made, to wit, the Judge with his Attendance on the Throne; the Bar for the Prisoners, and the Rebels all stand∣ing with gastly Jaws, to look for what comes after: Presently the Books are brought forth, to wit, the Books both of Death and Life. And every one of them opened before the sinners,
now to be judged and condemned. For after that he had said before, Dan. 7. 10. A fiery stream issued, and came orth from before him: he adds, thousands, thou∣sands ministred to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the Judgement was set, and the Books was open∣ed. And again, I saw a great white Throne, and him that sate upon it, from whose face, the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no more place for them; and I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened: and another Book were opened, which is the Book of Life. And the Dead were Judged out of the things that were written in the Books, according to their works. Rev. 20. 11, 12. He doth not say, the Book was opened, as of one, but the Books, as of many. And indeed, they are more than one, two, or three, out of which the Dead shall in the Judgement, be proceeded against. First then, there is the Book of the Creatures to be opened. Secondly, The Book of Gods Remem∣brance.
Thirdly, The Book of the Law. And fourthly, The Book of Life. For by every one of these, that is, out of what is writ∣ten in them, shall the World of the ungodly be judged. And the Books were opened. First, The Book of the Creatures shall be opened, and that first it con∣cerns mans nature,The first Book opened in its first part. and next, as it relates to all other Crea∣tures. First, he will shew in what the principles if nature were, as they were Gods Creation; and how contrary to these principles, the World have walked, acted, and done. The principles of nature are concluded under these three gene∣rall heads. First, That man by his own natural Reason and Judgement, may gather, that there is a God, a Deity, a chief, or first, or principal Being, who is over all, and supreme above all. This instinct, I say, man meerly as he is ra∣tional Creature, findeth in himself; and hence it is, that all Heathens that mind their own na∣tural Reason, do conclude, that we are his off∣spring; that is, his Creation and Worman∣ship. That he made Heaven and Earth, and
hath made of one blood, all Nations of men; That in him we live, and move, and have our Be∣ing, &c. Acts 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. It appears further, that man by his own na∣ture, doth know that there is such a God. 1. By his being able to judge by nature, that there is such a thing as sin, as Christ saith, Why do ye not even of your selves, judge that which is right, as if he had said, you are degenerated even from the principles of nature, and right reason; as Paul saith in another place, Doth not even nature it self teach you, Luke 12. 57. 1 Cor. 11. 14. Now he that can judge, that there is such a thing as sin, it must of necessity be, that he understandeth that there is a God, to whom sin is opposite; for if there be no God, there is no sin against him, and he that knowes not the one, knowes not the other. 2. It is evident further, that man by nature, knowes that there is a God, by those fits of fear, and dread that is often begotten in them∣selves, even in every man that breatheth in this World; for they are by their own Consci∣ences, and thoughts, convicted and reproved, judged and condemned,Mans nature is a Book, or law to it self. though they know neither Moses, nor Christ. For the Gentiles which have not the Law, these are a Law to themselves, and shew the works of the Law,
written in their hearts. Rom. 2. 14, 15. that is, by this very thing, they hold forth to all men, that God created them in that state and qua∣lity, that they might, in, and by their own na∣ture, judge, and know, that there is a God. And it further sheweth it self, saith he, by those workings of heart, convictions of Conscience, and accusations, that every thought maketh within them, together with the fear that is be∣gotten in them, when they transgress, or do those things that are irrational, or contrary to what they see they shall do. I might add fur∣ther, that the natural proneness that is in all men, to Devotion and Religion, that is, of one kind or another, doth clearly tell us, that they by the Book of nature, which Book is them∣selves, do read, that there is one great and eter∣nall God. Secondly, The second principle of nature is, that this God should by man be sought af∣ter, that they might injoy Communion with him for ever. As I said before, the light of na∣ture sheweth man, that there is a great God, even God that made the World; and the end of its shewing him this is, that they might seek the Lord, if happily they may feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of them, &c. Acts 17. 26, 27.
Thirdly, This light of nature teache, that men between themselves, should do that which is just and equall. As Moses said, and that long before the Law was given, Acts 7. 26. Exod. 2. 13. Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one another? as who should say, you are of equall Creation, you are the same flesh; you both judge, that it is not equally done of any, to do you wrong, and therefore ought to judge by the same Reason, that ye ought not to wrong one another. Now against every one of these three prin∣ciples, hath every man in the whole World transgressed, as Paul saith; For both Jews and Gentiles, are all under sin. Rom. 3. 9. For as touching the first, who is he that hath honour∣ed, reverenced, worshipped, and adored the living God, to the heighth, both of what they saw in him, and also according to the goodness and mercy they have as men, received from him. Rom. 1. 25. All have served, and wor∣shipped the Creature, more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever and so have walkt contrary to, and have sinned against this bond of nature, in this first principle of it. Secondly, Men instead of minding their own future happiness, as nature teacheth, they have, through their giving way to sin and Satan, minded nothing less; for though Reason teach∣eth
all men to love that which is good and profitable, yet they contrary to this, have loved that which is hurtfull, and destructive. Yea, though sense teacheth, to avoid the danger that is manifest: yet man, contrary to Reason and sense both, even all men, have both against light and feeling, rejected their own happiness, as Paul saith, Though they knw the Judgements of God, that they which do such things, are worthy of death: not onely do the same, but take pleasure in them that do them. Rom. 1. 33. Thirdly, Man instead of doing equity, and as he would be done by, which nature it self teacheth: he hath given up himself to vile affections, being filled, by refusing the dictates of nature, with all unrighteousness, for∣nication, wickedness, covetousness, malicious∣ness, envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whispering, backbiting: to hate God, to be dispiteful, proud, bosters, inventors of evill things, disobedient to Parents, without under∣standing, Covenant-breakers, without naturall affections, implacable, unmerciful. Rom. 1. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. And observe it, he doth not say, that all these things are by every man, put into pra∣ctice; but every man hath all these in his heart, which there defile the Soul, and make it abo∣minable
in the sight of God. They are filled with all unrighteousness, which also appears, as occasion serveth, sometimes one of them, some∣times more. Now man having sinned against that natural Light, Judgement, Reason, and Conscience, that God hath given him: there∣fore, though as I said before, he neither knew Moses nor Christ, yet he shall perish; As many, saith Paul, as have sinned without Law, they shall perish without Law. Rom. 2. 12. Yea, here will man be found, not onely a sinner against God, but an (2 Tim. 12. 25.) oppo∣ser of himself, a contradictor of his own na∣ture, and one that will not do that which he judgeth even of himself to be right. Their sin is written upon the Tables of their own heart, and their own wickedness and back-sliding, shall both correct, and reprove them. Jer. 17. 1. Jer. 2. 19. It is marvellous, (if we consider) how curi∣ous a Creature man was made of God: to be∣hold how much below, besides and against that state and place, man acts and does in this state of sin and degeneracy. Man in his Creation, was made in the Image of God, Gen. 1. 26. but man, by reason of his yielding to the tempter, hath made himself the very figure and Image of the Devil. Man by Creation was made up∣right, and sinless; but man by sin, hath made
himself crooked and sinful. Eccless. 7. 29. Man by Creation, had all the faculties of his Soul at liberty to study God, his Creator, and his glorious Attributes and Being; but man by sin, hath so bound up his own senses and reason, and hath given way for blindness and igno∣rance of God, so to reign in his Soul, that now he is Captivated, and held bound in alie∣nation and estrangedness, both from God, and all things truly spiritually good; Because, saith he, That when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish he arts were darkened. And again, having the understanding darkened, being aliena∣ted from the life of God, through the igno∣rance that is in them, through the blind∣ness of their hearts. Rom. 1. 21. Ephef. 4. 18. Now for this abuse of the Workmanship of God, shall man be brought forth to the Judge∣ment, shall be convicted, cast, and condemn∣ed as a Rebel, against both God, and his own Soul, as Paul affirmeth, and that when he rea∣soned but as a man. Rom. 3. 5, 6. When this part of the Book touching mans nature, is opened, and man convicted and caft
by it, by reason of his sinning against the three general principles thereof: then forthwith is the second part of the Book opened, which is the mystery of the Creatures; for the whole Cre∣ation, that is before thee, are not onely made to shew the power of God in themselves; but also to teach thee, and to preach unto thee, both much of God and thy self; as also the Righteousness, and Justice of God against sin; For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness, and un∣righteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them; for the in∣visible things of him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being under∣stood by the things that are made, even his Eternall Power, and God-head: so that they are left without excuse. Rom. 1. 18. 19, 20. The Creation then of the World, namely, of the Heavens, Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, with all other the Creatures of God: they preach aloud to all men, the Eternal Power and God∣head of their Creator. Psal. 8. 3. In Wisdom he hath made them all: to be teachable, and car∣rying
instruction in them: and he that is wise. and will understand these things, even he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord; for the Works of the Lord are great, and sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. Psal. 104. 24. Psal. 107. Psal. 111. 2. Secondly, As the Creation in generall, preacheth to every man something of God: so they do hold forth, how man should behave himself both to God, and one to another; and will assuredly come in, in the Judgement, against all those that shall be found crossers, and to thwarters of what God by the Creatures doth hold foth to us. As first, The obedience of the Creatures, both to God and thee; first to God, they are all in subjection (set Devils and men aside) even the very Dragons, and all Deeps, Fire, Hail, Snow, and Vapours, fulfilling his Word. Yea, the Winds and Seas obey him. Psal. 148. 7, 8. Psal. 147. 15, 16, 17, 18. Mark 4. 41. Thus I say, by their obedience to God, they teach the obedience, and by their obedience, shall thy disobedience be condemned, in the Judge∣ment. 2. Their obedience to thee also, teacheth thee obedience to all Superiours; For every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and Serpents, and things
in the Sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed, and brought into obedience by mankind. Man onely remains untamed, and untruly, and therefore by these are condemned. Jam. 3. 7, 8. Secondly, The fruitfulness of all the Crea∣tures, in their kind, doth teach and admonish thee to a fruitful life to Godward, and in the things of his holy Word. God did but say in the beginning, Let the Earth bring forth fruit, Grass, Herbs, Trees, Beasts, creeping things, and Cattell after their kind; and it was so. Gen. 115. 24. But to man, he hath sent his Prophets, ri∣sing early, and sending them, saying, O do not this abominable thing that I hate; but they will not obey. Jer. 44. 4, 5. For if the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by some acts of obedi∣ence, condemn the wickedness of those who do by the Letter and Circumcision, break the Law: how much more shall the fruitfulness of all the Creatures come in, in the Judgement, against the whole World. As Job saith, By the obedi∣ence and fruitfulness of the Creatures he judgeth, (and so will judge) the people. Job 36. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Thirdly, The knowledge and wisdom of the Creatures, do with a check, command thee to be wise, and do teach thee wisdom.
1. The Stork in the Heaven, the Swallow and the Crane, by observing the time and season of their coming, do admonish thee to learn the time of grace, and of the mercy of God. Jer. 8, 7. 2. The Ox and the Ass, by the know∣ledge they have of their Masters Crib, do admonish thee to know the Bread and Table of God, and both do and shall condemn thy ig∣norance of the food of Heaven. Isa. 1. 3. Fourthly, The labour and coyl of the Crea∣tures, doth convict thee of sloath and idleness. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her wayes, and be wise; for she provideth her food in the Summer, and layeth up against the day of tryall. Prov. 6. 6, 7. But thou spendest the whole Sum∣mer of thy life, in wasting both time and Soul. All things are full of labour, saith Solomon, onely man spendeth all the day idle, and his years like a tale that is told. Eccles. 1. 8. Mat. 20. 6. Psal. 90. 9. Rom. 10. 21. The Cony is but a feeble folk, yet laboureth for a House in the Rock, to be safe from the rage of the Hunter. The Spider also, taketh hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces. 'Tis man onely, that turneth himself upon the bed of sloath, as the door doth it self upon the hinges: 'tis man I say, that will neither lay hold on the Rock Christ, as the
Coney doth teach, nor lay hold on the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Spider doth bid him. Prov. 30. 26. 28. Joh. 5. 40. Fifthly, The fear that is in all Creatures, when they perceive that danger is near, it teacheth men to fly from the wrath to come, in vain is the snare laid in the sight of any Bird; Prov. 1. 17 18. but man, man onely is the fool∣hardy Creature, that layeth wait for his own blood, and that lurketh privily for his own life. How I say, will every Creature flie, run, strive, and struggle, to escape the danger it is sensible of? 'tis man onely, that delighteth to dance about the mouth of Hell, and to be knowingly smitted with Satans snare. Rom. 1. 33. Sixthly, The dependence that all the Crea∣tures have upon God: they teach thee to de∣pend on him that made thee; yea, and will in the Judgement condemn thee for thy unlawful practices, and dealings for thy preservation. The young Ravens seek their food from God, and will condemn thy lying, cheating over∣reaching, defrauding, and the like: they pro∣vide neither Store-house, nor Barn; but th art so greedy of these things, that thou for them shuttest thy self out of the Kingdom of Hea∣ven.
Psal. 147. 9. Job 38. 41. Luk. 12. 24. Prov. 17. 16. Seventhly, The love and pitty that is in their hearts to their young, and one another: will judge and condemn the hard-heartedness that is in thee to thy own Soul. What shall I say, The Heavens shall reveal thy iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against thee. Job 20. 27. That is, all the Creatures of God, they will by their fruitfulness and subjection to the will of their Creator, judge and condemn thee for thy disobedience, and rebellion against him. Now as these Creatures do every day call unto thee, and lay before thee these things: so he hath for thy awakening, in case thou be asleep, and senseless, Creatures of another na∣ture, as 1. Thy Bed when thou lyest down in it, preacheth to thee thy Grave; thy sleep, thy death, and thy rising in the morning, thy Re∣surrection to Judgement. Job 14. 12. Job 17. 13. Isa. 26. 19. 2. The Goal that thou seest with thy eyes, and the Felons that look out at the Grate, they put thee in mind of the Prison of Hell, and of the dreadful state of those that are there. Luke 12. 58, 59.
3. The fire that burns in thy Chimney, it holds forth the fire to Hell unto thee. Isa. 10. 16. Rev. 20. 14. 4. The ugly smell, stench, and steam, of the burning Brimstone, it shews thee the loathsom, odious, and dreadful torments of Hell. Rev. 19, 20. 5. The darkness of the night in solitary pla∣ces, and the fears that do commonly haunt those that walk therein: it preacheth to thee the fears and frights, the scares and amaze∣ments, that will for ever attend all damned Souls. Matth. 8. 12. Deut. 28. 65, 66, 6. 7. 6. By thy delighting, when thou art cold, to lay sticks on the fire to warm thy self, not caring how fiercely they flame therein, so thou canst be warm, and be refreshed thereby: by this I say, God preacheth to thee, with what de∣light he will burn sinners in the flames of Hell, for the easing of his mind, and the satisfaction of his Justice. Ah! saith he, I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. Isa. 1. 24. 7. Yea, by thy blowing the fire, that it may fasten upon the wood the better: thou preach∣est
to thy self, how God will blow the fire of Hell by the rigour of his Law, to the end, it may be its flames, to purpose, kindle upon damned sinners. Isa. 3. 33. All these things, as inconsiderable and un∣likely as they may appear to you now, yet in the Judgement will be found the Items, and warning words of God to your Souls. And know, that he who could overthrow the Land of Egypt, with frogs, lice, flies, Locusts, &c. will overthrow the World, at the last day, by the Book of the Creatures; and that by the least, and most inconsiderable of them, as well as by the rest. This Book of the Creatures, it is so excellent, and so full, so easie, and so suit∣ing the capacity of all, that there is not one man in the World, but is catched, convicted, and cast by it. This is the Book, that he who knows no letters, may read in: yea, and that he who neither saw New Testament, nor Old, may know both much of God, and himself, by. 'Tis this Book, out of which generally, both Job and his friends did so profoundly discourse of the Judgements of God, and that out of which God himself did so convincingly an∣swer Job. Job was as perfect in this Book, as we are, many of us in the Scriptures, yea, and could see further by it, then many now a dayes do see by the new Testament and old.
This is the Book out of which, both Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, do so frequently dis∣course by their Similitudes, Proverbs, and Pa∣rables: as being the most easie way to con∣vince the World, though by reason of their ig∣norance, nothing will work with them, but what is set on their heart by the holy Ghost. One word further, and I have done with this, and that is, God hath sealed the Judge∣ment of the World by the Book of the Crea∣tures, even by mans own carriage unto such of them, which, through any impediment, have disappointed his expectations. As thus, if thou hast but a Tree in thy Orchard, that neither beareth fruit, nor ought else that is good: why thou art for hewing it down, and for appoint∣ing it, as fewel for the fire: now thou little thinkest, that by thy thus judging, thou shoul∣dest passe sentence upon thy own fruitless Soul; but it is so, For now is the Ax laid to the Roots of the Trees, and every Tree that bring∣eth not forth good fruit, is hewen down, and cast into the fire. For as truly as thou sayest of thy fruitless Tree, cut it down, why doth it cum∣bet the ground? so truly doth thy Voyce cause Heaven to Eccho again upon thy head: Cut him down, why doth he cumber the ground? Mat.
3. 10. Luk. 13. 6, 7, 8. Ezek. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Further, The inclination of thy heart to∣wards fruitless and unprofitable Creatures, doth fore-preach to thee, the inclination of the heart of God towards thee in the Judgement: If thou hast either Cow, or any other Beast, that is now unprofitable to thee, though thou mayst suffer them for some time, to be with thee, as God suffereth sinners in the World, yet all this while, thy heart is not with them; but thou wilt take thy time to clear thy hands of them. Why, just so shall thy Judgement be, as God saith, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, that is, to pray me to spare this People, yet my heart could not be towards them, therefore cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth. Jer. 15. 1. Ezek. 14. 13, 14. Thus I say, will God judge the World at the last day; he will open before them, how they have degenerated and gone back from the Principles of nature, in which he created them. Also how they have slighted all the instructi∣ons that he hath given them, even by the obedi∣ence, fruitfulness, wisdom, labour, fear, and love of the Creatures; and he will tell them, that as to their Judgement, they themselves have decided it, both by their cutting down that which was fruitless, and by the withdraw∣ing
of their hearts from those things, which to them were unprofitable, As therefore the Tars are gathered, and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this World. As men deal with weeds, and rotten Wood: so will God deal with sinners in the day of Judgement: and will bring in, I say, all the Counsels and warn∣ings he hath given men by these things, both to clear up, and to agravate their Judgement to them. The second Book that will be opened at this day, it will be the Book of Gods Remembrance. Mal. 3. 16. For as God hath in his Remem∣brance, Recorded all and every particular good thing that his own People hath done to, and for his Name, while they were in this World: so he hath in his Remembrance, Recorded all the evill and sin of his adversaries;The Book of Gods Remem∣brance opened. even every thing. Eccles. 12. 14. Now Gods Remembrance is so perfect every way, that it is impossible, that any thing should be lost, that is committed to it to be kept, and brought forth to the Judge∣ment at the time appointed; for as a thousand years are but as yesterday, with his Eternity: so the sins that have been committed thousands of years since, they are all so firmly fixed in the Remembrance of the Eternal God, that they are always as fresh and clear in his sight, as if they were but just now in committing. He call∣eth
again the things that are past, Eccles. 3. 15. and hath set our most securest things in the light of his Countenance, Psal. 90. 8. As he also saith in another place, Hell it self is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. Job 26. 6. That is the most secret, cunning, and hidden contri∣vances of the most subtle of the infernal spirits, which yet are far more slethy, then men, to hide their wickedness; yet, I say, all their wayes, hearts, and most secret doings, are clear, to the very bottom of them, in the Eyes of the great God. All things are open and bare, before the Eyes of him with whom we have to do: who will bring to light, the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the heart. Heb. 4. 13. 1 Cor. 4, 5. Ye that say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Understand, O ye bruitish among the People, and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall not he hear? He that formed the Eye, shall not he see? He that cha∣steneth the Heathen, shall not he correct? He that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know? Psal. 94. 7, 8, 9, 10. See also, Hos. 7. 2. & 8. 13. Can any hide him∣self
in secret places, that I should not see him? that is, when he is committing wickedness, saith the Lord, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, saith the Lord? Jer. 23. 24. Now to know and see things, it is the cause among men, of their remembrance. Where∣fore, God to shew us, that he will remember all our sins, if we die out of Christ, he tells us, that he knoweth, and seeth them all, and there∣fore must needs remember them; for as is his sight and knowledge, so is his Remembrance of all things. When this Book of his Remembrance there∣fore is opened, as it shall be, in the Judgement: then shall be brought forth of their hidden holes, all things, whatsoever hath been done since the World began, whether by Kingdoms in general, or persons in particular. Now also shall be brought forth to open view, all the transactions of God and his Son, among the Sons of men, and every thing shall be applyed to every particular person, in equity and Ju∣stice, to whom they belong: the sins that thou hast committed shall be thy own, and thou thy self shall bear them. The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.
It will be marvellous to behold, how by thousands, and ten thousands, God will call from their secret places, those sins, that one would have thought, had been dead, and buri∣ed, and forgotten; yea, how he will shew be∣fore the Sun, such things, so base, and so hor∣rid, that one would think, it was not in the hearts of any to commit; for all is Recorded in the Book of Gods Remembrance. While men are here, they have a thousand tricks to present themselves one to another, far more fair, and honest then they are, or ever were. As Christ said to the Pharisees, Ye are they, who justifie your selves before men, but God knoweth your hearts, Luk. 16. 15. I, God knoweth indeed, what a nest, what a heap, what swarms; yea, what Legions of hellish wickednesses, there is with power lurking, like Cockatrices, in those men, that one would swear a thousand times, are good and honest men. The way of men in their sins, it is like an Eagle in the Air, a Serpent upon the Rock, a Ship in the midst of the Sea, and of a young Man with a Maid: saith Solomon, Prov. 30. 19, 20. That is, hiddenly, closely, covertly, burying all under fair pre∣tences, wipeth their mouths in the close of their evill, saying, I have done wickedness. But this, though it may serve for the time pre∣sent, and no longer, God will not be deluded,
nor blinded, nor mocked, nor put off. Gal. 6. 7. They consider not that I remember all their wickedness, saith he, but I will reprove thee, and will set them in order before thine eyes. Hos. 7. 2. Psal. 50. 21. Here will be laid open, the very heart of Cain the murderer, of Judas the Traytor, of Saul the adversary of David, and of those that under pretences of holiness, have persecuted Christ, his Word and People. Now shall every Drunkard, Whoremaster, Thief, and other wicked person, be turned, their inside outward; their hearts right open, and every sin, with every circumstance of place, time, person with whom, with the causes also that drew them to the commission of every evill, be discovered to all. Here will be no hi∣ding your selves behind Curtains, nor no co∣vering your selves with the black and dark night. If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me; yea, (O God) darkness hideth not from thee, but the night shineth as the day, the darkness and light are both alike unto thee. Psal. 139. 11, 12. The piercing Eye of God, beholds all pla∣ces, persons, and things; the holy hand of his Justice writeth them down in the Book of his Remembrance; and by his Power, and Wisdom, will he open and read to all men exactly, di∣stinctly,
and convincingly, whatever hath pas∣sed from them, or bin done by them in their whole life; For, for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgement. Eccles. 11. 9. Again, as God will bring out of the Book of his Re∣membrance, what ever hath passed from thee, against him: so also will he then bring forth by the same Book, all things and carriages of his towards thee. Here will he bring to thy mind, every Ser∣mon thou hast heard, every Chapter thou hast read; every conviction thou hast had on thy Conscience: and every admonition that hath been given thee in all thy life, when thou wast in the Land of the Living. Now will God lay open before thee, what patience he extended to thee, how he let thee lve one year, two years, ten, yea twenty and twenty years, and all to try thee. Yea, now also will he bring to thy view, how many times he warned, rebuked, threatned, and chastised thee for thy wickedness; how many awaken∣ing Providences and Judgements he continu∣ally laid before thy face; yea, how many a time, thou didst like Balaam, run upon the point of the Sword of Justice, and how he gave back, as being loath to kill thee. Numb. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
Now also again, shall be brought before thee and all men, how many struglings God had with thy heart, on thy sick Bed, to do thee good; yea, and at such times, how many Vowes, Promises, Ingagements, and Resoluti∣ons, thou madest before God, to turn, if he would release thee from thy affliction, and take off his Rod from thy back: Mar. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4▪ 5. and yet how thou didst like the man possessed, break, and snap in twain all these Chains of Iron, with which thou hadst bound thy Soul; and that for a very lust and sin. Here also, will be opened before thee, how often thou hast sinned against thy light and know∣ledge; how often thou hast laid violent hands on thy own Conscience; how often thou hast laboured to put out that light that hath stood in thy way, to hinder thee from sinning against thy Soul. Ah Lord, what a condition will the Christless Soul be in at this day? How will every one of these things afflict the damned Soul? they will pierce like Arrows, and bite like Serpents, and sting like an Adder. With what shame, will that man stand before the Judgement Seat of Christ, who must have all things he hath done against God, to provoke the Eyes of his Glory to jealousie: laid open before the whole Host of the Heavenly train! It would make a man blush, to have his Pockets
searched, for things that are stolen, in the midst of a Market, especially, if he stand upon his Reputation and Honour. But thou must have thy heart searched, the bottom of thy heart searched; and that, I say, before thy Neigh∣bour, whom thou hast wronged, and before the Devills, whom thou hast served; yea, before God, whom thou hast despised, and before the Angels, those holy and delicate Creatures, whose holy and chast Faces, will scarce forbear blushing, while God is making thee Vomit up, all thou hast swallowed; for God shall bring it out of thy belly. Job. 20. 12, 13, 14, 15. For as for God to forget iniquity, is one of the chief heads of the Covenant of Grace, and is an Argument of the highest nature, to beget, and to continue Consolation in the godly: so the remembrance of Iniquity, by the Lord, it is one of the heaviest loads, and Judgements that can befall any poor Creature. Lord, saith the Prophet, remember not against us, former iniquities. And again, if thou Lord, shouldest mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? Psal. 130. 3. And the Reason is, because, that which the Lord forgetteth, is forgiven for ever; but that which he remembreth, it is charged for ever, and nothing can take it away. Heb. 8. 12. Rom. 4. 6, 7, 8. Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much Soap, yet thine iniquity is
marked before me, saith the Lord God. Jer. 2, 22. The third Book that will at this day be opened, and out of which God will judge the World: it is the Book of the Law, or ten words given forth on the Mount Sinai, But this Book will more specially concern those that have received it, or that have had knowledge thereof. Every one shall not be judged by this Book, as there delivered, though they shall be judged by the works of it, which are written in their hearts. Rom. 2. 14. As many as have sin∣ned without Law, shall perish without Law, and they that have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. Rom. 2. 12. That is, the Heathens that never knew the Law, as delivered on Sinai, they shall be judged by the Law, as it was written in mans heart in his Creation, (which is comprised within the Book of the Creatures;) but those that have knowledge of the Law, as delivered on Sinai: they shall be judged by the Law as there given. Now then, this Book when it is opened, at the day of Judgement, it will, to those to whom it especially relates, be a most terrible Law, far surpassing the two afore-mentioned. This Law, as I may so say, it is the chief, and most pure Resemblance of the Justice and holiness of the Heavenly Majesty, and doth hold forth to all
men, the sharpness and keenness of his wrath' above the other two that I have before menti∣oned. I say, both because it hath been deli∣vered more plain and open, both as to the duty injoyned, and the sin prohibited; and there∣fore must of necessity, fall with the more vio∣lence upon the head of all that shall be found within the compass of it. This Law, it hath in it to be opened at this day, these two general heads. First, A discovery of the evill of sin, that is so, against plain light and truth. And Secondly, A discovery of the vanity of all things, that will at this day be brought by sinners, for their help and plea at the Judge∣ment. Alas, who can but imagine, that the poor World, at the day of their Arraignment, should muster up all that ever they can think of, as Arguments to shelter them from the exe∣cution of that fierce wrath, that then with sink∣ing Souls, they will see prepared for them. As to the first of these, the Apostle tells us, that the Law was added, that the offence might aboun, or be discovered what it is. As he saith again, I had not known sin but by the Law. Rom. 5. 20. Rom. 7. 7. Rom. 7. 13. Thus it is in this life, and thus it will be in the day of Judgement, that is, those that see sin, and that in its abounding nature, and in its exceeding sinfulness, they must see it by the Law, for that
is indeed, the Glass by which God discovereth sin. Jam. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25. And the filthy spots of leprosie, that is in the Soul. Now those that have not the happiness to see their sin by the Law in this life, while there is a Fountain of Grace to wash in, and be clean: they must have the misery to see it at the Judgement, when nothing is left but misery, and pain, as the punishment for the same. At which day, those little Titles of this holy Law, that now men so easily look over, and sin against with ease, they will every one of them appear with such dread, and with such flaming Justice against every offence committed: that if Heaven and Earth it self, should step in to shelter the sinner from the Justice and wrath due to sin, it would turn them up by the Roots. It is easier for Heaven and Earth to passe away, then for one tittle of the Law to fail. Luke 16. 17. If there appeared such flames, such Thunder∣ings, and Tempests, as there were at the giv∣ing of the Law: what flames and blackness will there appear at the execution thereof; and if at the giving of the Law, there appeared so much Holiness and Justice, that it made all Israel flie; yea, holy Moses exceedingly fear and quake: what will become of these that God shall judge by the rigour of this Law in
the day of Judgement? Exod. 19. 16. Heb. 11. 21. O what Thunderings and Lightnings, what Earthquakes and Tempests, will there be in every damned Soul, at the opening of this Book? then indeed, will God visit them with Thunder, and Earthquake, and great noyse: with Storm and Tempest, and the flame of a devouring fire. For behold, saith the Prophet, the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots, like a Whirl-wind, to render his anger with fury; and his re∣bukes with flames of fire. Isa. 29. 6. Isa. 66. 15. The Lord will come with fire, that is, in the flaming heat of his Justice and Holiness against sin, and sinners, to execute the rigour of his threatnings upon their perishing Souls. Secondly, The second general Head, that is contained in this Law, to be opened at this day, is its exactness, and purity, and strict∣ness as to all acts of good that any poor Crea∣ture hath done in this life, whereby he in the Judgement will think to shelter, or secure himself from the wrath of God. This is the Rule, and Line, and Plummet, whereby every act of every man, shall be measured; and he whose righteousness is not found every way an∣swerable
to this Law, which all will fall short of, but they that have the Righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ: he must perish, as he saith, Rom. 3. 21. 22. Judgement also will I lay to the line, and Righteousness will I lay to the Plum∣met, and the Hal shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the water shall overflow the hiding places. Isa. 28. 17, 18. That is, though men may now shelter themselves under legall Repentance, cold profession, good meaning, thinkings, and doings: yet all these things must be measured, and weighed in the ballance of Gods most righ∣teous Law: and as I said, whatever in that day, is not found the Righteousness of God, it will be found a reuge of lies, and will be drowned by the over-flowing of the wrath of God, as the waters of Noah over-flowed the World. Mal. 4. 1. And hence it is, that all the ungodly will at this day, be found as stubble, and the Law as fire. As it saith, From his Right hand went a fiery Law. And again, his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire. Deut. 33, 2: Isa. 30. 27. For as fire, where it sezeth, doth burn, eat, destroy, devoure and consume: so will the Law, all those that at this day, shall be found under the transgressio of the least tittle of it. It will be with the Souls at the day of Judgement, as it is wit those Countries that are over-run with mo
merciless Conquerours, who leave not any thing behind them, but swallow up all with fire and sword. For by fire, and by his Sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. Isa. 66. 16. There are two things at the day of Judgement, will meet in their height and utmost strength, and they are sin and the Law; for the Judgement will not be, till the iniquity of the World be full ripe. Joel. 3. 13. Rev. 14. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Now then, when sin is come to its full, ha∣ving plaid all its pranks, and done all the mis∣chief it can against the Lord of Glory: then God brings forth the Law, his holy and righ∣teous Law, one of which will now reign for ever, that is, either the Law or sin: Where∣fore sin and sinners, they must tremble with all that help, and hold them up; for God will magnifie the Law, and make it honourable. Isa. 42. 21. That is, will give it the Victory over the World for ever; for that is holy, just, and good: they are unholy, unjust, and bad. There∣fore by this Law, will the Lord rain snares, fire and Brimstone, and a horrible Tempest, this shall be the potion of their Cup. Psal. 11. 5, 6. Let no man say then, that because God is so famous in his mercy and patience, in this day of his Grace, that therefore he will not be fierce, and
dreadful in his Justice, in the day of Judge∣ment; for Judgement and Justice, is the last thing that God intends to bring upon the stage, which will then be to the full, as terrible, as now his goodness and patience, and long suffe∣rance, is admirable. Lord, who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. Psal. 90. 11. You may see, if you will, a few of the sparks of the Justice of God▪ against sin and sinners: by his casting off Angels for sin, from Heaven to Hell; by his drowning the old World; by his burning of Sodom, and Gomorah, to ashes; condemning them with an overthrow, making them an example to those that after should live ungodly. 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. Jude 6. 7. For whatsoever the Law saith, it saith it to them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World become guilty before God. Rom. 3. 19. Moses seems to wonder, that the Children of Israel could continue to live, when they did but hear the Law delivered on the Mountain, Did ever People, saith he, hear the Lord speak out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast done, and live. Deut. 4. 73. O that ye did but know the Law, and the wonderous things that are writ∣ten therein, before the Lord cause that fearful Voyce to be heard, Cursed is every one, that
continueth not in every thing that is written in the Book of the Law to do them: which curse must fall on all that walk not in all the Commande∣ments of God, without iniquity, which none do, I say, but they that walk in Christ, who hath alone fulfilled them all. Gal. 3. 10. Ezek. 33. 15. Col. 2. 10. The Law is that which standeth at the en∣trance of the Paradice of God, as a flaming Sword turning every way to keep out those that are not righteous with the righteousness of God; that have not skill to come to the throne of Grace by that new and living way which he hath consecrated for us through the veil; that is to say, his flesh, Gen. 3. 24. Heb. 1. 19, 20. for though this Law, I say, be taken away by Christ Jesus, for all that truly and savingly be∣lieve; yet it remains in full force and power in every tittle of it, against every Soul of man, that now shall be found in his Tabernacle; that is, in himself, and out of the Lord Jesus, Col. 2. 14. Rom. 3. 19. Job 18. 14. it lyeth, I say, like a Lyon rampant at the gates of Hea∣ven, and will roar upon every unconverted soul, fiercely accusing every one, that now would gladly enter in through the gates into this City, Joh. 5. 45. So then, he that can an∣swer all its most perfect and legal commands, and that can live in the midst of devouring
fire, and there injoy God and solace himself; he shall dwell on high and shall not be hurt by this Law, His place of defence shall be the mu∣nitions of Rocks; bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure; thine eyes shall behold the King in his Beauty, they shall see the Land that is very far off, Isa. 33. 14. 15▪ 16, 17. Blessed then is he whose Righteousness doth answer every point of the Law of God, accor∣ding to 1 Cor. 1. 30. he shall be able to escape all those things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man; for in himself, ou God is a consuming fire, and man out of Christ, is but as stubble, chaff, thorns, briers, and fuel for the wrath of this holy and sinner-consuming God to seize upon for ever. Nah. 1. 6. Heb. 12. 29. Mala. 4. 1. Mat. 3. 12. Heb. 6. 7, 8. Isa. 27. 4. 2 Sam. 23. 6, 7. Who can stand before his indignation? Who can abide the fierceness of his anger? His fury is poured ou like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. Now when these three Books are thus open∣ed, there will without doubt, be sad throbbing and pricking, in every heart that now stands for his life, before the Judgement-Seat of Christ the Righteous Judge; and without all question, they will be studying a thousand wayes to evade and shift the stroak, that by
the sin that these three Books do charge them with, will immediately fall upon them. But now to cut off all these at a blow, forth∣with appear the Witnesses, who are ready to evince, and make full, and Soul-killing proof of every particular charged against them. And the first is, God himself. I, saith he, will be a swift witness against the Sorcerers,The Witnesses give in their Evidence. and against the Adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling of his wages; the widow and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and that feareth not me, saith the Lord. Mal. 3. 5. This must needs be of great sway with every Soul, that God should now come in. I will witness, saith God, that these things of which you are accused before the Judge, is true. I hve seen all▪ know all, and writ down all. There hath not been a thought in your heart, nor a wod in your Tongue, but I have known it altogether, all things have alwayes bin open, and naked to my Eye. Yea, my Eye-lids try the Children of men. I have known your down-sitting, and your up-rising; and have under∣stood your thughts a far off▪ I have compassed
your path, and am well acquainted with all your wayes. Heb. 4. 13. Psal. 11. 4. Psal. 139. 1, 2 3, 4. 1. You have not continued in that state of nature in which I did at first create you: Eccles. 7. 29. you have not liked to retain that knowledge and understanding of God, that you had, and might have had, by the very Book of the Creatures, Rom. 1. You gave way o the suggestions of fallen Angels, and so your foolish earts were darkned and aliena∣ted, and estranged from God. 2. All the Creatures that were in the World, have even condemned you, they have been fruitful, but you fruitless; they have been fear∣full of danger, but you fool-hardy; they have taken the fittest opportunity for their own pre∣servation, but th  both blindly, and con∣fidently gone on to thy punishment. Prov. 22. 3. 3. Touching the Book of my Remembrance, who can contradict it? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, saith the Lord? was not I in all places to behold, to see, and to observe thee in all thy ways? My eye sw the Thief, and the Adulterer, and I heard every Lye and Oath of the wicked. I saw the hypocrisie of the dis∣sembler. They have committed villany in Israel, and have committed Adultery with their Neigh∣bours
Wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I have not commanded them, even I know, and am a Witness, saith the Lord. Jer. 29. 23. 4. God will also come in against them for their transgressing his Law, even the Law which he delivered on Mount Sinai, he will, I say, open every tittle thereof in such order, and truth: and apply the breach of each particular person with such cong Argument, that they will fall down silenced for ever. Every mouth shall be stopped, and all the World shall become guilty before God. Secondly, There is yet another ws, for the condemning the transgressors of these Laws, and that is, Conscience: their Consci∣ences also beating witness, saith  Apostle, Rom. 2. 14, 15. Conscience is a  Wit∣nesses. Conscience, it will cry, Amen, to every word that the Great God doth speak against thee. Conscience is a terrible accuser, it will hold pace with the Witness of God, as to the truth of Evidence, to a hairs bredth. The Wit∣nesses of Conscience, it is of great Authority, it commands guilt, and fastneth it on every Soul which it accuseth. And hence it is said, if our hearts or Conscience condemn us. 1 Joh. 3. 20. Conscience will thunder and lighten at this day; even the Consciences of the most
pagan sinners in the World, will have suffici∣ently wherewith to accuse, to condemn, and to make paleness appear in their faces, and break∣ing in their loins, by reason of the force of its conviction. O the mire and dirt, that a guilty Conscience, when it is forced to speak, will cast up, and throw out before the Judgment-Seat! it must out, none can speak peace, nor health, to that man upon whom God hath let loose his own Conscience, Cain will now cry, My punishment is greater then I can bear, Judas will hang himself; and both Belshazzer and Felix will feel the joynts of their loins to be loosened, and their knees to smite one against ano∣ther, when Conscience stirreth. Gen. 4. 13. Mat. 27. 3. Dan. 5. 6. Acts 24. 23. When Conscience is once thorowly awakened, as it shall be before the Judgment-Seat: God need say no more to the sinner, then Solomon said to filthy Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness that thy heart is privy to. 1 King. 2. 44. As who should say, thy Conscience knoweth, and can well inform thee of all the evill, and sin that thou art guilty of. To all which it answereth, even as face answereth to face in a Glass; or as an Eccho answereth the man that speaketh, as fa I say, as God chargeth Conscience will cry out, guilty, guilty; Lord, guilty of all, of every
whit, I remember clearly all the Crimes thou layest before me. Thus I say, will Conscience be a witness against the Soul, in the day of God. Thirdly, As God and Conscience, will at this day be most dreadful witnesses against the sinful man at this day: so also will those seve∣rall thoughts that have passed through mans heart, be a witness also against him. As he said before, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, accord∣ing to the Gospel. Rom. 2. 14, 15. The thoughts come in as a witness for God against the sinner, upon the account of that un∣steddiness and variety that was in them, both touching God, and their own selves. Some∣times the man thinks there is no God, but that every thing hath its rise of it self, or by chance, or fortune, The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God. Psal. 14. 1. Sometimes again, they think there is a God; but yet they think and imagine of him falsly, Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, saith God, but I will reprove thee. Psal. 50. 21. Men think, that because they can sin with delight: that therefore God can let them es∣scape
without punishment. Nay, oftentimes they think, that God doth either quite forget their wickedness, or else that he will be pleased with such satisfaction as they are pleased to give him, even a few howling prayers, fained and hypocritical tears, and weepings, which passe from them. Hos. 7. 14. Mal. 2. 13. More for fear of the punishment of Hell-fire, then because they have offended so holy, so just, and so glorious a God; and so loving, and so con∣descending a Jesus. Sometimes again, they have had right thoughts of something of God, but not of him together: either thinking so of his Ju∣stice, as to drive them from him, and also cause them to put him out of their mind: Job 21. 14. or else so thinking of his mercy, as that they quite forget his Holiness and Justice. Now both these are but base thoughts of God, and so erronious, and sinful thoughts. Sometimes also, they have prety right thoughts of God, both as to Justice and Mercy, but then through the wretchedness of their un∣satisfied nature, they, against this light and knowledge, do with shut eyes, and hardened hearts, rush fiercely, knowingly, and willingly again into their sins and wickedness. Heb. 6. 2, 3, 4. Heb. 10. 26. 2. Pet. 2. 20.
Secondly, As men have these various thoughts of God, so also their thoughts are not steddy about themselves. 1. Sometimes they think they are sinners, and therefore they have need of mercy. 2. Sometimes again, they think they are righteous, and so have not so much need; mark, and yet both alike rotten, and base: because, as the last is altogether senseless: so the first is not at all savingly senseable, Mark 10. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Luk. 18. 11, 12. 3. Sometime again, they think they are Gods; that they shall never die, or that if they do die, yet they shall never rise again; or if they do rise again, yet they shall be saved, though they have lived vilely, and in their sins all the dayes of their life. Ezek. 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15. 12. Deut. 29. 18. 12. 20. Now I say, every one of these thoughts, with ten thousand more of the like nature, will God bring in against the Rebels in the Judgment∣day. Which thoughts, shall every one of them be brought forth in their distinct order. He sheweth to man what is his thought. And again, I know that thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be hid from thee. Amos 4. 13. Job. 42. 2. We read, that when the strangers at Jerusalem, did but hear the Apostle speak to every one of them in their own Lan∣guage,
how it amazed and confounded them. Acts 2. 6, 7, 8. But I say, how will they look, and be amazed, when God shall evidently, clearly, and fully speak out all their hearts, and every thought they have had, before them. Now the reason and strength of this wit∣ness, will lie here, that God will by the varie∣ty and crossness that their thoughts had one to another, and by the contradiction that was in them, prove them sinners and ungodly; be∣cause that I say, sometimes they thought there was a God, sometimes again they thought, there was none. Sometimes they thought, that he was such a God, and sometimes again, they thought of him quite contrary; Sometimes they thought he was worth regarding, and sometimes they thought he was not: As also sometimes they thought he would be faithful, both to mercy and Justice, and sinners; and sometimes again, they thought he would not. What greater Argument now can there be, to prove men, vanity, froth, a lie, sinners, de∣luded by the Devil, and such as had false ap∣prehensions of God, his waye, his Word, his Justice, his Holiness, of themselves, their sins, and every action?
Now they will indeed appear, a very lump of confusion, a mass of sin, a bundle of igno∣rance, of Atheism, of unbelief, and of all things that should lay them obnoxious to the Judgments of God. This will God, I say, by mustering up the thoughts of man, and by shewing of them, that every imagination and thought of their heart was onely evill, and that continually (by shewing of them what staggering, drunken, wild, and uncomely thoughts they have had, both of him, and of themselves) convince them, cast them, and condemn them for sinners, and transgressors against the Book of Creatures, the Book of his Remembrance, and the Book of the Law. By the variety of their thoughts, they shall be proved unstable, ignorant, wandring Stars, Clouds carryed with a Tempest, without order or guidance, and taken Captive of the Devil at his will. Now while the wicked are thus standing upon their tryal, and lives before the Judge∣ment-Seat, and that in the view of Heaven and Hell▪ they I say, hearing and seeing such dread∣ful things, both written and witnessed against every one of them; and that by such Books, and such Witnesses, as do not onely talk, but testifie, and that with the whole strength of truth against them: they will then begin,
though poorly, and without any advantage, to plead for themselves, which plea will be to this effect. Lord, we did find in the Scriptures, that thou didst send a Saviour into the World, to deliver us from these sins and miseries.The sinners plea for himself at the Judgment-Seat. We heard this Saviour also published, and openly profered to such poor sinners as we are. Lord, Lord, we also made profession of this Saviour, and were many of us frequenters of his holy Ordinan∣ces. We have eat and drunk in thy pre∣sence, and thou hast taught in our streets, Lord, we have also some of us, bin Preach∣ers our selves, we have prophecied in thy Name, and in thy Name have we cast out Devils, and done many wonderous works: Nay Lord, we did herd among thy People, we forsook the profain and wicked World; and carryed our shining Lamps before us in the face of all men: Lord, Lord, open to us. Mat. 7. 21, 22, 23. Luk. 13. 24, 25, 26, 27. Mat. 25. 1, 2. 10, 11.
And all the while they are thus pleading, and speaking for themselves: behold, how ear∣nestly they groan, how gastly they look, and how now the brinish tears flow down like Ri∣vers from their eyes, ever re-doubling their Petition, Lord, Lord, Lord, Lord: first think∣ing of this thing, and then of that, ever con∣tending, seeking, and striving to enter in at this strait Gate. As Christ saith, When once the Masters of the House is risen up, that is, when Christ hath laid aside his mediation for sinners, and hath taken upon him onely to judge and con∣demn: then will the wicked begin to stand without, and to knock and contend, for a portion among them that are the blessed. Ah how will their hearts twitter, while they look upon the Kingdom of Glory! and how will they ake and throb at every view of Hell, their proper place! still crying, O that we might inherit life, and O that we might escape eternal death! But now to take away al cavils and ob∣jections, that of this nature will arise,The Book of Life opened. in the hearts of these men: forthwith the Book of Life is brought ou for a conclusion, and a finall end of eternall Judgment. As John saith, The Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the Dead were judg out of those things that were
written in the Books, according to their works. Rev. 20. 12. But this Book of Life, it is not at this time opened, because there are not any godly to be tryed; for as I have shewed before, their Judgment is past, and over, before the wicked rise. The Book of Life then, it is now opened for further conviction of damned Reprobates, that their mouths may be stoped for ever, as touching all their cavils, contendings and Ar∣guments against Gods proceeding in Judge∣ment with them. For believe it, while God is judging them, they will fall to judging him again, but he will be justified in his sayings, and will overcome when he is judged at this day. Rom. 3. 1, 2, 3▪ 4, 5, 6. Yet not by a hasty and and angry casting them away, but by a legall and convincing proceeding against them, and overthrowing all their cavils, by his manifest and invincible truth. Wherefore, to cut off all that they can say, he will now open the Book of Life before them, and will shew them what is written therein, both as to Election, Conversion, and a truly Gospel-Conversation. And will convince them, that they neither are of the number of his Elect, neither were they ever regenerate, neither had they ever a truly Gospel-Conversation in  World.
By these three things then, out of this Book, thou, who art not saved, must at last be judged, and overcome. First, Here will be tryed, whether thou art within that part of this Book, wherein all the Elect are Recorded; for all the Elect are writ∣ten here, as Christ saith, Rejoyce, that your names are written in Heaven; And again, in thy Book, saith he to his Father, are all my mem∣bers written, Luk. 10. 20. Psal. 139. 16. Heb, 12. 22, 23. Now then, if thy name be not found, either among the Prophets, Apostles, or the rest of Saints, thou must be put by, as one that is cast away, as one polluted, and as an abominable branch. Isa. 14. 18, 19. Thy name is wanting in the Genealogies, and Rolls of Heaven. Ezra 2. 62. Thou art not prickt for everlasting life, therefore thou must not be delivered from that Soul-amazing misery; for there are no Souls can, though they would give a thousand Worlds, be delivered at the day of God, but such that are found written in this Book. Every one of those that are written, though never a one of those that are not written shall in that day be deli∣vered from the wrath to cme. Dan. 12. 1. But, O methinks, with what careful hearts will▪ the damned now begin to look for their names in this Book? Those that, when once
the long suffering of God waited on them, made light of all admonition, and slighted the Counsel of making their Calling and Election sure: would now give thousands of Treasures, that they could but spy their names, though last and least among the Sons of God▪ but I say, how will they fail? how will they faint? how will they die and languish in their Souls? when they shall still as they look, see their names wanting. What a pinch will it be to Cain, to see his Brother there Recorded, and he himself left out. Absalon will now sound, and be as one that giveth up the Ghost, when he shall see David his Father, and Solomon his Brother written here, while he with all is writ∣ten in the Earth, among the damned? Thus I say, will sadness be added to sadness, in the Soul of the perishing World, when they fail of finding their names in this part of the Book of the life of the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the World. Rev. 13. 8. Secondly, The second part of this Book, is that in which is Recorded, the nature of Con∣version, of Faith, Love, &c. And those that have not had the effectual Word of God upon them, and the true and saving operation of Grace in their hearts, which is indeed the true life which is begun in every Christian, they will be found still not written in this Book; for
the living, the holy living Souls, are they onely that are written therein: as the Prophet saith, And he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem. Isa. 4. 3. Eternal life is already in this life, begun in every Soul that shall be saved, as Christ saith, He that believeth in me, hath everlasting life. And again, Who so eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eter∣nall life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Joh. 6. 54. And hence they ae called the living▪ that are written in this Book. Here then the Lord will open before thee, what Con∣version is, in the true and simple nature of it, which wher thou beholdest, thou wilt then be convinced, that this thou hast mist of; for it must needs be, that when thou beholdest by the Records of Heaven, what a change. what a turn; what an alteration the work of Regene∣ration maketh on every Soul, and in every heart, where the effectual Call, or the Call ac∣cording to his purpose, is, that thou who hast lived a stranger to this, or that hast contented thy self with the notion onely, or a formal, and feigned profession thereef: I say, it cannot be, but that thou must forthwith fall down, and with grief conclude, that thou hast no share in this part of the Book of Life neither, the living
onely, are written herein. There is not one dead, carnall, wicked man recorded here. No, but when the Lord shall at this day make men∣tion of Rahb, of Babylon, of Philistia, and Ethiopia: that is, of all the cursed abble and crue of the damned: then he will say, that this man was born there, that is amongst them, and so hath his name where they have theirs; namely, under the black Rod, in the Kings black Book, where he hath Recorded all his E∣nemies and Traytors. It shall be said of this man, of this ungodly man, that he was born there. Psal. 87. 4. That he lived and dyed in the state of nature, and so under the curse of God, even as others; for as he said of wicked Coniah, Jer. 22. 30. Write this man childless: so he saith, of every ungodly man that so depart∣eth out of this World, Write this man Graceless. Wherefore, I say, among the Babylonians, and Phylistians; among the unbelieving Moors and Pagans, his name will be found in the day when it will be inquired where every man was born; for God at this day, will divide the whole World into these two Ranks, the Chil∣dren of the World, and the Children of Zion. Wherefore, here is the honour, the priviledge, and advantage that the Godly above the wick∣ed, will have at the day of their counting,
When the Lord maketh mention of Zion, it shall be then acknowledged, that this and that (good) man was born in her, the Lord shall count, saith the Prophet, when he wrighteth up the People, that this man was born there. Psal. 87. 5, 6. This man had the work of Conversion of Faith, and Grace i his Soul. This man Child of Zion of the Heavenly Jerusalem▪ which is also written in Heaven▪ Blessed is the People, that are in such a case Gal. 4▪ 26▪ Heb▪ 12. 22, 23. Psal. 144. 1▪ But poor Soul, Counters will not go for Gold now; for though so long as thou didst judge thy self by the crooked rule of thy own reason, fancy, and affection, thou wast pure in thy own eyes: yet ow thu must be judged alone, by the words and rule of the Lord Jesus. Which word shall not now, as in times past, be wrested and wrung, both▪ this way and that to smooth thee up in thy Hypocrites hope, and carnall confidence; but be thou King, or Keser, be thou who thou wilt, the Word of Christ, and that with this interpretation onely, It shall judge thee in the last day. Joh. 12. 44.
Now will sinners begin to cry with loud and bitter cryes, Oh! ten thousand Worlds for a saving work of Grace, Crowns and King∣doms for the least measure of saving Faith, and for the love, that Christ will say, is the love of his own Spirit. Now they will begin also to see the work of a broken and a contrite spirit, and of walk∣ing with God, as living , in this World. But alas, these things appear in their hearts, to the damned too late; as also do all things else. This will be but like the repentance of the Thief, about whose neck is the alter, and he turning off the ladder; for the unfortunate hap of the damned will be, that the glory of Hea∣venly things will not appear to them, till out of season. Christ must now indeed be shewed to them; as also the true nature of Faith, and all Grace; but it will be, when the door is shut, and mercy gone: they will pray, and repent most earnestly; but it will be in the time of great Waters of the flouds of eternall wrath, when they cannot come nigh him. 1 Tim. 6. 15. Matth. 25. 10, 11. Psal. 32. 6. Well then, tell me sinner, if Christ shoud now come to judge the World, canst thou abide the tryal of the Book of Life? Art thou confi∣dent that thy Profession, that thy Conversion,
thy Faith, and all other Graces, thou thinkest thou hast, will prove Gold, Silver, and preci∣ous Stones in this day? behold, he comes as a Refiners fire, and as Fullrs Soap, shalt thou indeed abide the melting and washing of this day? Examine, I say, before hand, and try thy self unfeignedly; for every one that doth ruth, cometh to the light, that their deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Joh. 3. 21. Thou sayest thou art a Christian, that also thou hast repented, dost believe, and love the Lord Jesus; but the question is, whether these things will be found of equall length, heighth, and bredth with the Book of Life. Or whether, when thou art weighed in the ballance, thou wilt yet be found wanting. Dan. 5. 27. How, if when thou comest to speak for thy self before God, thou shouldest say Siboleth, instead of Shiboleth: that is, though almost, yet not right∣ly, and naturally the Language of the Christi∣ans. Judg. 12. 4▪ 5, 6. If thou miss but one letter in thy evidence, thou art gone; for though thou mayst deceive thy own heart with Brass, instead of Gold, and with Tin instead of Silver: Gal. 6. 7. yet God will not be so put off. You know how confi∣dent the foolish Virgins were, and yet how they were deceived. They herded with the
Saints, they went forth from the gross polluti∣ons of the World, they, every one had shining Lamps, and all went forth to meet the Bridegroom, and yet they mist the Kingdom. They were not written among the living in Jerusalem; they had not the true, powerful, saving work of Con∣version, of Faith, and Grace in their Souls, they that are foolish, take their Lamps, but take no Oyl, no saving Grace with them. Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4. Thus you see how sinners will be put to it be∣fore the Judgment-Seat, from these two parts of this Book of Life. But Thirdly, There is yet another part of this Book to be opened, and that is, that part of it, in which is Recorded those noble and Christi∣an acts, that they have done since the time of their Conversion, and turning to Christ. Here I say, is Recorded the Testimony of the Saints against sin and Antichrist; their suffering for the sake of God, their love to the members of Christ, their patience under the Cross, and their faithful frequenting the Assemblies of the Saints, and their incouraging one another to bear up in his wayes in the worst of times; even when the proud was called happy, and when they that wrought wickedness were even set up. As he there saith, Then they that feared the Lord, spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remem∣rance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. Mat. 3. 14, 15, 16. For indeed, as truly as any person hath his name found in the first part of this Book of Life, and his Conversion in the second: so there is a third part, in which there is his noble spiritual and holy actions Recorded, and set down. As it is said by the Spirit, to John, con∣cerning those that suffered Martyrdom for the truth of Jesus, Write, blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works fol∣low them. Rev. 14. 13. And hence it is, that the labours of the Saints, and the Book of Life, are mentioned together, signifying, that the travels, and la∣bours, and acts of the godly, are Recorded therein. Phil. 4. 3. And hence it is again, that the Lord doth tell Sardis, that those among them that stood it out to the last gasp, in the Faith and Love of the Gospel, should not be blotted out of the Book of Life; but they, with the work of God, on their Soul, and their labour for God in this World: should be confessed before his Fa∣ther, and before his Angels. Rev. 3. 5.
This part of this Book, is in another place, called, The Book of the Word of the Lord, be∣cause in it, I say is Recorded those famous acts of the Saints, against the World, flesh, and the Devil. Numb. 21. 14. You find also, how exact the Holy Ghost is, in Recording the travels, pains, labour, and goodness of any of the Children of Israel, in their Journey from Egypt to Canaan, which was a Representation of the Travels of the Saints, from nature to Grace, and from Grace to Glory. King Ahasuerus, kept in his Library a Book of Records, wherein was wit, the good Service that his Subjects did for him at any time, which was a Type also of the man∣ner and order of Heaven. And as sure as ever Mordecai, when search was made in the Rolls, was found there to have done such and such service for the King, and his Kingdom: Esth. 6. 1. 2. so surely will it be found, what every Saint hath done for God, at the day of inquiry. You find in the Old Testament also, still as any of the Kings of Judah dyed, there was surely a Record in the Book of Chronicles, of their memorable acts and doings for their God, the Church, and the Common-wealth of Israel, which still doth further hold forth unto the Children of men, this very thing, That all the Kings of the New Testament, which are the
Saints of God, have all their acts, and what they have done for their God▪ &c. Recorded in the Book of Chronicles, in the Heavenly Jerusa∣lem. Now I say, when this part of the Book of Life shall be opened, what can be found in it, of the good deeds, and Heaven-born actions of wicked men? Just nothing; for as it is not to be expected, that Thorns should bring forth Grapes, or that Thistles should bear as Figs: so it cannot be imagined, that ungodly men should have any thing to their Commen∣dations, Recorded in this part of the Book of Life. What hast thou done man, for God, in this World? Art thou one of them that hast set thy self against those strong struglings of pride, lust, covetousness, and secret wickedness, that remain in thy heart, like Job and Paul, Job 1. 8▪ 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. 2. And do these struglings against these things, arise from pure love to the Lord Jesus, or from some legall terrours and conviction for sin? Gal. 5, 6. 3. Doest thou I say, struggle against thy lusts, because thou doest in truth, love the sweet, holy, and blessed leadings of the Spi∣rit of the Lord Jesus, its leadings of thee I say, into his blood and death, for thy Justifica∣tion, and deliverance from wrath to com Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
4. What acts of self-denyal, hast thou done for the name of the Lord Jesus, among the Sons of men? I say, what house, what friend, what Wife, what Children, and the like, hast thou lost, or left, for the Word of God, and the Testimony of his truth in the World. Matth. 19. 27, 28. Revel. 12. 10, 11. 5. Wast thou one of them, that didst sigh, and afflict thy self for the abominations of the times? and that Christ hath marked, and Re∣corded for such a one? Ezek. 9. 3, 4. Zeph. 3. 18. 6. In a word, Art thou one of them, that wouldest not be won, by neither fear, frowns, nor flatteries, to forsake the wayes of God, or wrong thy Conscience? or art thou one of them that slightest those opportunities, that Satan and this World did often give thee to return to sin in secret. Heb. 11. 14, 15. These be the men whose prayse is in the Gospel; and whose commendable and worthy acts, are Recorded before the Judge of all the World. Alas, alas, these things are strange things to a carnal and wicked man. Nothing of this hath bin done by him in this life, and therefore how can any such be Recorded for him in the Book of Life: wherefore he must needs be shut out of this part also. As David saith, Let them be blotted out of the Book of the living, and not be written with the Righteous. Psal. 69. 28.
Thus I say, the wicked will find nothing for their comfort, either in the first part of this book, where all the names of the Elect are, nei∣ther will they find any thing in the second part thereof, where is recorded the true nature and operation of effectual Conversion, of Faith, or Love, or the like; and I say, neither can any thing be found in this third part, wherein is re∣corded the worthy acts, and memorable deeds of the Saints of the Lord Jesus. Thus when Christ therefore hath opened before them this book of life, and convinced the ungodly at this day out of it; he will then shut it up again, saying, I find nothing herein that will do you good, you are none of my Elect, you are the sons of perdition: For as these things will be found clear and full in the book of life, so they will be found effectually wrought in the hearts of the Elect, all whose conversion and perseve∣rance shall now be opened before hy eyes, as a witness, I say, of the truth of what thou here seest opened before thee, and also of thy unre∣generate estate: Now thou wilt see what a turn, what a change, and what a clinging to God, to Christ, and his Word and wayes; there was found in the Souls of the saved ones! here shall be seen also how resolvedly, unfeignedly, and heartily the true child of God did oppose, resist, and war against his most dearest and
darling lusts and corruptions: now the Saints are hidden ones, but then they shall be mani∣fest, this is the morrow in which the Lord will shew who are his, and who they are that fear the Lord, and who that fear him not, Psal. 83. 3. Sam. 8. 19. Numb. 16. 5. Mal. 3. 18. Now, you shall see how Abraham left his Country, how close good Lot did stick to God in pro∣phane and wicked Sodom; Heb. 11. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Mat. 19. 29. how the Apostles left all to folow Jesus Christ, and how patiently they took all crosses, afflictions, persecutions, and necessities for the Kingdome of Heavens ske; how they indured burning, starving, stoning, hanging, and a thousand calamities; how they manifested their love to their Lord, his Cause and people in the worst of times, and in the dayes when they were most rejected, slighted, abused, and abased, then shall the King say to them on his right hand (and that when all the Devils and damned sinners stand by) Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome pre∣pared for you from the foundation of the World▪ (you are indeed the truly converted Souls, as appears by the grace that was in your hearts) For I was an hungred, and you gave me meat: ! was thirsty, and you gave me drink: I was a stran∣ger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye cloathed me; I was sick, and you visited me; and in Prison, and
you came unto me, Matth. 25. 34, 35, 36. you owned me, stood by me, and denyed your selves to nourish me and my poor members, in our low, and weak, and most despised conditi∣on. This, I say, the World shall see, hear, and be witnesses of, against themselves and their Souls for ever; for how can it be, but these poor damned sinners should be forced to confess, that they were both Christless and Graceless, when they shall find, both in the book of life, and in the hearts of the holy and beloved Souls, that which themselves are quite barren of, and greatest strangers to. The Saints, by the fruits of Regeneration, even in this World, do testify to the World, not only the truth of conversion in themselves, but also that they are yet Christless, and so heavenless, and salvati∣onless, that are not converted, 1 Tim. 6. 12. 1 Thess. 2. 10. 2 Tim. 2. 2. But alas, while we are here, they will evade this testimony, both of our happiness, by calling our Faith, fantacy; our communion with God, delusion; and the sincere profession of his Word before the World, hypocrisy, pride, and arrogancy: yet, I say, when they see us on the right hand of Christ, commingled among the Angels of light, and themselves on his left hand, and commingled with the Angels of darkness; and, I say, when they shall see our hearts and wayes
opened before their eyes, and owned by the Judg for honest hearts, and good wayes, and yet the same wayes that they hated, slighted, disowned and contemned; what will they, or what can they say, but thus, We fools counted their lives madness, and their end to be without honour, but how are they numbred with the Saints, and owned by God and Christ. And truly, was it not that the world might, by seeing the turn that is wrought on the godly at their Conversion, be convinced of the evil of their wayes, or be left without excuse the more in the day of God (with some other rea∣sons) they should not, I am perswaded, stay so long from Heaven as they do, nor undergo so much abuse and hardship as frequently befalls them. God, by the lengthening out the life of his people that are scattered here and there among men in this world, is making work for the day of Judgment, and the overthrow of the implacable, for ever and ever, and, as I have said, will by the Conversion, life, patience, self-denyal, and heavenly mindedness of his dear children, give them a heavy and most dreadful blow. Now When God hath thus laid open the work of Grace, both by the boo of life, and the Christians heart; then, of self, will fall to the ground, their pleading what gifts and abilities they had in this world,
they will now see that gifts, and grace, are two things; and also, that whosoever is graceless, let their gifts be never so excellent, they must perish and be lost for ever: wherefore for all their gifts, they shall be found the workers of iniquity, and shall so be judged and condem∣ned, Matth. 7. 22, 23. That is a notable place in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Thus saith the Lord, saith he, If the Prince (the Prince of life) give a gift to any of his sons, that is, to any that are truly gracious, the inheritance, o the profit that he gets thereby, shall be his sons; that is, for the exercise of his gift, he shall receive a re∣ward; but if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, (that is not a son) then it shall be his (but) to the year of liberty▪ after it shall re∣turn to the Prince, &c. Ezek. 46. 16, 17. This day of liberty, it is now, when the Judg is set upon the throne to Judgment, even the glori∣ous liberty of the children of God, Rom. 8. 21. wherefore then will Christ say to them that stand by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath ten punds, this servant must not abide in the house for ever, though with the son it shall be so, Joh. 8. 35. Luke 19. 24. A man may be used as a servant in the Church of God, and may receive many gifts, and much know∣ledg of the things of heaven, and yet at last,
himself be no more than a very bubble and no∣thing, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. But now I say, at this day, they shall clearly see the difference between gifts and grace, even as clearly, as now they that have eyes can see the difference between gifts and igno∣rance, and very foolishness: This our day doth indeed abound with gifts; many sparkling wits are seen in every corner, men have the Word and truths of Christ at their fingers ends; but alas, with many, yea, a great many, there is naught but wits and gifts, they are but words, all their Religion lyeth in their tongues and heads, the power of what they say and know, it is seen in others, not in themselves: these are like the Lord on whom the King of Israel lea∣ned, they shall see the plenty, the blessed plen∣ty that God doth provide, and will bestow up∣on his Church, but they shall not tast thereof, 2 Kings 7. 17, 18, 19, 20. Before I conclude this matter, observe, that among all the objections and cavils that are made, and will be made, by the ungodly, in the day of the Lord Jesus, they have not one hump abou election and reprobation, they murmur not at all that they were not predestinated to eternal life; and the reason is, because then they shall see, though now they are blind, that
God could in his Prerogative Royal, without prejudice to them that are damned, chuse and refuse at pleasure; and besides, they at that day shall be convinced, that thee was so much reality, and downright willingness in God, in every tender of Grace and mercy, to the worst of men; and also so much goodness, justness, and reasonableness in every command of the Gospel of grace, which they were so often in∣treated and beseeched to imbrace, that they will be drowned in the conviction of this, that they did refuse love, grace, reason, &c. love, I say, for hatred, grace for sin, and things rea∣sonable, for things unreasonable and vain. Now they shall see they left glory for shame, God for the Devil, heaven for hell, light for dark∣ness. Now they shall see, that though they made themselves beasts, yet God made the reasonable Creatures, and that he did with rea∣son expect that they should have adhered to, and have delighted in, things that are good, and according to God: yea, now they shall see, that though God did not determine to bring them to Heaven against their hearts and wills, and the love that they had to their sins: yet then they shall be convinced, that God was far from infusing any thing into their Souls, that should in the least hinder, weaken, ob∣struct,
or let them in seeking the welfare of their Souls. Now men will tattle and prattle at a mad rae, about election and reprobation, and conclude, that because all are not elected, therefore God is to blame that any are dam∣ned: but then they will see, that they are not damned because they were not elected, but because they sinned, and also that they sinned, not because God put any weakness into their Souls, but because they gave way, and that wilfully, knowingly, and desperately, to Satan and his suggestions; and so turned away from the holy Commandment delivered unto them; yea, then they will see, that though God at sometimes did fasten his cords about your heads, and heels, and hands, both by godly e∣ducation, and smarting convictions: yet you rusht away with violence from all, saying, Let us break these bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us. Psal. 2. 1, 2, 3. God will be justified in his sayings, and clear when he judgeth; though thy proud ignorance thinks to have, and to multiply, cavills against him, Psal. 51. 4. But secondly, as the whole body of the E∣lect, by the nature of conversion in their hearts, shall witness a non-conversion in the hearts of the wicked; and as the ungodly shall fall under the conviction of this cloud of Wit∣nesses. So to increase their conviction, there
will also be opened before them all the labours of the godly, both Ministers and others, and the pains that they have taken, to save, if it had been possible, these damned wretches; and now will it come burning hot upon their Souls, how often they were forewarned of this day; now they shall see, that there was never any Quarter-Sessions, nor general Goal-delivery more publickly foretold of, then this day. You know that the Judges, before they begin their Assizes, do give to the Countrey in Charge, That they take heed to the Laws and Statutes of the King: Why Rbel, thou shalt be at this day convicted, that every sermon thou hast heard, and that every serious debate thou hast bin at about the things of God, and Laws of eternity, they were to thee as the Judges Charge before the Assizes and Judgment be∣gan. Every exhortation of every Minister of God, it is as that which Paul gave to Timothy, and commanded hi to give in charge to others: I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angells, saith he that thou observe these things, and again, I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Ponus Plae witnessed a god confession, that thou keep this Com∣mandment without spot, unrebukable, untill the ap∣pearing of Jesus Christ; these things give in
charge, saith he, that they may be blameless, 1 Tim. 3. 21. and c. 6. v. 13. This, I say, hast thou heard, and seen, and yet thou hast not held fast, but hast cast away the things that thou hast heard, and hast bin warned of; alas, God will multiply his Witnesses against thee. 1. Thy own Vows and Promises shall be a Witness against thee, that thou hast, contra∣ry to thy light and knowledg, destroyed thy Soul, as Joshuah said to the children of Israel, when they said the Lord should be their God. Well, saith he, Ye are Witnesses against your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him; that is, if now you turn back again, even this Co∣venant and resolution of yours will in the great day be a witness against you, and they said, we are witnesses, Jos. 24. 20, 21, 22. 2. Every time you have with your mouth said well of godliness, and yet gone on in wickedness; or every time you have condem∣ned sin in others, and yet have not refrained it your selves; I say, every such word and con∣clusion that hath passed out of thy mouth, sinner, it shall be as a witness against thee in the day of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as Christ saith, Matth. 12. 36, 37. By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condem∣ned. I observe, that talk with who you will, they will with their mouth, say, serving of
God, and loving of Christ, and walking in wayes of holiness is best, and best will come of it. I observe again, that men that are gros∣ly wicked themselves, will yet, with heavy censures and Judgments, condemn drunken∣ness, lying, coveousness, pride, and whoring, with all manner of abominations in others; and yet, in the mean time, continue to be neg∣lectors of God, and imbracers of sin and the allurements of the flesh themselves. Why such souls, every time they speak well of god∣liness, and continue in their sins; they do pass Judgment upon themselves, and provide a witness, even their own mouth, against their own Soul, at the Judgment seat; Out of thy own mouth, saith Christ, will I judg thee thou wicked servant; thou knewest what I was, and that I loved to see all my servants zealous, and active for me, that at my comming, I might have re∣ceived again what I gave thee with increase: thou oughtest therefore to have bin busying thy self in my work for my glory, and thy own good, but seeing thou hast, against thy own light, and mouth, gone contrary; Angels, take this unprofitable servant, and cast ye him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; he sinned against his light, he shall go to hell against his will, Matth. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
The very same I say, will befall all those that have used their mouth to condemn the sins of others, while they themselves live in their sins. Saith God, O thou wicked wretch, thou didst know that sin was bad, thou didst con∣demn it in others; thou didst also condemn, and passe Judgment upon them for their sin, Thou art therefore inexcusable, a man, whosoever thou art, that hast thus Judged; for thou that judgest, dost the same thing: Wherefore, wherein thou hast judged ano∣ther, thou hast condemned thy self. I must therefore, saith Christ, look upon thee to be no other but a sinner against thy own mouth, and cannot but judge thee as a despiser of my goodness, and the riches of my forbea∣rance; by which means, thou hast treasured up wrath against this day of wrath, and Revel∣lation of the Righteous Judgment of God, He that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is sin. Rom. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Thus will God, I say, judge and condemn poor sinners, even from and by themselves, to the fire, that Lake of Brimstone and fire. Thirdly, God hath said in his Word, that rather then there shall want witness at the day of Judgment, against the works of iniquity:
The very dust of their City, that shall cleave to his Messengers that publish the Gospel, shall it self be a witness against them; and so Christ bid his Servants say, into whatsoever City, ye enter, and they receive you not, go your wayes out into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of your City, which cleav∣eth to us, we do wipe off against you, &c. But I say unto you, saith he to his Ministers, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom at the Judge∣ment, then for that City. Luk. 10. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. It may be, that when thou hearest that the dust of the street, (that cleaveth to a Minister of the Gospel, while thou rejectest his word of Salvation) shall be a witness against thee at the day of Judgment: though wilt be apt to laugh, and say, the dust a Witness! Witnesses will be scarce where dust is forced to come in to plead against a man. Well sinner, mock not, God doth use to confound the great and mighty, by things that are not, and that are despised. And how sayst thou? if God had said by a Prophet to Pharaoh, but two years before the Plague, that he would shortly come against him with one Army of Lice, and a se∣cond
Army of Frogs, and with a third Army of Locusts, &c. and would destroy his Land; dost thou think it had bin wisdom in Pharaoh, now to have laughed such tydings to scorn? Is any thing to hard for the Lord? hath he said it, and shall he not bring it to passe? You shall see, in the day of Judgment, of what force all these things will be, as witnesses against the un∣godly. Many more witnesses might I here reckon up, but these at this time shall suffice to be no∣minated; for out of the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word shall be established. And at the mouth of two or three Witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death, be put to death. 2 Cor. 13. 1. Deut. 17. 6. Joh. 8. 17. Thus then the Books being opened, the Laws read, the witnesses heard, and the un∣godly convicted: forthwith the Lord and Judge proceeds to execution. And to that end, doth passe the sentence of eternall death upon them, saying, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devill and his Angels. You are now by the Book of the Creatures, by the Book of Gods Remembrance, by the Book of the Law, and by the Book of Life, adjudged guilty of High Treason against God, and me; and as murderers of your own
Souls. As these faithful and true witnesses here have testified, every one of them ap∣pearing in their most upright testimony against you. Also you never had a saving work of Con∣version, and faith, past upon you, you died in your sins; neither can I find any thing in the last part of this Book that will serve your turn, no worthy act is here Recorded of you. When I was an hungred, you gave me no meat; When I was a thirsty, you gave me no drink; When I was a stranger, you took me not in; I was naked, but ye cloathed me not; I was sick and in prison, but ye visited me not. I have made a thorow search among the Records of the Living, and find nothing of you, or of your deeds therein: Depart from me ye cursed, &c. Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43. Thus will these poor ungodly Creatures be stript of all hope and comfort, and therefore must needs fall into great sadness and wailing, before the Judge; yea, crying out, as being loath to let go all for lost, and even as the man that is fallen into the River, will catch hold of any thing, when he is struggling for life, though it tend to hold him faster under the water, to drownd him. So, I say, while these poor Crea∣tures,
as they lie strugling and twining under the ireful countenance of the Judge; they will bring out yet one more faint and weak groan, and there goes life and all; their last sigh is this, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and gave thee no meat? or when saw we thee thirsty, and gave thee no drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee not in? or naked, and cloathed thee not? or when wast thou sick, or in prison, and we did not minister unto thee? Mat. 25. 44. Thus you see, how loath the sinner is now to take a Nay of life everlasting. He that once would not be perswaded to close with the Lord Jesus, though one should have perswaded him with tears of blood: behold how fast he now hangs about the Lord, what Arguments he frames with mournful groans; how with shifts and words, he seeks to gain the time, and to defer the execution; Matth. 25. 10, 11. Lord open unto us! Lord, Lord, open unto us! Lord, thou hast taught in our streets, and we have both taught in thy name, and in thy name have we cast out Devils. Mat. 7. 21, 22, 23. VVe have eat and drank
in thy presence. And when did we see thee an hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or na∣ked, or sick, or in prison, and did not mini∣ster to thee? Luk. 13. 25, 26, 27, 28. O poor hearts, how loath? how unwillingly do they turn away from Christ? how loath are they to partake of the fruit of their ungodly doings? Christ must say, depart once, and de∣part twice, before they will depart. When he hath shut the door upon them, yet they knock, and cry, Lord open unto us; when he hath given them their answer, that he knowes them not, yet they plead and mourn. Wherefore, he is fain to answer again, I tell you, I know you not whence you are, depart. Luk. 13. 25, 26, 27. Depart] O this word, depart! how dreadful is it? with what weight will it fall on the head of every condemned sinner! for you must note, that while the ungodly stand thus before the Judge: they cannot chuse but have a most famous view, both of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the damned wights in Hell. Now they see the God of Glory, the King of Glory, the Saints of Glory, and the Angels of Glory; and the Kingdom in which they have their eternal aboad. Now, they also begin to see the worth of Christ, and what it is to be
miled upon by him; from all which they must depart, and as I say, they shall have the view of this, so they will most famously be∣hold he pit, the bottomless pit, the fire, the Brimstone, and the flaming beds that Justice hath prepred for them of old. Jud. 4. Their Associates also, will be very cospicuous, and clear before their watery eyes. They will see now, what and which are Devils, and who are damned Souls; now their great Grandfather Cain, and all his brood, with Judas and his Companions, must be their fellow-sighers in the flames and pangs for ever. O heavy day! O heavy Word! This word [depart] therefore, it looketh two wayes, and commands the damned to do so too. Depart from Heaven, depart to Hell: depart from life, depart to death: depart from me] now the Ladder doth turn from under them in deed. The Saviour turns them off, the Saviour throwes them down. He hath given him authority to execute Judgment also, be∣cause he is the Son of man. Joh. 5. 27. Depart from me. I would come to have done you good; but then you would not: now then, though you would have it never so willingly, yet you shall not. Depart from me ye Cursed] You lie open
to the stroak of Justice for your sins; ye for∣saken, and left off God, ye Vessels of wrath, ye despisers of God and goodness. You must now have vengeance feed on you; for you did, when you were in the World, feed on sin, and treasure up wrath against this day of wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Rom. 2, 3, 4, 5▪ 6. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.] Fire is that which of all things is the most insuffer∣able, and insupportable. Wherefore, by fire, is shewed the grievous state of the ungodly, after Judgment. Who can eat fire, drink fire, and ly down in the midst of flames of fire? yet this must the wicked do. Again, not onely fire, but everlasting fire. Behold how great a fire a little matter kindleth. A little sin, a little pleasure, a little unjust dealing and doing: what preparation is made for the punishment thereof. And hence it is, that the fire into which the damned fll, is called the Lake, or Sea of fire. And whosoever, saith John, was not found written in the Rok of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire and Brimstone. Revel. 20. 15. Little did the sinner seriously think, that when he was sinning against God, he was making such provision for his poor Soul; but now 'tis to late to repent, his worm must ne∣ver
die, and his fire never shall be quenched. Mark 9. 49. Though the time in which men com∣mit sin, is short, yet the time of Gods punish∣ing of them for their sin, is long. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.] In that he saith, prepared for the Devil and his An∣gels: he insinuates a further conviction upon the Consciences of the damned. As if he had said, as for this fire and Lake that you must go to, though you thought but little of it, because you were careless, yet I did betimes, put you in mind of what would be the fruits of sin, even by preparing of this Judgment for the Devil and his Angels. The Devil in his Creation, is far more noble then you, yet when he sinned, I spared him not. He sinned also before man and I, upon his sinning, did cast him down from Heaven to Hell, and did hang the Chains of everlasting darkness upon him, which might, yea, ought to have bin a fair item to you to take heed; but you would not. Jud. 6. Gen. 31. 2, 3, 4, 5. Rev. 20. 1. Wherefore, see∣ing you have sinned as he hath done, and that too, after he had both sinned, and was bound over to eternal punishment: the same Justice that layeth hold on these more noble Crea∣tures,
must surely seize on you. The World should be convinced of Judgment then, because the Prince of the World is judged. Joh. 6. 8, 9, 10. And that before they came to this condition of hearing the eternal sentence rattle in their ears; but seeing they did not regard it then, they must and shall feel the smart of it now. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. God would have men learn both what mer∣cy and Justice is to them, by his shewing it to others; but if they be sottish and careless in the day of forbearance, they must learn by smarting in the day of rebukes, and vengeance. Thus it was with the old World, God gave them one hundred and twenty years warning, by the preparation of Noah for the floud that should come; but for as much as they then were careless, and would not consider the works of the Lord, nor his threatning them by this pre∣paration: therefore he brought in the floud upon the World of the ungodly. As he doth hear the last Judgment upon the workers of ini∣quity, and sweep them all away in their wilful ignorance. Mat. 24. 37, 38, 39. Wherefore I say, the Lord Chief Judge, by these words [prepared for the Devill and his An∣gels] doth as good as say, this fire into which
now I send you, it did of it self, even in the preparation of it, (had you considered it) fore∣warn you of this that now is come upon you. Hell fire is no new, or unheard of thing, you cannot now plead, that you heard not of it in the Wold, neither could you with any reason judge, that seeing I prepared it for Angels, for noble, powerful, and mighty Angels; that you poor dust and ashes should escape the ven∣geance. Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The sen∣tence being thus passed, it remains now, the work being done, that every one goeth to his eternal station. Wherefore, forthwith this mighty Company, do now with heavy heart, return again from before the Judgment-Seat: and that full hastily, God knoweth, for their proper Center, is the Hell of Hell; into which they descend like a stone into a Well, or like Pharaoh into the bottom of the red Sea. Exod. 15. 10. For all hope being now taken from them, they must needs fall with violence, into the Jaws of eternal desperation, which will deal far worse with the souls of men, and make a greater slaughter in their tortured consciences, then the Lions in the Den with Daniel, could possibly do with the men that were cast in a∣mong them. Dan. 6. 24.
This is that which Paul calleth Eternall Judgement, Heb. 6▪ 2. because it is that which is last and finall. Many are the Judgments that God doth execute among the Sons of Men, some after this manner, and some after that, divers of which, continue but for a while, and none of them are eternal, no, the very Devils and damned spirits in Hell, though there is the longest and most terrible of all the Judgments of God, yet on foot: yet I say, they must pass under another Judgment, even this last, great and finall Judgment. The Angels that kept not their first state, but left their own Habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting Chains under dark∣ness, unto the Judgment of the great day. Jude 6. And so also it is with damned souls; for boh Sodom and Gomorah, with all other, though al∣ready in Hell in their souls: yet they must (as I have before shewed) all arise to this judge∣ment, which will be their finall judgement. O∣ther of the judgements of God, as they have an end, so the end of many of them prove the pro∣fit of those on whom they are inflicted, being I say, Gods Instruments of Conversion to sinners: and so may fitly be compared to those petty judgements among men, as putting in the stocks, whipping, or burning in the hand: which punishments, and judgements, do often
prove profitable to those that are punished with them; but eternal judgement, it is like those more severe judgements among men, as beheading, shooting to death, hanging, draw∣ing, and quartering which soop all, even health, time, and the like, and cut off all opportunity of good, leaving no place for mercy or amend∣ment: these shall go away into everlasting punish∣ment, &c. Mat. 25. 40. This word, depart, &c. is the last word the damned for ever are like to hear. I say, it is the last voice, and therefore will stick longest, and with most power on their slaughtered souls: there is no calling of it back again, it is the very wind-up of Eternall Judgement. Thus then, the judgement being over, the Kingdom ceaseth to be any longer in the hand of the Man Christ Jesus; for as the Judges here among men, when they have gone their Cir∣cuit, do deliver up their Commission to the King: so Christ the Judge, doth now deliver up his Kingdom to his Father. And now all is swallowed up of Eternity. Mat. 21. 8. The damned are swallowed up of eternal justice and wrath; the saved, of eternal life and feli∣city; and the Son also delivereth up, I say, the Kingdom to the Father, and subjects himself under him that did put all things under him,
that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. For now is the end come, and not before, even the end of the reign of death it self; for Death, and Hell, and sinners, and Devils, must now together into the Lake, that burns with fire and Brimstone. Rev. 20. 14, 15. And now is the end of Christs Reign, as the Son of Man, and the end of the Reign of the Saints, with him in this his Kingdom, which he hath received of his Father, for his work sake, which he did for him, and for his Elect. Then cometh the end faith Paul, when he shall have delivered up the King∣dom to God the Father: But when shall that be? why, he answers, saying, When he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power; for he must reign, saith he, untill he hath put all his enemies under his feet, (which will not be, untill the finall Sentence and Judgment be over;) for the last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. For God hath put all things under his feet, but when he saith, all things are put under him: it is mani∣fested, he is accepted, that did put all things under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject to him, that did put all things under him, that God may be all in all. All things being now at this pass, to wit, every one being in its proper place, God in his,
Christ in his, the Saint in his, and the Sinner in his; I shall conclude with this brief touch upon both the state of the Good and Bad after this Eternal Judgment. 1. The Righteous now shall never fear Death, the Devill, and Hell more: And the Wicked shall never hope of life. 2. The Just shall ever have the Victory over these things: But the Wicked shall ever∣lastingly be swallowed up of them. 3. The Holy shall be in everlasting Light: But the Sinner in everlasting Darkness. With∣out light, I say, yet in Fire ever burning, yet not consumed, always afraid of death and hell, vehemently desiring to be annihited to no∣thing. Continually fearing to stay long in Hell, and yet certainly sure they shall never come out of it. Ever desiring the Saints hap∣piness, and yet alwayes envying their felicity. They would have it, because it is easie and Comfortable; yet cannot abide to think of it, because they have lost it for ever. Ever loaden with the delight of sin: and yet that is the greatest torture, alwayes desiring to put it out of their Mind, and yet assuredly know they must for ever abide the guilt and torment thereof.
4. The Saints are always inflamed with the Consideration of the Grace that once they im∣braced: but the Wicked, most flamingly tor∣mented with the thoughts of rejecting and re∣fusing it. 5. The Just, when they think of their sins, they are comforted with the thoughts of their being delivered from them; but the Ungodly, when they think of their righteousness, will gnaw themselves, to think that this would not deliver them from Hell. 6. When the Godly think of Hell, it will increase their Comfort; but when the Wicked think of Heaven, it will twinge them like a Serpent. Oh this Eternal Judgment! What would a damned Soul give, that there might be, though after Thousands and Hundreds of Thousands of Millions of Years, an end put to this Eternal Judgment. But their misery is, they have sinned against a God that is Eternal; they have offended that Justice that will never be satisfied; and therefore they must abide the Fire that never shall be quenched. Here is Judgment, Just, and Sad.
Again, As it will be thus with Good and Bad in general, so again, more particularly, when the Wicked are thus adjudged and Con∣demned, and also received of the Fiery Gulph; then they shall find, That as he that busieth himself to do good, shall have more glory than others; So they that have been more busie and active in sin than others, they shall have more Wrath and Torment than others. For as doing good abundantly, doth inlarge the Heart to receive and hold more Glory; So doing evil abundantly, doth inlarge the Heart and Soul to receive Punishment so much the more. And hence it is that you have such Sayings as these, It shall be more tolerable in the Judgment for Sodome, than for others; that is, then for those that had sinned against much greater Light and Mercy: For these, as he saith in another place, shall receive greater Damna∣tion; Yea, it standeth to reason, that he who had most Light, most Conviction, most means of Conversion, and that was highest towards Heaven, he must needs have the greatest Fall, and so sink deepest into the Jaws of Eternal Misery, Luke 10. 12. Luke 20. 47. As one Star, that is, as one Saint, differeth from an∣other in Heaven; so one damned Soul shall differ from another in Hell. It is so among
the Devils themselves, they are some worse than others: Matth. 9. 34. Mar. 3. 22. Bel∣zebub is the Prince; or the Chief of the Devils; That is, One that was most glorious in Hea∣ven; Chief among the reprobate Angels be∣fore his Fall, Isa. 14. 2. and therefore sinned against the greater Light, Mercy, and Good∣ness: and so became the Chief for wicked∣ness, and will also have as the wages thereof, the Chief of Torments. For that will be true of the damned in Hell, which is prayed for against Babylon. Revel. 18. 7. How much she hath glorified her self, and lived deliciously; so much torment and sorrow give her. Can it be imagined, that Judas should have no more torment, who betrayed the Prince of Life and Saviour of the World, than others who never came near his Wickedness by ten thousand de∣grees? He that know his Masters Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many stripes. With many moe stripes, than others that through ignorance did commit sin worthy of many stripes. But what should I thus discourse of the degrees of the Torments of the damned Souls in Hell? For he that suffers least, will the waters of a full Cup be wrung out to him. The least measure of wrath, it will be the Wrath of God, eternal and fiery Wrath,
insupportable wrath; it will lay the Soul in the Gulph of that Second Death, which will for ever have the Mastery over the poor damn∣ed perishing Sinner. And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire: which is the Se∣cond Death. And whosoever was not found in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 20. 14, 15. FINIS.
