c1999 r38999 18204331 107066
THE CHARACTER OF A True Protestant. HE is one that professeth the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, as it is Established by the Laws of the Kingdom, and professeth against the Contrary. He sticks to the Protestation of Ausburge. from whence he had his Name: He loves the Ʋnity of the Church so, that he endeavours next her Verity in Faith, her Unity and Conformity in Discipline with that Church, not daring to broach any new Opinion, nor preach them to disturb the Peace of his Aged Mother! Private Interpretations of Scrip∣ture he approves not; but submits his own, and maintains none against the received and approved Doctrine of the Church, whereof he is a Member. He thinks that Evange∣lical Counsel is to be observed, and that all things must be done in Order and Decency: He owns the King to be the Head of the Church, as it is Personall, and hath Sworn him Gods Deputy in Government, and Trusted with the Sword, which he must not bear in vain: He dares not question his Authority, who is only answerable to God; but in his Heart, honour him, as Gods Vice-gerent; and knows, that to resist his Power, is to resist him that gave it; and though the Penalty be Damnation, yet he fears not for that so much as the Offence given, to God who gave that Power: He Confesseth an Obligation to Gods Moral Laws, and Man's Judicial; and that there must be Obedience Active, as well as Passive, to the One, and the Other: He knows Christ's Spi∣ritual Kingdom opposeth not the Temporal Cim and Pow∣er of Kings; but Cesar must have his Tribute (he Badge of Conquest) as God must have his in the Acknowledgment of
his Protection; and dare call his Soveraign, the Anointed of God, since God called Cyrus an Heathen so; not for the Ho∣liness of External Unction, but the Internal Character of Suprem Power. So he can make a difference between Types and Metaphors; the One being in Persons, the Other in Words. He conceives Passive Obedience always due to the King, where Active cannot be performed with a Good Conscience. He believes Faith alone cannot justify, without Works; but both together; the First before God, the Second before Man. He believes God rewards above Merit; yet that there is difference in Glory, and Reward, though all have Ful∣ness: Traditions and Ceremonies he reverences, as they are Antiquites, and stream from the Spring of Original Pu∣rity, not to the necessity of Doctrine, but Discipline. He detesteth Parity in Church or Common-wealth, as tending to Anarchy. He dares not Swear against his Conscience, nor vow Implicite Obedience to occasional Ordinances. He thinks no Authority but the same, or greater than that to whom he hath made a Judicial Vow, can disannul it: He is Loyal, for Conscience sake, to his Soveraign; Charitable, for Gods sake, to his Neighbour; and dares not do that un∣to another, he cannot be contened should be done unto him∣self; muchless rob his Soveraign of his Birth-Right, or deface Gods Character. He thinks Dixi vos dijestis, belongs Supreamly to his Soveraign, Ministerially to his Subjects: He dares not distinguish betwixt the King, and his Person; but thinks those that dare be so bold, derive their Logick with the Jesuits, from Hell. His Heart thinks no Disloyal thought, muchless dares he speak a Word to lessen the Re∣verence due to Majesty; not for fear of Punishment, but the Sin. In a word, he is One that dare in his Princes Just quarrel, meet Death with chearfulness, as David met Goli∣ah, or as Daniel went into the Lyons Den; and can serve his God, his King, and Country, without Fear of Enemies; and with chearfulnness, can sing his Nunc Dimitte, as Simeon did with his Christ in his Arms. And this alone is your True Pro∣testant. LONDON, Printed for T. S. in the Year 1682.
