c2158 12097522 53999
A COLLECTION OF HIS MAIESTIES MOST GRACIOUS MESSAGES FOR PEACE, Sent to the Two Houses of Parlia∣ment at Westminster, since the 5. of Decemb▪ 1645. With His MAjESTI last Message Jan. 15. and the Answer of  ses to His two for∣mer Messages of the  of Decemb. CHARLES. R. OVr Pleasure and Command is, That these Messages with their Answers, be forthwith published in all Churches and Chappells within Our Dominions. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity. 1645.
A COLLECTION OF His MAjESTIES most Gracious Messages for Peace, sent to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster since the 5. of Decemb. 1645. CHARLES R. HIS Majesty being deeply ble of the Continuation of this bloudy  naturall Warre, cannot think Himselfe discharg'd of the Duty He owes to God, or the affection and regard Hee hath to the preservation of His People, without the constant applica∣tion of His est endeavou to find some expedient for the speedy ending of these unhappy Di∣stractions, if that may be, doth  desire, That a safe Conduct may be forthwith sear▪  Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Southampton,  and Jeffery Palmer Esquires, and their  to, with Coaches, Hor∣ses, and other Accommodations for their Journey to Westmin∣ster, during their stay there, and require when they shall think fit. Whom His Majesty intends to send to the Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the Coissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, furni∣shed with uch Propositions, as His Majesty is confident will  the Foundation of a happy and well grounded Peace. Gi∣ven at the Court at Oxford the fifth of December, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tempore.
This Gracious Message came to Westminster, December the sixth, where he that brought it was detained five dayes, and at last sent back without any Answer at all to His MAJESTY; only these few words were written to Sir Thomas Glemham Governour of Oxford. SIR, WE have received your Letter of the 5th of this instant December, with His Majesties inclosed, and have sent back your Trumpet by Command of both Houses, who will with all convenient speed returne an answer to His Majesty, and rest Your loving Friends Grey of Wark Speaker of the House of Peeres Pro Tempore. William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons, For Sir Thomas Glemham Governour of Oxford. This was all, after so many dayes expectation; which is indeed nei∣ther Answer nor Excuse, being only a Concession of nothing at present, and an intimation that for f (when themselves judg'd it convenient) they would grant or deny. Notwithstanding all manner of difficulties and pretences. His MAJESTIES (to testifie His unwearied desires for Peace) presently sent  Message. CHARLES R. HIS Majesty cannot but extreamly wonder, that after so many expressions on your part of a deep and seeming sence of the miseries of this afflicted Kingdom, and of the dan∣gers incident to His Person during the continuance of this un∣naturall War, your many great and so often repeated Protesta∣tions, that the raising of these Armes hath been only for the ne∣cessary defence of Gods true Religion, His Majesties Honour, Safety and Prosperity, the Peace, comfort and security of His
People, you should delay a safe Conduct to the persons menti∣oned in His Majesties Message of the fifth of this instant De∣cember, which are to be sent unto you with Propositions for a well grounded Peace: A thing so far from having been denied at any time by His Maiesty, whensoever you have desired the same, that he beleives it hath been seldom (if ever) practised among the most avowed & professed enemies, much lesse from Subiects to their King. But His Maiesty is resolved, that no dis∣couragements whatsoever shall make Him faile of His part in doing His uttermost endeavours to put an end to these Cala∣mities, which if not in time prevented, must prove the ruine of this unhappy Nation; And therefore doth once againe desire, that a safe conduct may be forthwith sent for those persons ex∣pressed in His former Message, & doth therefore Co you, as you will answer to Almighty God in that day when he shall make inquisition for all the Bloud that hath and may yet be spilt in this unnaturall Warre, as you tender the preservation and establishment of the true Religion; by all the Bonds of Duty and Allegiance to your King, or compassion to your blee∣ding and unhappy Country, and of Charity to your selves, that you dispose your hearts to a true sence, and ploy all your faculties in a more seriou endeavour together with His Ma∣jesty, to set a speedy and to these sting Divisions, and then He shall not doubt, but that God  give the bles∣sing of Peace to this distr . Given at the Court at Oxford the 15. of December 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peers o tempore. Above Twenty dayes passed (which was more then they allowed for the whole Treaty at Ʋxbridge) and yet no Answer came to either of these former Messages. His MAJESTY observing such strange delayes against any whomsoever He should send with Propositions (though Persons of most unblemish'd Honour and Integrity) Resolved to remove all Clouds and Excuses by repairing Personally to London, and therefore sent this following Message.
CHARLES R. NOtwithstanding the strange and unexpected delayes (which can be precedented by no former times) to His Majesties two former Messages, His Majesty will lay aside all Expostulations, as rather serving to loose time, then to contri∣bute any remedy to the evills, which (for the present) doe afflict this distracted Kingdome; Therefore without farther Preamble, His Majesty thinkes it most necessary to send these Propositions this way, which He intended to doe by the Per∣sons mentioned in His former Messages, though He well knowes the great disadvantage, which Overtures of this kind have, by the want of being accompanied by well instructed Messengers. His Majesty conceiving that the former Treaties have hi∣therto proved ineffectuall, chiefly for want of Power in those Persons that Treated, as likewise because those from whom their Power was derived (not possibly having the particular informations of every severall debate) could not give so cleare a Iudgement as was requisite in so important a businesse; If therefore His Majesty may have the engagement of the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, the Major, Aldermen, Common-Councell, and Militia of London, at the chiefe Commanders in Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army, as also of those in the Scots Ar∣my, for His Majesties free and safe Comming to, and abode in London or Westminster, (with such of His Servants now atten∣ding Him, and their Followers, not exceeding in all the num∣ber of 300) for the space of forty dayes, and after the said time for His free and safe repaire to any of His Garrisons of Oxford, Worcester, or Newarke, (which His Majesty shall nominate at any time before His going from London or Westminster,) His Majesty propounds to have a Personall Treaty with the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, upon all matters which may con∣duce
to the restoring of Peace and happinesse to these misera∣bly distracted Kingdomes; And to begin with the three Heads which were Treated on at Ʋxbridge. And for the better clea∣ring of His Majesties earnest and sincere Intentions of putting an end to these unnaturall Distractions, (knowing that point of security may prove the greatest obstacle to this most blessed Worke) His Majesty therefore Declares, That He is willing to commit the great Trust of the Militia of this Kingdome, for such time, and with such Powers, as are exprest in the Paper delivered by His Majesties Commissioners at Ʋxbridge, the 6th of February last, to these Persons following, viz. The Lord Privy Seale, the Duke of Richmond, the Marquesse of Hert∣ford, the Marquesse of Dorchester, the Earle of Drst Lord Chamberlaine, the Earle of Northumberland, the Earle of Essex, Earle of Southampton, Earle of Pembroke, Earle of Sa∣lisbury, Earle of Manchester, Earle of Warwick, Earle of Den∣bigh, Earle of Chichester, Lord Say, Lord Seymour, Lord Lucas, Lord Lexington, M. Denzill Hois, M. Pierrepoint, M. Henry Bellasis, M. Richard Spencer, Sir Thomas Fairfax, M. John Ash∣burnham, Sir Gervas Clifton, Sir Henry Vane junior, M. Rober Wallop, M. Thomas Chichely, M. Oliver Cromwell, and M. Philip Skippon, supposing that these are Persons against whom there can be no just exception: But if this doth not satisfie, then His Majesty offers to name the ▪ and leave the other to the election of the two  or at Westminster, with the Powers and Lim  before mentioned. Thus His Majesty calls God  the World to witnesse, of His sincere Intentions and  Endeavours, for the compo∣sing and setling of these ble Distractions, which He doubts not, but by the blessing of God, will soon be put to a happy onclusion, if this His Majesties offer be accepted; Otherwise He leaves all the World to Iudge, who are the Continuers of this unnaturall Warre. And therefore He once more Conjures you, by all the Bonds of Duty you owe to God and your King, to have so great a Compassion on the bleeding and miserable Estate of your Country, That you joyne your most serious and hearty Endeavours with His Majesty, to put
a happy and speedy end to these present Miseries. Given at the Court at OXFORD the 26 of December, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore, To be Communicated to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. The day after His MAJESTY had sent this Third Message, Sir Peter Killgrew brought an Answer to His MAJESTIES two for∣mer of the 5 and 15 of December, whoever heares this Answer, will beleeve it might have been afforded sooner. May it please your Majesty, THE Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster, have received your Letters of the 5th and 15th of this instant December, and having, together with the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, taken the same into their serious consideration, doe humbly returne this An∣swer. They have in all their Actions manifested to Your Majesty and the World, their sincere and earnest desires, that a safe and well grounded Peace might be seted in Your three Kingdomes, and for the obtain  essing, shall ever pray to God, and use their utmost , and beseech Your Majesty to beleive, that their not sending a more speedy Ans hath not proceeded from any intention to retard the meane  putting an end to these present Calamities by a happy Peace,  been occasioned by the Considerations and Debates necessary in a busi∣nesse of so great importance, wherein both Kingdoms are so much concerned. As to Your Majesties desire of a safe Conduct for the comming hether of the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Southampton, Iohn Ashburnham and leffery Palmer Esquires, with Proposi∣tions
to be the foundation of a happy and well grounded Peace, They finding that former Treaties have been made use of for o∣ther ends under the pretence of Peace, and have proved delatory, and unsuccessefull, cannot give way to a safe Conduct according to Your Majesties desire; But both Houses of the Parliament of England, having now under their Consideration Propositions and Bills for the setling of a safe and well grounded Peace, which are speedily to be communicated to the Commissioners of the King∣dome of Scotland, doe resolve after mutuall agreement of both Kingdomes to present them with all speed to Your Majesty. Westminster the 25. Decemb. 1645. Gray of Warke Speake of the House of Peers pro . William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons. This Deniall (to say no worse) was brought to His MAIESTY December 27. and within two dayes Sir Peter Killegrew was dismissed with this Gracious Answer. CHARLES R. ALthough the Message sent by  Peter Killegrew, may justly require  expost  His Majestie laies that le, as no so  Endeavours; leaving  World o judge▪  Proposition for a Personall ty, o the  of a safe Conduct for Per∣sons to be  ly,  of a reall Intention to Peace;  all  upon His former Message of the 26  December.  upon His repaire to Westmin∣er  oubts not but so to joyne His Endeavours with His two Houses of Parliament, as to give just satisfaction, not only concerning the businesse of Ireland, but also for the setling of a way for the payment of the Publique Debts, as well to the Scots, and to the City of London, as others. And as already He
hath shewne a faire way for the setling of the Militia, so He shall carefully Endeavour in all other Particulars, that none shall have cause to complain for want of security, wherby just Iealousies may arise to hinder the continuance of the desired Peace. And certainly this Proposition of a Personall Treaty could never have entred into His Majesties Thoughts, if He had not resolv'd to make apparent to all the world, that the Publique good and Peace of this Kingdome, is farre dearer to Him then the respect of any particular Interest. Wherefore none can oppose this Motion, without a manifest demonstra∣tion, that he particularly envies His Majesty should be the cheife  in so blessed a Worke, besides the declaring him  opposer of the happy Peace of these Nations. To conide, whosoever will not be ashamed, that His faire and specious Protestations should be brought to a true and pub∣lique Test; and those who have a reall sence, and do truly com∣miserate the miseries of their bleeding Countrie: let them speedily and chearfully embrace His Majesties Proposition for His Personall Treaty at Westminster, which, by the blessing of God will undoubtedly to these now distracted Kingdomes, estor the happinesse of a long wisht for, and lasting Peace. Gin at the Court at Oxford, the 19th day of December, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Pres pro tempore, to  Cted to the two Houses of  West∣minster, and the  of the Parliament of Scotd. But neither this, nor the former Message of December 26.  ouch∣safed the least notice for full three weeks, though. Theirs ha  Answer in lesse then three doyes. All good men wondring at so strange detention of the Messenger at London, His MAIESTY sent another with this His fifth Message.
CHARLES R. BUt that these are times, wherein nothing is strange; it were a thing much to be marvailed at, what should cause this unparalell'd long detention of His Majesties Trumpet, sent with His Gracious Message of the 26th of December last; Peace being the only Subject of it, and His Majesties Perso∣nall Treaty, the meanes proposed for it. And it were almost as great a wonder, that His M uld be so long from inquiring after it, if that the ely expectation thereof, had not, in some measure ∣fied His Impatience: But least His Majesty, by is long silence, should condemne himselfe of Careles∣nesse in that, which so ich concernes the good of all His People, He thinkes it high time to inquire af∣ter His said Trumpeter, For since all men, who pre∣tend any goodnesse, must desire Peace, and that all men know Ties, to be the best and most Christi∣an way to procure it, and thee being as little questi∣on, that His Majesties  it; is the likeliest way to bring it to  He Judges there must be some strang  Accidents, which eth this most  Wherefore His M arnestly,  to have a speedy Account of Hi mer Message ubject whereof is Peace,  meanes His Personall Presence at Westmin∣ster, where the Government of the Church being setled, as it was in the times of the happy and glori∣ous Reignes of Queene Elizabeth and King Iames, with full Liberty for the ease of their Consciences,
who will not communicate in that Service establi∣shed by Law, and likewise for the free and publique use of the Directory (prescribed, and by Command of the two Houses of Parliament, now practised in some parts of the City of London) to such as shall de∣sire to use the same, and all Forces being agreed to be Disbanded, His Majesty will then forthwith (as He hath in His Message of the 29th of December last, al∣ready offered) joyne with His two Houses of Parlia∣ment, in setling some way for the payment of the Publique Debts to His Scots Subjects, the City of London, and others: And His Majesty having propo∣sed a faire way, for the setling of the Militia, which now by this long delay, seemes not to be thought sufficient Security: His Majesty (to show how really He will imploy Himselfe at His Comming to West∣minster, for making this a lasting Peace, and taking away all Jealousies, (how groundlesse soever) will endeavour, upon debate with His two Houses, so to dispose of it (as likewise of the Businesse of Ireland) as may give to them and both Kingdomes just satisfa∣ction; Not doubting also, but to give good Con∣tentment to His two Houses of Parliament in the choice of the Lord Admirall, the Officers of State and others, if His  by their ready Incli∣nations to Peace shall  encouragement there∣unto. Thus His Majesty, ng taken occasion by His just Impatience so to explaine His Intentions, that no Man can doubt of a happy Issue to this succeeding Treaty: If now, there shall be so much as a delay of the same, He calls God and the World to witnesse, who they are, that not only hinder, but Reject this
Kingdomes future happinesse, It being so much the stranger, that His Majesties comming to Westminster, (which was first the greatest pretence for taking up Armes) should be so much as delayed, much lesse not accepted or refused; But His Majesty hopes, that God will no longer suffer the malice of Wicked men to hinder the Peace of this too much afflicted Kingdom. Given at the Court at Oxford, the 15th of January, 1645. For the Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore, To be Communicated to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. After this sent, and on its way to Westminster; As  re∣turned His MAjESTIES former Trumpet with an An∣swer to His Messages of the 26th and 29th of December▪  long expected; but it seems 'twill aske time to fra ch an Answer as never had Precedent, (and till now) came ot from Subjects to any King in the World. May it please Your Majesty▪ WE Your  Loall Subjects of both ingdomes,  ectived Your Letters of  the 26 and 29 of December last; unto which mbly returne this Answer. That there hath been no delay on our parts, but what was necessary in a businesse of so great consequence, as is expressed in our former Letter to Your Majesty.
Concerning the Personall Treaty desired by Your Ma∣jesty, There having been so much innocent Bloud of Your good Subjects shed in this Warre, by Your Majesties Com∣mands and Commissions, Irish Rebels brought over into both Kingdomes, and endeavours to bring over more in∣to both of them, as also Forces from Forreign parts; Your Majesty being in Armes in these parts, and the Prince in the head of an Army in the West, divers Townes made Garrisons, and kept in hostility by Your Majesty against the Parliament of England: There being also For Scotland against that Parliament and King∣dome by Your Majesties Commission: The Warre in Ireland fomented and prolonged by Your Majesty, where∣by the three Kingdomes are brought neare to utter ruine and destruction. We conceive, That untill Satisfaction and security be first given to both Your Kingdomes, Your Majesties comming hither cannot be convenient, nor by  assented unto. Neither can we apprehend it a meanes conducing to Peace, That Your Majesty should come to Your Parliament for a few dayes, with any thoughts of leaving it▪ especially with intentions of returning to hostility against it. And are doe observe, That Your Majesty desire  gagement, not only of the Parlia∣ments, but of the Lord  Aldermen, Common-Coun∣cell, and Mili  of London, the chiefe Com∣manders of Sir Thom  his Army, and those of the Scots Army, which  against the Priviles and honour of the Parliaments, those being joyned with them▪ who are subject and subordinate to their authority. That which Your Majesty, against the freedome of the Parliaments inforces in both Your Letters with many earnest expressions, as if in no other way then that pro∣pounded
by Your Majesty, the Peace of Your Kingdomes could be established; Your Majesty may please to remem∣ber, That in our last Letter, we did Declare, That Pro∣positions from both Kingdomes were speedily to be sent to Your Majesty, which We conceive to be the only way for the attaining a happy and well grounded Peace; and Your Majesties Assent unto those Propositions, will be an effe∣ctuall meanes for giving satisfaction, and security to Your Kingdomes: will assure a firme Vnion between the two Kingdoms, as much desired by each for other as for them∣selves; And settle Religion and secure th  the Kingdom of Scotland, whereof neither is so much as mentioned in Your Majesties Letters. And in proceeding according to these just and necessa∣ry grounds for the putting an end to the bleeding Cala∣mities of these Nations, Your Majesty may have the Glo∣ry to be a Principall Instrument in so happy a Worke; and we (however misinterpreted) shall approve our selves to God and the world to be reall and sincere in sking a safe and well grounded Peace. Westminster, 13. Jan. 1645.  the name and  rant of the Com∣  to for the Par∣ment of Scotland. BALMERINOTH. Grey of Warke, Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore▪ William Lenthall, Speaker of the H of Commons. For Your MAjESTY.
This, and no more, is all they Answer'd to His MAjES∣TIES Five Messages, and six weeks Expectation. Such as are not drencht so deep in bloud, as to abhorre all Peace, would chearfully embrace His MAjESTIES Proposition for a Per∣sonall Treaty: 'Tis the very expedient Themselves propos'd in all their Messages, Declarations and Speeches. But now they renounce it, forasmuch as they find His MAjESTY in hostility, and Prince CHARLES in the Head of an Army in the West, (a strange consequence, That because 'tis now Warre, therefore it shall never be Peace;) Though 'tis as notorious who was first in Armes, as who first began to Plunder. What they here intend by demanding of His Majesty Satisfaction for , no modest Christian but trembles to under∣stand. And 'tis as strange, that His Majesty in desiring the joynt Engagement of the City of London for His Security at West∣minster, should violate the Priviledges of Parliament, Re∣member what forc'd His Majesty from White-Hall; those Tumults They pretended received no influence from any Vote of Theirs; And for like assurance from Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army, His Majesty aske no more then Him∣ offer'd to the Earle of Essex in Cornwall, in a Let∣ter sign'd by all the chiefe Officer of His Majesties Army;  sure they'l grant as much at His Majesties command as  Thomas Fairfax's Officers or the Citizens of London can  This is manifest that His Majesty hath  in the World to heale His bleeding  Westminster they'l not grant so much as a  should either Send Peace, or  spend forty dayes in sending two Denyalls. FINIS.
