D2519 11774937 48943
DƲM SPIRO SPERO. An Humble Representation OF THE STATE OF OUR WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES. LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.
1. IT's evident to most Thinking People, That the ut∣most Endeavours are still used by the French King, to obtain that in a Peace, which he could not procure by a WAR, By Supplanting us in our Woollen Manufactures. And if some Extraordinary Care be not taken, he is in a likelier way to succeed, having the chiefest of our Allies as hearty on his side, in carrying on this Design, as they were on ours, in carrying on the War. The Advantages obtained by a French Interest in the be∣ginning of the Reign of King Charles the Second, in in∣vading the Right of the Ancient and long-establisht Com∣pany of Merchant-Adventurers of England, and putting the French Merchant upon an Equal Foot in Trade with the English, by taking off Aliens-Duties, the Ancient Re∣venue of the Crown; being corroborated by a Law made in the beginning of the Reign of His Present Majesty King William, which in the Heat of Friendship, gave away our Merchandize to gratifie our Neighbours, hath prevailed to an alteration of the Guardianship and Care of our Woollen Manufactures for Flanders, Germany, Holland, and the East-Country, in point of Inspection, Merchandize and Navigation; to which Parts Two Thirds of our Woollen Manufactures are Exported. The Good Genius of this Present Time, the beginning of the New Century, tending to a Consideration of this Notable Commodity of ours, the which there is not the like in any Foreign Parts, as is exprest in the Statute of Edward the Sixth of Blessed Memory— I will endea∣vour (to the best of my Judgment) to represent the true
State of our Woollen Manufactures, as they now stand, and the Discouragements they labour under, by which the good or bad effect of this alteration to the Publick, may somewhat appear— And instead of Improvement un∣der this Foreign Guardianship, I find the case of our Wool∣len Manufactures to be much alike to the Man in the Pa∣rable, that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among Thieves, that robb'd him of his raiment, wounded him, and left him half dead, &c. II. It is manifest, That as these Merchant-Aliens increase in England, the Woollen Manufactures increast in a like pro∣portion in Foreign Parts, and the French became considerable Merchants with our Woollen Manufactures, in Spain, Turky and other parts. Good Proof was made before a Committee of Parlia∣ment, by the Inspection of two Frenchmens Books, That the Exportation of our Wooll was carried on by these men— Printed Tickets were given out in Holland to give notice of the Sale of considerable quantities of English Wooll, and reported by some, that the Dutch Men-of-War that came out to fight the French, were assisting in carrying over Fullers-Earth, and returned home not empty-hand∣ed of; a little resemblance, if so, to the Woman in the Fable, that was afflicted with a Dimness in her Sight, and agreed with a famous Occulist that anointed her Eyes with a certain Material that took away her sight wholly, for a time, and then robb'd her of a good piece of Houshold-stuff— This Practice comes up to the Letter of my Si∣mile— To ascertain the loss to our Poor in this parti∣cular, I will here set down a Calculation made by the Ho∣nourable Sir Matthew Hale, of the distinct value of the Wooll, and the Workmanship:
In a Course Medley Cloth, containing 32 Yards long; to the making this Cloth 90 pound of Wooll, 54 of ab, 34 of warp, 2 of mixture, at one Shilling per pound. l. s. d. 4 10   1. Parting and Picking— 00 03 00 2. Colouring— 00 16 00 3. Breaking and Spinning the Ab,— 01 07 09 4. Breaking and Spinning the Warp 00 18 06 5. Cards and Oil— 01 00 00 6. Weaving, Spooling and Warping 01 01 03 7. Milling and Burling— 00 12 00 8. Shearing and Dressing— 00 18 00 9. Drawing— 00 01 06 10. Carriage and Factorage— 00 07 00   11 15 00 Out of which deducting the Materials of Wooll, Cards and Oil,— 05 10 00 There remains for Expence of Workmanship 06 05 00 In our Finest Manufactures a Calculation is thus made, viz. One Pack of our finest Kemb'd Wooll, containing twelve Score, I compute to be worth at this time— l. s. d. 30 00 00 The Spinning of this into the Finest Worsted, cost 5 s. per Pound— 60 00 00 Four Ounces thus spun, will make a pair of Hose worth 5 s. the Knitting— 240 00 00 This Pack so knit, will make 80 dozen of Hose, which pay Custom, 7½ per dozen 02 10 00   302 10 00 The Medium in our Woollen-Manufactures I take to be one Third Wooll, two Thirds Workmanship.
III. Since this alteration of the Merchandize of our Woollen Manufactures, greater quantities have been Ex∣ported White, and not fully manufactured, which has sunk the imployment of many Occupations, and hindred the consumption of many of our Native Materials which are used in Dying, &c. IV. The Reputation of our English Manufactures (which in former time was famous at all Foreign Markets) has been wounded by these Foreign Interlopers— When extraordinary care has been taken in France of late years to improve their own. The Price has been always beat down, and extraordinary Measure required, which has forc'd the Maker upon slight making, and extraordinary straining. Cloth of an ordinary quality has been mark'd by these Foreign Buyers with Marks of our best Makers of Cloth, and sent over as Cloth made by them, and the most fallaci∣ous ways us'd to ruine the Reputation of our Goods, and supplant the English Merchants. Seals, Tillets, Coats of Arms, Numbers, all counterfeited by a foreign Interloper, as was prov'd in Westminster-Hall by Mr. Banks— and hereby an Odium has bin brought upon English Goods, when no con∣sumer of Cloth, either at home or abroad, when he finds himself abus'd and cheated, but does resent the fact. The Hudsons-Bay Company (as is credibly told) sold a parcel of Strained Cloth to the Indians, with whom they Traffick for the Skins of Wild Beasts, and the next time they came, the Indians told them they had sold them thiev∣ing-Cloth, and stole it from them again, and would never permit the like abuse; we read of Christians in the Primi∣tive times in the Skins of wild beasts; lo! wild Beasts here in the Skins of Christians, cheating of Indians. A Bur∣gher-woman at Hamburg bought some of this Strained Cloth to make her Children Garments, which shrunk so abomi∣nably, that her Children appear'd in a New Fashion, and
she brought them for a Sight to the Shop where she bought the Cloth, the Man that sold it, perceiving the matter, broke out into the highest admiration, and blest himself at the miraculous growth of the Children, and hereby took off the edge of the Womans Passion. A Welch Woman bought of a Clothier in Hereford Fair as much Broad-Cloth as would make her a Wastcoat, and it was apply'd to that use, and all well; but after∣wards meeting with some wet, the Wastcoat shrunk so much, that she was forc'd upon an Ingraffment, and which added to her Misfortune, she could not procure any thing near to the Colour. The next Fair, with her Wastcoat on, she met her Chapman, and treated him in Welch very roughly, which being not understood by the Clothier, she began to salute him with Stones; and the Abuse ap∣pearing so visible by the different Colour of the Cloth, all her Neighbours flock'd in to her Assistance, and the Clothier was forc'd upon a Resumption; and he often told me he was glad he came off so well. Were all the shrinking Contracts that has been made with the Govern∣ment since the Revolution, in a just Proportion made good, it would enable His Majesty to pay back part of our Taxes, according to the Example of Queen Elizabeth, who here∣by won the Hearts of her Subjects, that all the Freehold∣ers (in whom is the chiefest Strength of this Kingdom) were turn'd into a Standing-Army, and put up Beacons upon the highest Hills, that one County might give notice to each other, if any Invasion happen'd: And hereby she humbled the proud Spaniard, who was then putting up for Universal Monarch, and furnished the distressed States with her friendly Assistance, part of which Money is said to be owing us at this time, or a Free Right of Traffick at Dort, for English Merchants, in lieu thereof. A Merchant in Amsterdam advanc'd Ten thousand Pounds
to pay our Army in Flanders, by way of Exchange, for England, at Twenty five Shillings six Pence Flemish, for a Pound Sterling in England; which gain'd him Twenty seven Pounds two Shillings ten Pence per Cent. according to the allow'd Par of Exchange, of Thirty five Shillings Flemish for a Pound Sterling in England, and invested this Ten thousand Pounds in England, in Tallies, at Forty five per Cent. which made in Tallies Twenty two thousand two hundrrd twenty two Pounds four Shillings and five Pence. These Tallies being ingrafted into the Bank, pro∣duce now the Annual Revenue (at Ten per Cent. which the Bank affords) of Two thousand two hundred twenty two Pounds four Shillings five Pence per Annum, for Seven thousand two hundred eighty five Pounds sixteen Shillings eight Pence, at first advanc'd. The King, by his Officer at Exon, deliver'd One thou∣sand Pounds in mill'd Money, which pay'd for Serges bought for a Dutch Merchant there, and took Bills for the like Value, payable One Month after Date, to his Officers of Excise in London, by a Dutch Merchant, who with his Money bought Exchequer-Notes at Eight per Cent. profit, and paid his Bills; which made our English Treasure shrink, as did the Welch Woman's Wastcoat. And as this Extraordinary Effluction of our Treasure tends to a Consumption in England, it will certainly make a Pleurisie in Holland; both dangerous Distempers. It was never known in Holland (before our late Wars) that Merchants bred their Sons above their own Imployment, who are now become the Sparks of Christendom; Hats and Coats so daub'd with Gold Lace, that they pass for Dutch Counts, Harpalus a Como Eques ab aure rupe, tho' in their Behaviour a little beneath a true-bred Gentleman: Asto∣nish'd at nothing more in England, than our Leaden-Hall Market, having been chiefly conversant in their Minority with Herring-Barrels. Had the Merchant-Adventurers
been preserved in their Tde, this Inconve∣niency could have never come upon us,  in all likeli∣hood the Exchange had never been brought so low: I am sure there is no President for it; but if so, what had been lost in the Shire had been got in the Hundred. V. During such time that our Woollen-Manufactures were exported by English Merchants, a good Correspon∣dence was held between Merchants and Clothiers; most Cloth bought in Custom; and if any Complaint came from the Pack-house abroad, the Clothier was sure to hear of it from the Merchant; Marks wove into the Cloth, which continued from Father to Son; some Cloth-Marks a good Legacy; and a constant Course of Trade carried on. Sir Matthew Hale well observes, That nothing doth oppress our Poor so much as Stops in Trade; which is now in the Power of these Foreign Buyers to transact as they please. Since a Foreign Factory has been settled in Lon∣don, the Management of the Cloth Trade has fallen into the Hands of Factors; most Foreign Buyers of Cloth be∣ing disabled to buy of the Clothiers in the City of Lon∣don: And these Buyers of Cloth serving Shop-keepers abroad with small Parcels, as they send their Patterns, a Quantity of Cloth is always left at Market, at the Ma∣ker's Charge, and the Clothier a Stranger to whom his Cloth is sold; no Certainty in the Marks of Cloth, which for∣merly denoted the true sorts; the same Man's Cloth in one Factor's hand a Stark-Mark, and in another some other Figure in Silk; Quantities of Cloth sent into Packers Hou∣ses from the Publick Market, in the present Course of Trade, and returned into the Market again; which occa∣sions a great Expence to the Clothier. These Factors, to procure a clandestine Profit to themselves, have given great Incouragement to Wool-Broggers, who are now be∣come very numerous, and a great Oppression to the Clothing-Trade;
and hereby our Woollen Manufactures are load∣ed with an unnecessary Charge. These Factors, to pro∣mote their own Interest, have brought on a long Credit in the Sale of Cloth, which hath been freely given by them to French Merchants and others; and hereby many Foreigners have wound themselves into the Trading Stock of this Kingdom, and then took Sanctuary in some Privi∣leged Places in this Kingdom, or withdrawn themselves into Foreign Parts; by which means the Trading Stock of this Kingdom is almost destroy'd, and looks like a Con∣trivance of State. Above Two hundred thousand Pounds of the Clothing Stock have been lost by Foreigners in few Years. Twenty thousand Pounds was stopp'd in Trade by one Interloper that served Dutch Merchants the last Year; Twenty thou∣sand Pounds more is stopp'd this Year by a French Mer∣chant. Should an English Man in France cheat the King of France's Subjects of Twenty thousand Pounds, it would soon be taken notice of by the Government, and such Abuses redress'd. This Credit is extremely prejudicial in several other Respects to the Cloathing Trade. VI. The next Inconveniency that our Woollen Manufa∣ctures labours under, is the high Duties upon Oil, Soap, and Dye-stuff, which said Commodities are observed to be much dearer in England, since the Imposition of those Duties, the free Importation being hereby hindred, and doth make a considerable Odds in the Value of our Manufa∣ctures and those made in France and Holland. Logwood pays Five Pounds per Tonn Custom, and draws back, up∣on Exportation, Four Pounds. Copperas and Allum, Com∣modities peculiar to England, are delivered cheaper to the French and Dutch than to our own Manufacturers; which Commodities would bear a Duty upon Exportation. Al∣lum sold at Fourteen Pounds per Tonn, for Exportation,
at Fifteen Pounds Ten Shillings per Tonn to several Dyers London, and at Twenty Pounds per Tonn to the Clothi∣ers, and to have but one Seller of Allum, which is the present Case, savours very much of Monopoly. Rape-Oil is at this time advanc'd to double the usual Price, by the Ingrossing of Rape-Seed, when to every Six Pound of We I one Pound of Oil is required to the working. Madder, the Growth of Holland, is rendred to us at three times the usual Price: Which looks as a Conspiracy to sup∣plant our Clothing Trade. VII. The Scarcity of Money, occasion'd by our vast Ex∣portation to the East-Indies, doth very much discourage our Clothing-Trade. Above Five hundred thousand Pounds in Treasure have been exported in less than twelve Months time, as appears by their Entries; and as large a Summ suppos'd to be taken in at Cales; Silver worth Five Shillings eight Pence per Ounce. This being brought home chiefly in Muslins and Calico's, it hinders the Consumption of the Flaxen Linens of Flanders, Ger∣many, and Holland; which hath lessen'd the Consumption of above Twenty thousand Cloths per Annum in those Parts, and the Wear of considerable of our Norwich Stuffs at home, and forc'd the Linen Looms in those Parts upon Woollen, to our further Prejudice. The Spanish Netherlands finding that the Consumption of their Linens were so much lessen'd in England, were thereby induc'd, in their own Defence, to prohibit our Woollen Manufactures; and hereby the whole Trade of Christendom is rendred unasie. The Case of Thousands of Manufacturers in England, by this Foreign Management, is exactly the same with this Man that went down from Jerusalem to Jerico, and fell among Thieves that robb'd him of his Raiment, wounded him, and left him half dead, (I wish I had no
Occasion to add farther, quite starved,) and by chance there came down a certain Priest that way, and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side: (Doubtless of the Ro∣mish Persuasion, who possibly, as some Men do now, might very much exclaim in his Thoughts against the vil∣lainous Practices of those Robbers who had thus barba∣rously abus'd this poor Man; but was so far from lending a hand to his Assistance, that the Text tells us, he went on the other side.) And likewise a Levite, when he was at the Place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side: (One, in great probability, that might come from Geneva, who seemingly took a little more Consideration of the Matter, he came and looked on him, and then passed by on the other side, and to satisfie himself, in not relieving of him, after he had, as it were, made a Judgment of his Circumstances, in all likelihood he might attribute his Misfortunes to his own Idleness or Intemperance that brought him to this helpless Condition, and wish that bet∣ter Care was taken in England to provide Work-Houses and Houses of Correction for such idle People, after the Example of Holland, &c.) But a certain Samaritane, as he journied, came where he was, and when he saw him, he had Compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own Beast, &c. True Friend this! The Circumstances of our Woollen Manufactures, and the Man that fell among Thieves, being so much alike, it makes a little Resemblance between this Priest and Levite, and our Commissioners of Trade; but I correct my self, for it no way appears that these Men were under any other Obligation to his Relief, than common Kindness and good Neighbourhood. Our Woollen Manufactures are perfectly unfortunate in the Age we live in; the Aulnage, which was design'd by
our Ancestors to secure her Reputation, is now turn'd in∣to the greatest Oppression; a formal Court kept up by Commissioners, Officers sent out to lay a formal Arrest up∣on Goods, if the Nib of the Seal be not well stamp'd, and Judgment given amongst themselves: Of a little Re∣semblance to Aesop's Court, where the Wolf sate Judge, and summon'd the Lamb to appear. I hope this will fall under Consideration with the rest of the Grants, being carried on in England according to an Irish Understanding. Trade being at a low ebb in England, and a great Scar∣city of Money, during the Reign of Richard II. Henry IV. Henry V. and Henry VI. as appears by strict Laws made in those Reigns to force Merchant-Aliens to imploy their Money which they receiv'd for their Foreign Commodities upon the native Commodities of this Realm. In the 3d. and 4th. Year of Henry IV. the Woollen Manufactures of this King∣dom came under the Consideration of this good Samari∣tane, and effectual Means were us'd for its Incouragement and Preservation, which soon encreas'd our Trea∣sure. Anno Tertio Edw. IV. Cap. 1 A Law was first made to incourage our English Navigation, and in that Law a Clause was added to prevent any Deceit which should be wound up in Wool, upon a Forfeiture of 6 d. a Fleece, in which any Deceit should be found. In the next place, a Law was made to prevent the Importation of wrought Silks: And then another Law was made Cap. 3 to prevent the Importation of Woollen Cloths, Woollen Caps, Silk, in any wise imbroider'd, and many other Com∣modities express'd in the said Law, Cap. 4 which were prejudicial to the Artificers of sundry manual Oc∣cupations. To incourage the Wear of our Woollen Manufactures, a sumptuary Law was Cap. 5 next made: And the next Year a Law was made for the true making of our Woollen Manu∣factures,
expressing in the Preamble the Inconveniencies which had ensued to the Realm by the deceitful making of Cloth; and good Care was taken in this Law, Anno Quarto Edw. IV. Cap. 1 that Work-People should do their Part faithfully; that the Master should deliver just Weight, and pay them for their Labour in Money, and not Commodities. A Law was next made, Cap. 4 That no Person, during Three Years, should buy or take any Promise of Bar∣gain for any Wool then not shorn, of the Growth of Berks, &c amounting to twenty eight Counties, before the same be shorn, and until Bartholomew's Day following, but they which shall make Cloth or Yarn of them, upon pain of Forfeiture of double the Value thereof. And the Duke of Burgundy having at this time prohibited our Woollen Manufactures in Flanders, Cap. 5 a Law was made to prohibite all Merchandise of the Growth and Work∣manship of the said Duke's Dominions, until he revoke his Proclamation, prohibiting our Manufactures. The Charter of the Merchant-Adventurers of England was con∣firmed by this King; and at this time he call'd in question the Charter of the Merchants of the Stilliard, who had obtain'd Pri∣vileges in England, for some extraordinary Services done, in as∣sisting Henry III. in his Wars abroad, and they were permitted to Trade under these Terms, viz. To pay Aliens Duties, and to colour no Strangers Goods. Upon this just Foundation Trade was carried on until the End of the Reign of Henry VII. strengthened only with this farther Addition in the last-recited Reign, Anno Primo Hen. VII. Cap. 5 That no Person that was not a natural born Subject of Eng∣land, should be excused the Payment of Aliens Duties, if naturaliz'd by Act of Parliament. During this time, the Affairs of England were in a flourishing Condition, a plentiful Imployment to the Poor; which was one great Occasion of the Reconciliation of the Houses of York and Lancaster. During such time that there is full Imployment for the Poor, the Designs of Great Persons are no way to be execu∣ted; which is a Matter of Moment to be consider'd at this time: And the Stop of the Exportation of our Wool will thoroughly effect the Matter. The good Effect of this Settlement of Trade fully appear'd at the Death of this King, who left in the Trea∣sury One million eight hundred thousand Pounds, which made above Three Millions of our Money.
In the last Year of this King's Reign there was a Change of Affairs, and the Merchants of the Stilliard obtain'd footing again, as appears by two Laws then made in their Favour. The two last Laws, except one that pass'd in this Reign. Calice was at this time the grand Mart of English Goods, Anno De∣cimo Nono Hen. VII. Cap. 22 and there was a Law made in favour of the English Merchants, prohibiting the Men of Calice to be Factors for Merchant-Stran∣gers living in England: Which Law was at this time repeal'd, and all Laws made in Derogation of the Mer∣chants of the Stilliard were repeal'd. In the beginning of the Reign of Henry VIII. Cap. 23 they got leave to Custom one Man's Goods in the Name of another, and indeed were fa∣vour'd this whole Reign; Aliens Duties were taken off by the King's Proclamation, which produc'd the like Effect that we feel at this time. Anno 32. Hen. VIII. Cap. 15 They got the whole Trade into their hands, and it was with great difficulty recover'd in the Year 1552, the Fifth and Sixth Years of Edw. VI. in whose Journals it thus appears, That the Merchants of the Stil∣liard shipp'd off Forty thousand Cloaths, and our English Merchants not Four thousand, and all was exported and imported in Foreign Bottoms. The English Merchants being at this low ebb, put in their Complaint to the King and Council against these Merchants of the Stilliard or Tutonicorum: And they gave in their Answer to the said Complaint upon the 18th. Day of January; and upon the 25th. their Answer was deliver'd to some Learned Council to pe∣ruse it. Upon the 18th. Day of February the Merchant-Adventu∣rers put in their Replication to the said Answer; and upon the 23d. a Decree was made by the Board, That upon Knowledge and Information of their Charters, they had found, first, That they were no sufficient Corporation; secondly, That their Names, Numbers, and Nations were unknown; thirdly, When Edw. IV. did restore them to their Privileges, it was upon the Condition they should co∣ver no Foreigners Goods, which they had done: For these Consi∣derations, Sentence was given, That they had forfeited their Li∣berties, and were to be no more than Strangers. Upon the 28th. Day came Embassadors from Hamburgh, Lubeck, and the Regent of Flanders, to speak upon the Behalf of these Merchants of the Stil∣liard; and upon the 2d. of March the Answer was committed to the Lord Chancellor, the two Secretaries, Sir Robert Bows, and Sir John Baker, Judge Mountague Griffith; Sollicitors, Gosnald, Goodrick, and Brooks. It remained under Consideration until the
1st. Day of May, and then the Merchants of the Stilliard receiv'd their full Answer, confirming the former Judgment of the Council. This gave Incouragement to a great many English Merchants to come into this Company; and in October 3. following, they shipp'd off Forty thousand Cloaths. At this time our Woollen Manufa∣ctures came again under the Consideration of the good Samaritane, being miserably debas'd by these Merchants of the Stilliard, as ap∣pears by the Preamble of the Statute, Anno 5. & 6. Edw. VI. cap. 6 and several di∣screet and sage Knights and Burghesses undertook the Matter, by consulting divers honest Clothiers, Woollen-Drapers, &c. a Law was made with great Caution to suppress Wool-broggers, who were got to a great heighth. And upon this Foundation Trade was carried on the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and never wholly thrown open until the Year 1663. What is here asserted is Matter of Fact, and I appeal to the nicest Historian, whether the Affairs of England were not in a much more flourishing Condition, from Edward IV. to the End of Henry VII. and from Edward VI. to the End of Queen Elizabeth, than it hath been during such time that Trade was laid open to Merchant-Aliens. Never was greater Marks of Kindness shewn by any Prince than ours, by repeated Recommendations of the Care of Trade; nay, at last in Words at length, by a Bill to incourage the fair Merchant, our Manufactures, and discourage clandestine Trading: And the Hardships which have been under∣gone by our Poor, through the Neglect thereof, had never been born but from the entire Satisfaction and Confidence in His Maje∣sty's Favour. England is said to be a mighty Animal that will never die, unless it destroy it self. No Age can produce more unnatural Instances than ours, nor was ever the true Interest of England, in point of Trade, more in danger of being supplanted by her own Sons. And thus I leave our Woollen Manufactures, Queen Elizabeth's Mines, and the Indies of England, to Conside∣ration under the unfortunate Circumstances of poor Belisarus,Date obo∣lum Beli∣sario, quem invidia, non culpa caecavit. and with the like Inscription as he had wrote upon his Breast, Dum Spiro Spero.
