D2920A 26866721 109836
A GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY. In which are Described the most Eminent COƲNTREYS, TOWNS, PORTS, SEAS, STREIGHTS, and RIVERS in the whole World. Very Ʋseful for the Ʋnderstanding of all Modern Histories. LONDON, Printed by J. C. and are to be sold by Henry Brome at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1662.
THE STATIONER To the READER. COurteous Reader, I here pre∣sent you with a small Copy of the World drawn by an English pencil from the Original of the fa∣mous Monsieur Du Vall, Geogra∣pher to the French King. Though it seem too small a Volume to per∣form
the promise the Title Page makes you, yet upon perusal you will find it satisfyed, and that seem∣ing defect amply repaired by the con∣venience (a greater bulk would not afford you) to make it your constant Companion, without abating you the knowledge of any place conside∣rable, either for Praerogative, Hi∣storical observation, or Commerce, to which end it was only designed; Peruse it, and enjoy the benefit. Farewel. H. B.
TYPUS OR∣BIS TERR∣ARUM A MAPP of the WORLD P. Stt excudit
A GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY: In which are Described The most eminent Countries, Towns, Ports, Seas, Straights, and Rivers in the whole World. Very useful for the understanding of all Modern Histories. A ABbeville the chief Town of the County of Ponthieu in Pi∣cardy. Aberdene, a Town, and Sea Port in the Northern Part of Scotland, famous for a University, and the fishing of Perles and Salmons. Aberfraw, a Town in the Isle of Anglesey, formerly the Residence of the Kings of North-Wales. Abernethy, a Town in Scotland on this side
the Taye, anciently the seat of the Kings of the Picts. Abex, a Coast in Abissinia upon the Red Sea. Abissinia or Abassinia, the greatest King∣dom in all Africa. Abe, a Town in Finland. Abruzzo, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples. Abapulco, a Sea Port in new Spain, where they usually embarque for Peru, and the Phil∣lipine Islands. Accadie, a Peninsula in New France. Aere or Ptolemais, a Town and Sea Port in Phenicia, formerly the Residence of the Knights of Malta. Aden, a Town of great Traffique in Arabia giving name to a Kingdom, of which the Turk having hang'd up the King has posses∣sed himself. Adour, a River in Gascoigne in France, run∣ning to Bayon. Adria, a Town in the Venetian Signiory, which first gave the name to the Adriatick Sea. Africa, one of the four parts of the world, lyes Southerly from England. Agde, a City and Bishoprick in Languedoc in France, lately made a Port. Agen, a City and Bishoprick in Guienne in France neer the River Garomne.
Agra, a City in the Continent of India, the Residence of the great Mogol. Agram, a City in Sclavonia, properly be∣longing to the house of Austria. Agria or Eger, a very strong Town in Hungary under the subjection of the Turk. Aiazzo, a Town and Port in the Isle of Corsica. Aiehstet, a City and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire, situate in the upper Palatinate. Ainaon, an Island upon the Coast of China, famous for the abundance of Pearls found there. Aigues Mortes, a Town in the lower Lan∣guedoc, neer the mouth of the River Rhone. Ainza, a Town in Arragon. Aire, a very strong Town in Artois. Aire, a City and Bishoprick in Gascony. Aix, in Provence in France, a City and Arch-bishoprick, and Seat of a Parliament. Aix, an Imperial City lying neer the low Countries. Albe, a Town in Montferrat, belonging to the Duke of Savoy. Albano, formerly Alba Longa, a Town in Italy twelve miles distant from Rome. Alba Regalis, a City of Hungary, where the Kings formerly were Crowned. Alberg, a City and Bishoprick in Jut∣land.
Albret, a Country and Dutchy in Gascony. Albreton, a Town and Port in Barbary. Alby, a City in Languedoc, the richest Bi∣shoprick in all France. Alcali de Henares, a Town and University in the new Castile. Alcantara, a City of Castile. Alemaer, a Town in the Northern part of Holland. Almaigne, see Germany. Alenson, a City and Dutchy in Normandy. Aleppo, a Town of great Traffique in Asia, where the Garravannes arrive, and the Ren∣dezvous of the Turkish Armies, in their wars against Persia. Aletz, a City and Bishoprick in Languedoc. Alexandretta or Scandero, a Sea Port at the bottom of the Streights. Alexandria, a City of Egypt, seated on the Mediterranean Sea, a Patriarchal seat, having two Ports, and famous for the Pharos there built, one of the seven wonders of the World. Alexandria, a City in the Dutchy of Milan. Algabria, a Province in the South of Por∣tugal. Algiers, a City and Republique in Africa, upon the confines of Barbary, famous for Py∣racies, and the defeat of the Emperour Charls the Fifth's Fleete.
Alicante, a Town and Port in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain. Alize, a place in the Dutchy of Burgundy, now ruinous, formerly famous for the siege it endured against Julius Caesar. Allier, a River in France, it runs to Mou∣lins. Almeria, a Town and Port in Granada. Alps, Mountains which divide France and Italy. Alost, a Town in Flanders. Alsatia, a Province of Germany. Altembourg, a Town and Dutchy of the Empire in Misnia. Amalfi, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples, where was first found out the use of the compass. Almara, a Town seated on a Mountain in Abissinia, where are kept the Princes of the blood Royal. Amasia, a Town in Anatolia. Amberg, the chief Town of the upper Pa∣latinate. Amboina, an Island in the Indian sea, upon the North from the Molluccos. Ambois, a Town and Castle in Tourane in France, seated on the banks of the River Loir. America, one of the four pants of the world, otherwise call'd the West-Indies.
Amiens, a City and Bishoprick, and chief Town of Picardy, one of the most considera∣ble in France, beautified with a very strong Citadel, built there by Henry the IV. after he had taken the Town from the Spani∣ards in the year 1596. Ammon, a Town of Bile Dulgend, formerly famous for the Temples and Oracles of Ju∣piter. Amsterdam, the chief Town of Holland, a place of the greatest traffique in Europe. Ana, a Town in Arabia deserta, upon the River Euphrates. Anatolia, a province in Asia, under the subjection of the Turk. Anclam, one of the Hans Towns in Pome∣rania. Ancona, a Town and Port upon the Adri∣atick sea, or Gulfe of Venice, under the sub∣jection of the Pope. Andaluzia, a province in Spain. Andernac, a Town under the Archbishop of Colen. Adrianople, a City in Romania, the seat of the Turkish Emperours before Constan∣tinople. Angiers, the chief Town (and a Bishoprick) of the province of Anjou in France. Anglesey, an Island upon the Coast of Wales.
Angola, a Kingdom in Africa, upon the South of the Kingdom of Conge. Angoulesme, a City, Bishoprick, and Dutchy, the chief Town of the Province of Angoul∣mois. Angoulmois, a Province in France. Angra, the chief of the Tercera Islands. Anian, a streight between America and Asia, takes it name from a Country of new Mexico. Anjou, a Province in France. Annecy, a Town of Savoy, formerly the chief of the Country of Geneva, and residence of the Bishop of Geneva. Antibes, a Town and Port in Provence. Antioche, a Patriarchy in Asia. Antivary, a City in Dalmatia, under the subjection of the Turk. Antwerp, a City in Brabant, under the King of Spain, a place of great traffique, and strengthened with one of the Noblest Cita∣dels of Europe. Aoust, a City and Dutchy in Piedmont. Appenines, Mountains which passe from the East to the West of Italy dividing it. Appenzel, a Town and chief of one of the Cantons of Switzerland. Apt, a City and Bishoprick in Provence. Apulia, a Province in the Kingdom of Na∣ples.
Aqui, a Town in Moutferrat, where there are hot Baths. Aquila, a Town in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy. Aquilea, a Town in Friuli, under the Venetians, ruinated by Artila King of the Huns, after a three years siege. It was for∣merly the seat of a Patriarch, whose residence is now at Ʋdino. Arabia, a country in Asia; there are three countries of them distinguished by the Epi∣thetes of Petrea, the Stony; Deserta, the De∣sart; and Foelix, the Happy. Arauques, a people of Chili, the most war∣lick of all the Americans. Archipelago, formerly the Aegean sea, be∣tween Europe and Asia. Arbois, a Town in the Franche county, fa∣mous for the good Wines it yields. Ardennes, a Forrest in Luxembourg upon the Frontiers of France. Ardres, a very strong Town in Picardy. Aremberg, a county of the Empire, bor∣dering upon the States of Juliers and Colen. Arguin, a small Island and a Fort upon the Coast of Nigritia, belonging to the Hollanders. Arhusen, a Town, Port, and Diocess in Jutland. Ariea, a Port in Peru, where they ship the
Silver brought from Petosi. Arles, a City and Arch-bishoprick in Provence, upon the Rhone, one of the Anci∣entest Towns of France. Armagh, a Town and Arch-Bishoprick in Ʋlster in Ireland, whose Archbishop is Pri∣mate of all Ireland. Armagnae, a County in Gascoyne. Arnehim, a Town in Guelderland. Arona, a Town in the Dutchy of Milan. Arques, a small Town in Normandy, Fa∣mous for the Victory obtained there by Hen∣ry the Fourth, in the year 1589. Arquico, or Erroco, a Town upon the con∣fines of Abex, belonging to the Turk. Arragon, formerly a Kingdom, now a Pro∣vince in Spain. Arras, the chief Town of Artois. Artois, a Country between France and Flanders, shared by the Kings of France and Spain. Aschaffenbourg, a Town in Franconia, the Residence of the Elector of Mentz. Asia, one of the four Parts of the World Assisi, a Town in Italy, in the Patrimony of the Church in Ʋmbria. L'Assumption, a Town in the Country of Plata in America. Ast, a Town and Country lying between Piedmont, and Montferrat.
Astorga, a Town, and Bishoprick in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain. Astracan, a Town, and Kingdom, in the greater Tartary, near the mouth of the Ri∣ver Volga, belonging to the Great Duke of Muscovy. Asturia, Anciently a Kingdom, now a Pro∣vince in Spain. Athenes, now Setines, a ruined Town in Greece, anciently the Head of a Noble Com∣monwealth. Atlantick, Sea, Part of the Western O∣cean. Atlas, or Claros, a Mountain in Africa, to∣wards the South of Barbary, one of the high∣est in the World. Athlone, a Town in the Province of Con∣naught in Ireland. Auche, the Metropolitane Town of Gas∣cony, whose Archbishoprick is esteemed to be the richest in France. Avein, a Town in Luxembourg. Avesnes, a Town in Hainault. Auge, a Country in Normandy. Avigliano, a small Town in Piedmont. Avignon, a City and Archbishoprick, and chief of the County of Venaissin, upon the Rhone, between Provence and the Principality of Aurange, belonging to the Pope. Avii, a Town in Portugall.
Aulnis, a Country in Xaingtonge, of which Rochelle is the chief Town. Auranches, a Town, and Bishoprick in Nor∣mandy. Auray, a Town and Port in Britany. Aurick, a Town in Friseland, Residence of the Counts of Embden. Ausbourg, a Town in Swabeland. Aussone, a Town in Burgundy, upon the River Saone. Austria, a Country in Germany, the only Arch-Duchy in Europe. Autun, a very Ancient City and Bishoprick in Burgundy. Auvergne, a Province in France. Auxerre, a City and Bishoprick in Bur∣gundy. Auxois, a small Country in Burgundy. Axel, a Town in Flanders, whose surpri∣sall was the first Exploit of Count Maurice of Nassau, Captain General of the united Pro∣vinces Azac, or Azoff, a Town seated in the Marishes made by the Lakes called Meotides, between Europe and Asia. Azin Court, a small town in Artois, where in the year, 1415. the French Army consist∣ing of 80 thousand, and commanded by the Connestable D'Albret, were defeated by King Henry the Fifth of England.
B Babelmandel, an Island, in the Streights, at the entry of the Red Sea. Bache Serrail, a Town in the lesser Tar∣tary. Badoiox, a Town in Castillia Nova, upon the confines of Portugal. Bade, a Town in Switzerland, where the Assembly of the Cantons is held. Baden, a City and Marquisate in Alsatia, subject to the Emperour. Bagded, a Town upon the River Tygris in Asia, a place of great Traffick, by reason of the passage from Turky to Persia, a little dayes journey from the Ancient Babylon. Bagalouq, a Town upon the Frontiere of Bosnia and Dalmatia, under the Dominion of the Turks. Bahama, an Island, and the most Rapid Channel in all America, being Eastwards from Florida, thorow which the Spanish Fleets pass to the Havana. Bahrem, an Island in the Gulfe of Persia. Baieux, a City and Bishoprick in Nor∣mandy. Baione, a City and Bishoprick in Gascony, upon the borders of Biscaye. Balaguier, a town in Catalonia.
Balbastro, a City and Bishoprick in Ar∣ragon. Balsora, a town in Turcomania, in Asia, near the mouth of the River Tigris. Baltick Sea lies between Germany, Den∣mark, Sweden, and Poland. Bamberg, a City, and Bishoprick of the Empire. Bangor, a City and Bishoprick in Wales; famous for the Abbey Anciently founded there, in which twelve hundred Monks lived upon their own Labour. Bantam, a town in the Isle of Java, the General Mart of almost all the East Indies. Bapaume, a Town seated upon Rising in Artois, very hard to be besieged, by reason of the scarcity of Water in those parts. Barca, a town in the Eastern part of Bar∣bary. Barca, a desart in the Eastern part of Bile∣dulgend. Barcelona, a City and Bishoprick in Cata∣lonia, the chiefest town of that Province, ve∣ry rich, Populous, and of great traffick, being seated upon the sea. Barcelonete, a City and Principality in Piedmont. Barbary, a country in Africa, lying up∣on the Mediterranean Sea. Bar upon Aube, a town in Champaigne in France.
Bar, upon the Seine, a town in Burgundy. Bari, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples, where the Kings of the two Sicilyes were anciently crowned. Bar le Duc, the chief town of Artois. Barletta, a City, and Archbishoprick, and Fortress in Apulia, in the Kingdom of Na∣ples. Barrois, a Country lying between Lor∣raine, and Campaigne. Barnagesso, a Kingdom in Abissinia, which payes annually to the Turk a thousand ounces of Gold. Barwick, a very strong Town in England, upon the Frontiere of Scotland. Basil, a City, giving name to a Canton of the Switzers, seated upon the River Rhine, one of the fairest of all that country. Biscaye, a country bordering upon Gas∣cony. Bass, a small Island not far from Eden∣burgh, famous for the great quantity of Geese that frequent it at certain seasons. Bassigny, a country in Campaigne. Bastia, the chief town of Corsica, where the Governour resides. Bastic, a small Town upon the coast of Epirus, where they usually imbargue for Con∣stantinople. Batavia or Jacatra, a Town in the Isle of
Java, belonging to the Hollanders. Baudissen, a Town in Lusatia, the Resi∣dence of the Governour. Bauge, a small Town in Anjou in France, where Charles the Eighth, then Dolphin, ob∣tained a signal Victory over the English, then commanded by the Duke of Clarence, who was there slain, in the year 1420. Bavaria, a country, and Duchy in Ger∣many. Bazas, a City and Bishoprick in Guienne in France. Bearne, a province of France upon the borders of Navarre, also a Canton of Swit∣zerland joyning to Geneva. Bearford, a small town in Groenland. Beaucaire, a Town in Languedoc, upon the banks of the Rhone. Beausse, a Province in France, of which Orleans is the chief Town. Beaufort, a Town in Anjou in France, but that that gives a Title to the Ducthy is in Champaigne. Beaujolois, a small country, comprised un∣der the Lyonnois a province in France. Beaumaris, a Town in the Isle of Angle∣sey. Beaune, a Town in Burgundy, famous for the excellent Wines it yields. Beauvais, a City, Bishoprick, and Peerdom
of France, within the Government of the Isle of France. Beja, a Town in Portugal. Belac, a Town in Marche, a smal Province comprised under that of Poictou in France. Belgrade, the chief City of Servia seated upon the Danube. Bellegarde, a strong Town in Burgundy, up∣on the River Saone. Belley, a City, and Bishoprick in Bressia, near the Franch county. Bellinzone, a small Province in Switzer∣land, under the protection and jurisdiction of the three principal Cantons. Belle-Isle, an Island upon the coast of Britany in France. Benavarri, a Town in Arragon in Spain. Benevent, a City, Archbishoprick, and Dutchy in the Kingdom of Naples, under the subjection of the Pope. Bengala, a Kingdom and Gulfe in the East Indies. Benin, a Town and Kingdome in Guine. Benthem, a City and County under the Dominion of the Emperour in Westphalia. Bergamo, a City not far from the Alps, under the Dominion of the State of Ve∣nice. Bergerac, a Town in Perigort in France. Bergen, a Town in Norway.
Bergen op zon, a strong town in Brabant, subject to the States of Holland. Berlin, the chief city of Brandenburg, and Residence of the Elector. Berndes, an Island towards the East of Virginia, subject to the King of England. Berne, a protestant city and Canton of the Switzers, bordering upon the Lake of Geneva, the most powerful of them all; also a country in the Kingdom of Navarre. Berri, a Province in France. Bertogade, an Imperial Town in Bava∣ria. Bervalde, a town in Brandenbourge, where the Treaty was between the French and Swedes, in the year 1631. Besancon, an Imperial city, and Archbi∣shoprick in the Franch county. Besarabie, a country which makes up part of Moldavia; subject to the Turk. Bethune, a town in Artois. Beziers, a city and Bishoprick in Langue∣doc in France. Bidache, a small Soveraignty, in the lower Navarre. Bielsk, the chief town of Polaquia. Bienne, or Biel, a town in Switzerland leagued with the cantons. Bigorre, a town in Gascony. Bilbao, the chief town of Biscaye, famous
for the Excellency of its corn, beyond all the rest of Spain. Biledulgerid, or Numidia, a country in Africa. Biledulgerid, a particular Town of that country. Biminis, a small Island Eastward of Flo∣rida. Biolizero, a Fortress seated in a Lake in Muscovy, where the Great Duke keeps his Treasures. Bir, a Town upon the River Euphrates, the usual place of Imbarguing for Bagdet. Biscaye, a Province of Spain. New Biscaye, a Province of new Spain. Bitche, a County in Lorraine, upon the Frontiers of Germany. Black sea, anciently the Euxine sea, lyes be∣tween Asia and Europe above Constantinople. Blaye, a Town and Fortresse upon the Ri∣ver Garomne in Guienne. Bletterans, a Town in the Franche county. Bloys, a town and county with a Royal castle seated upon the Loire. Bohemia, a Kingdom near Germany, now possessed by the Emperour. Bois belle or Enrichmont, a small soveraign∣ty in Berry in France. Bologne, Sur Mer, or upon the sea, a Ci∣ty and Bishoprick in Picardy in France.
Bolognia la grassa, so called by reason of the fatness of the soyl, a City, Archbishoprick and famous ancient University in Italy, the second town in the Popes Dominions. Bommel, an Island beautifyed with a fair town, in the Dutchy of Guelderland. Boni, a Town upon the Loyr, between Ne∣verrs and Orleans, and ancient residence of the Knights of St. Lazarus, an order now a∣bolish'd in France, and incorporated with that of St. Maurice in Savoy. Bonificaio, a Town and Port in the Isle of Corsica. Bonne, a Town upon the River of Rhine, alittle above Colen, the Residence of that Elector. Borcholme, a Fortresse in the Isle of Oeland near Gotia. Boriquen, one of the greatest Islands upon the coast of America. Boristhenes, a River in Scythia. Bormio, a town and county in Switzerland, belonging to the Grisons. Borneo, an Island in Asia, with a town of the same name. Bosledue, a strong town in Brabant, subject to the States of Holland. Bosnia, a Province of Europe, under the subjection of the Turk, it was anciently a Kingdom.
Bothnia, a Province in Swedeland. Bovines, a town in the county of Namur, made famous by the bloody field which Phi∣lip, sirnamed August, King of France, won of Ferdinand, Earle of Flanders, who was there taken prisoner. Bourbon L' ancy, a town in Burgundy. Bourbon L' Archam bault, a city in the Pro∣vince of Bourbon in France, famous for the Baths, and the title which the Royal house of France thence assume. Bourbonnois, the name of that Province in France. Bourdeaux, a city and Archbishoprick, the chief town of Guienne, and seat of a Parlia∣ment, famous for the great traffique there used for Wines. Bourg in Bressia, the chief Town of that province. Bourg Sur Mer, or upon the sea, a town of Guienne, built upon the banks of the River Dordogne. Bourges, a city and Archbishoprick, the chief town of Berry, and seated in the very center of France. Bourgogne or Burgundy, a Province of France. Bozolo, a principality belonging to the Duke of Mantoua. Brabant, a Dutchy, and one of the 17. pro∣vinces of the Netherlands.
Bracciano, a city and Dutchy within the Popes Dominions, of whom it is now held by the Antient family of Ursini in Italy. Braga, a city in Portugal, whose Archbi∣shop pretends to the primacy of all Spain. Braganza, a city and Dutchy in Portugal, the title of King John the fourth, before he was proclaimed King. Brandenbourgh, a county, city, and Electo∣rate in Germany. Breda, a city and barony belonging to the prince of Orange, seated in Brabant. Bregens, a town and county in Tirol. Bremen, one of the Hans towns in the lower Saxony, the Archbishoprick of Bremen was raised to a Dutchy, and by the peace con∣cluded at Munster in the year 1648. given up to the crown of Sweden. Bremgarten, a Baylywick in Switzerlnnd, and belongs to the eight antientest Can∣tons. Bresil, a country of a vast extent, in the Eastern parts of the Southern America, and possessed by the Portugals and Hollanders. Breslaw, the chief town of Silesia, and one of the fairest of all Germany. Bressia, a town lying under the Alps, be∣longing to the State of Venice. Bressia, a province of France between Lyons and Geneva.
Brest, a town and famous port in the ex∣tremest Westerne part of the lower Britany. Britain, Great Britain, the greatest Island of Europe, comprising England and Scotland; also a province of France, divided into the higher and lower Britany. Brian con, a Town in Dauphine in France, conceived to be one of the highest in the World. Briare, a town upon the Loyre within the Dutchy of Orleans, where the channel is cut for the communication of the Loyr and the River Seine. Brie, a country in Champaigne in France. Briege, a town in Silesia. Bregnol, a town in Provence, whence come our best prunellaes. Brilinton, a small town in York shire where the Queen landing at her return from Holland was barbarously treated by four of the par∣liaments ships, who for a long space played with their canon on the town, especially on that house in which her Majesty was shelterd, Brille, a famous town and port in Hol∣land. Brindisi, formerly Brundusium, a city, Archbishoprick, and famous port within the Kingdom of Naples. Brinne, a town in Moravia. Brisack, a city in Brisgau a country of Al∣satia,
and one of the strongest of all Germa∣ny; it was yielded up by the house of Austria to the crown of France, in the year 1648. Brisack, a town and Dutchy in Anjou in France. Bristol, a city of great traffique, situate both in Somersetshire and Glostershire, but is a free county of it self, not far from the bor∣ders of Southwales. Brives, a town in Limosin a province of France. Brixen, a city and bishoprick in the coun∣ty of Tirol, under the Emperour of Germany. Brouage, one of the fairest and strongest forts in France, in Xaintonge not far from Bourde∣aux. Bruges, a city in Flanders, the fairest and best built of any in that province, famous also for the beauty of its female Inhabitants. Brunswick, a town in Germany, one of the four principle Hans towns, also a country and Dutchy in Germany. Bruxelles, a city in Brabant, the Residence of the prince or Governour of the Low Countries under the King of Spain. Buda, the chief town of the Kingdom of Hungary, the residence of a Bashawe. Budu veis, a town in Bohemia. Buenos Aytes, a town upon the River Plata in the West-Indies, whither the King of Spain
was perswaded to bring his Silver from Potosi, but found it not convenient, by reason of the vicinity of the Portugalls in Bresil. Buckingham, a Town and county, with the title of Dutchy, now born by the Noble Family of the Villiers. Bulgaria, a province of Europe, under the subjection of the Turk. Burgau, a Marquisate in Swabeland, be∣longing to the house of Austria. Burgos, a city and Archbishoprick in the old Castille. Bursa, a city of Anatolia, the seat of the first Emperours of the Turks, and one of the fairest of all Turky, little Inferiour to Con∣stantinople. Butrinto, a place upon the confines of E∣pirus, belonging to the Venetians. C Cab d'Istria, a Town in Istria, in the Vene∣tian Territories. Cabul, a City and Kingdom upon the con∣tinent of India, belonging to the Mogull. Cachieu, or Serra Leona, a Town in Guinee belonging to the Portugalls. Caen, a City and University in Normandy. Caffa, a Town in the Peninsula of the les∣ser
Tartary, belonging to the Turk. Caffreria, a country in Africa. Cagliari, the chief City, and an Archbi∣shoprick in Sardinia. Cahors, the chief City, and a Bishoprick in Quercy in France. Cairo, the Chief City of Aegypt, and se∣cond of the Turkish Empire, near to which are built the Pyramides, one of the seven won∣ders of the World. Cairoan, a Town in Barbary, in the King∣dome of Tunis, formerly the Residence of a Mahometan Calife. Calabria, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples. Calais, a Town in Picardy, opposite to Do∣ver, formerly in the possessions of the Kings of England, but surprised by the French in the Raign of Queen Mary. Its Situation gives it the reputation of one of the Keyes of France▪ and its gallant Fortifications and great Traffick gain it a place among the best Towns of that Kingdom. Calatajub, a town in Arragon. Calatrava, a City in Castilla Nova. Calcedon, a City in Anatolia, famous for the General Councill held there. Calicut, a Town in a Peninsula made by the River Indus, on this side the River Ganges, belonging to the Portugalls.
California, an Island near to new Mexico. Caliz or Cadiz, an Island and City upon the Coasts of Andalusia, with a famous Port, the usual Rendezvous of the King of Spains Armadoes, where also his West-Indian Fleets do still come in; a place of that consequence, that Charles the Fifth recommended the pre∣servation of it to his Son, as one of the Keyes of his Dominions, the other two being Gou∣letta in Barbary, and Flushing in Zealand. Callo, a Fort in Flanders, where the States Army received a sharp check in the year 1638. Calmar, a Town in Gothland, strongly fortified, by reason it is upon the Frontiers of Denmark; it hath also a Port upon the Bal∣tick Sea. Cambaja, a City and Kingdom in India. Cambalu, a Town of Tartary, and chief of the Province of Cathaye. Camboja, a Kingdom, and Town of the same name in India. Cambra, a City and Archbishoprick of the Empire, seated between France and the low Countries, strengthened with two brave Cittadels. Cambridge, one of the two most famous U∣niversities in the World. Camin, a City, and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire, in Pomerania. Canada, or new France, a large Country in the Northern part of America.
Canaries, Islands belonging to the King of Spain. Canaria, a Town in these Islands, famous for the excellency of its wine. Candahar, a Kingdom and City of the same name, upon the East of Persia, belong∣ing to the Mogull. Candea, a Town in the Isle of Ceilan in A∣sia. Candie, an Island and Kingdom in the Me∣diterranean Sea, under the subjection of the Venetians, and for these many years the seat of war between them and the Turks. It was anciently called Crete. Candia, the chief City, and an Archbisho∣prick of that Kingdom. Canea, a Town in the Isle of Candy, taken by the Turks in the year 1645. Canterbury, a City in Kent, the seat of the Archbishop and Metropolitane of all Eng∣land. Canton, the richest Town, and of the most Traffick in all China. Capoua, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Caprarola, a small Town in the Ecclesi∣astick State, but made famous by one of the most Noble Palaces of all Italy, belonging to the Duke of Parma. Capria, an Island near Naples.
Cap verde, an Island upon the West of A∣merica. Caramit, a Town of Diarbuh a province of Turky in Asia. Carcassone, a city and Bishoprick in Lan∣guedoc in France. Cardiff, a Town in Southwales. Cardona, a city and Dutchy in Catalonia, famous for its Mountain of Salt. Caribes, a people in Guiana in America, who eat those Enemies whom they take in battle. Carignan, a principality and city of the same name in Piedmont. Carinthia, a province of Germany. Carlisle, a strong Town in Cumberland, up∣on the borders of Scotland. Carlinforde, a Town and port in the pro∣vince of Ulster in Ireland. Carmagnole, a fortress in the Marquisate of Salusses in Piedmont. Carmarden, a country and Town of the same name in Wales. Carniole, a province in Germany. Carpentras, a City and Bishoprick in the County of Avignon in France, but be∣longing to the Pope. Carpy, a city and principality belonging to the Duke of Modena. Carrikke, a province in Scotland.
Carthage, a ruined place near Tunis in Bar∣bary. Cartagena, a city in Murcia, the best port of all Spain. Cartagena, a Town in Castile d' oro, advan∣taged with a fair port, which renders it the most considerable of America. Casal, the chief city of Montferrat, be∣longing to the Duke of Mantoua, and which being under the protection of France, and fortified with a gallant Cittadell, has proved many times the ball of discord between the Kings of France and Spain. Casbin, a city in Persia. Cascar, a Kingdom, and city of the same name in Turquestan in Tartary. Cashell, a city, and Archbishoprick in Munster in Ireland. Caspian Sea, de Sala, or de Bachue, a Sea in forme of a Lake in Asia. Cassell, the chief city of Hessen. Cassovia, a city in the higher Hungary belonging to the house of Austria. Castel-Arrogonese, a strong Town in the Isle of Sardignia. Castelnau Darry, a Town in Languedoc, near to which was defeated and taken the Duke of Montmorency in 1632. who was not long after beheaded at Tholouse. Castille, a Kingdom in Spain; there are two
of these Castilles, the old, and the new. Castille d'oro, a country in America. Castillon de Stivere, a small Soveraignty, and Marquisate belonging to the Duke of Mantuxa. Castillon, a Town in Perigord in France, near which were defeated the English, and their General slain upon the place, in the year 1451. by which victory Charles the seventh recovered the province of Guienne. Castres, a City and Bishoprick in Langue∣doc in France. Castro, a Dutchy, and Town of the same name, in the Ecclesiastick State, but belong∣ing to the Duke of Parma. Catalognia, a province, and principality in Spain, upon the Mediterranean Sea. Cathaye, a country in Tartary in Asia. Cavilon, a City and Bishoprick in the Coun∣ty of Avignon. Caudebec, a Town in Normandy. Caux, a country in Normandy. Cauamalca, a small place in Peru where Atabalippa the last King of that country was defeated and taken by the Spaniards. Cazan, a Kingdom and Town of the same name in Tartary belonging to the great Duke of Moscovy. Cephalonia, an Island, and Town of the same name upon the West of Greece, belonging to the Venetians.
Ceilan, an Island in Asia. Ceneda, a Town under the subjection of the Venetians. Cerigo, an Island near the Morea, belong∣ing to the Venetians. Cerisoles, a small Town in Piedmont, fa∣mous for the Victory obtained by the French under the conduct of the Duke d'Enquieu, over the Marquess Du Guast 1544. Ceve, a town and Marquisate in Piedmont. Cevenes, a country upon the Mountains of Languedoe in France. Ceuta, a town of Barbary, upon the streights of Gibraltar belonging to the King of Portu∣gal. Chaalons Sur Marne, a City, Bishoprick, and county in Champagne, Famous for the Victory obtained by the French, Romans, and Goths, over Attila King of the Huns, in the year 453. Chagra, a River upon the confines of the two Americaes, where pass the Merchandises bound for Panama, and Peru. Challo, a City and Bishoprick in Burgundy. Chamb, a town and county in the upper pa∣latinate. Chambery, the chief town of Savoye. Champagne, a province of France. Champ Arrien, a small town near Bourdeaux where Charle Maigne Defeated the Gothes.
Charante, a River in France, running to Angoulesme, and Seintes. La Charite, a town in the Dutchy of Ne∣vers in France. Charlemont, a town strongly seated in the county of Namur, one of the seventeen pro∣vinces of the low countries. Charle ville, a town upon the Meuse, in the North part of Champagne. Charolles, the chief town of the county of Charrolloi in Burgundy. Chartres, a town in Bausse in France, an ancient Residence of the Druides, Chasteau-Dun, the chief town of a little country called Dunois, near unto Beausse. Chasteau Regnaud, a little Soveraingty up∣on the Meuse in Champagne. Chasteau-Roux, a town in Berry. Chasteau Thierry, a town within the Go∣vernment of the Isle of France. Chastelleraud, a town upon the River Vi∣enne in Poictou in France. Cher, a River in France, which discharges itself into the Loyre a little below Tours. Cherbourg, a town upon the coast of Nor∣mandy. Chesne povilleux, a town in Champagne, where the inhabitants claim a priviledge to assist at the coronation of the Kings of France, and to convey the holy Ampoulle or oyle
(pretended to be brought by an Angel at the consecration of the first Christian King of that Kingdom) from St. Remy to our Ladies Church in Rheimes. Chester, the chief town of the county pa∣latine of Cheshire where we usually embarque for Dublin, and the parts adjacent, in Ireland. Chiavene, a town and county in Switzer∣land. Chier, a town in Piedmont, where the French obtained a signal victory over the Spaniards in the year 1639. Chili, a country in America. China, the most considerable kingdom of all Asia. Chinon, a town in Tourrain in France. Chio, an Island, where there is also a town of the same name, the most pleasant & fertile of any Island in the Archipelago, famous for the Mastick & Malvoisy wines which it yields. Chiorlick, a town of Romania, near to which was defeated Selim by his Father Bajazet Em∣perour of the Turks. Cilley, a town upon the East of Carniola. Ciotat, a town and port in Provence in France. Cirenza, a city and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Circassia, a county in Georgia, where the Ma∣malukes had their original.
Citta di castello, the chief town of a small province, within the Ecclesiastick state. Ciudad del Rey Philippo, a colony of Spa∣niards planted in Magellanica at the mouth of the Streights of Magellan, but dissipated by famine. Civita de chieti, a city and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Clermont in auvergne, a bishoprick and chief city of that province in France. Cleves, a country and Dutchy in Germany upon the Rhine. Clissa, a Fortresse in Dalmatia, taken by the Venetians in 1648. Cobtentz, a city of the Archbishoprick of Triers, where the Rhine and the Moselle meet. Cobourg, a city and Dutchy of the Empire, in Franconia. Cochim, a Kingdom with a Town of the same name in India. Cochin china, a Kingdom in India border∣ing upon China. Coeverden, in Overissel, the most regular fortification in Europe. Cogoreto, a town upon the coast of Genoa, the country of Christ. Columbus. Coimbra, a town in Portugal; famous for its University. Coire, the chieftown of the Grisons. Colberg, a very well fortified town upon the Baltick sea.
Colchester, a town in Essex, where the Roy∣allists made a brave resistance against the Parliamentarians under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, but being at length (van∣quished by necessity) forced to yield, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle were har∣quebusiered after the Rendition of the town. Colleoure, a strong town in the county of Ronssillon, taken from the Spaniards by the French in 1648. Colmar, an Imperial Town in the upper Alsatia. Colocza, a city and Archbishoprick in Hun∣gary. Colen, an Imperial town upon the Rhine, the Archbishop of that place is one of the Electors of the Empire, and keeps his residence at Bonne. Como, a town in the Dutchy of Milan, gives name to a great Lake not far from it. Cominges, a country in Gascony. Compiegne, a town in the Isle of France. Compostella or St. Jago, the chief town of Galicia, famous for the pilgrimages thither made to the Reliques of that Saint who gives name to the chiefest order of Knights in Spain. Concarneau, a strong town and port in Bri∣tany in France. Condom, a city and Bishoprick in Guienne.
Congo, a Kingdom in Africa. Coni, a town in Piedmont very advantage∣ously seated. Connaught, a province in the West of Ire∣land. Conserans, a country in Gascony. Constance, a Town in Swabeland, gives name to a Lake not far from it. Constantine, a City and chief of a King∣dome in Barbary. Constantinople, a City in Romania, seated the most pleasantly of any in the World, an∣ciently the Residence of the Eastern Empe∣rours, now of the Grand Signior of the Turkes. Constantinow, a place in Padolia in Poland, near to which were the Polish forces roughly handled by the Revolted Cosackes in 1648. Conza, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Copenhagen, a City in the Isle of Zealand, chief of the Kingdom of Denmark, and u∣suall Residence of its Kings. Corbeil, a town upon the Sein within the Government of the Isle of France. Corbie, a Town in Picardy upon the Some, taken by the Spaniards, and retaken by the French in 1636. Cordova, a City in Andalusia, chief of a Kingdome, during the Raign of the Moores
in Spain, but much more considerable under the Romanes. Corena, a Town in Barbary, in the country of Barca. Corfou, an Island, City and Archbishoprick in the Venetian Territories, lying on the West of Greece, accomodated with a good port, and strengthened with two Castles, whose Scituation renders them almost Im∣pregnable. Cori, one of the chiefest Towns in Ge∣orgia. Corinth, a Town seated in an Isthmus in that part of Greece, now called Morea, formerly more famous then now adayes. Cornewall, a County in the South-West part of England, famous for the abundance and excellency of the tinne it yields. Corregio, a Town and principality in the country of Modena, Subject to the Duke of that country. Coromandel, a place upon the coast of the River Indus. Corsica, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, upon the South of Italy, belonging to the Republick of Genoa. Coruna, a town and port in Gallicea, one of the best of all Spain. Cosaques, Auxiliary Souldiers entertained by the King of Poland, and kept upon his
frontiers to oppose the Incursions of the Tar∣tars. Cofenza, a city and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Cosmopolis, a Town in the Isle of Elbe in the Mediterranean Sea, belonging to the Duke of Florence, accomodated with a fair and well fortified port. Cossir, a Town in Aegypt upon the Red Sea. Cotbus, a Town in Lusatia, belonging to the Electors of Brandenbourg. Courtray, a Town in Flanders upon the Lys, famous in the late wars, but more in the year 1302. by the defeat of the French, who there lost the greatest part of the Nobility of France, besides the connestable, the King of Majorque, the Count of Artois, and many other great persons there slain. Coutances, a city and Bishoprick in the Lower Normandy. Coutras, a town in Guienne, famous for a battle fought there in the year 1587. Cranganor, a city and Archbishoprick in the Peninsula made by the River Indus, be∣longing to the Portugalls. Creci, a place in Picardy famous for the bloody Victory which the English there got over the French, who there lost the King of Bohemia, the brother of King Philip of Valois, the Duke of Lorraine, the Countes
of Blois, Flanders and St. Pol, in the year 1346. Crema, a town in the Venetian territories. Cremona, a city within the Dutchy of Millain. Crevant, a town in Burgundy, where in the year 1423. the Connestable Stuart lost a me∣morable battle, fought against the English and the Burgundians. Crim, a town in Tartary the lesser. Croatia, a province in Europe divided be∣tween the Turk and the house of Austria. Croia, a town in Albany, the Country of Scanderbeg, the scourge of the Ottoman Em∣pire. Cromarty, a Sea port in Scotland. Crossen, a town and Dutchy in Silesia, be∣longing to the Electors of Brandenbourg. Cuba, an Island upon the coast of America, and one of the most considerable in those parts. Cujavie, a province of Poland. Cullembach, a principality of the Empire in Franconia. Culm, a town in Prussia, and chief of a little country there. Curlande, a province between Poland and Swedeland, governed by a Duke of their own under the protection of Poland. Cuscou, a town in Peru, the ancient Resi∣dence
of their Kings, whom the Inhabitants call Incas. Custrim, a very strong town in Branden∣bourg. Czirnicz, a town in Carniola, where there is also a Lake, where the retreat and reflux of the waters affords the pastime either of hunting or fishing. D Dalmatia, a province of Europe lying upon the Gulph of Venice, anciently a Kingdom, but now subject to many Masters. Damas, the chief town of Phenicia, residence of a Bashaw, famous for its good grapes, ex∣cellent blades, and other Damasco works. Dambea, a town in Abyssinia. Damietta, a town in Aegypt, upon the Sea, formerly conquered by St. Lewis King of France. Damvillers, a strong town in Luxembourg. Danemark, a Kingdom in the North part of Europe. Dantzick, a town in Prussia, one of the prin∣cipall of the hans towns. Danube, the most Eminent River of Eu∣rope, rises in Swabeland, and falls into the black Sea.
Darby, a Shire and Town of the same name, about the middle of England. Dardanelles, castles upon a streight in the Hellespont. Davis, a streight towards China. Dax, a City and Bishoprick in Gascony, fa∣mous for its Baths. Dead sea, in Judea in Asia. Decan, a Kingdom in the East Indies. Delf, a Town in Holland, where William Prince of Orange was assasinated. Delli, a Kingdom, and City of the same name, sometimes the Residence of the great Mogull. Denia, a Port Town in the Kingdom of Valentia. Derbent, a Town in Georgia, seated upon the Caspian sea, and belonging to the Turk. Dessau, a Town in the upper Saxony, resi∣dence of the Prince of Anhalt. Deventer, the chief Town of Over-Issel. Diarbecb, a Province of Turkie in Asia. Die, a City and Bishoprick in Dauphine. Dieppe, a Port Town in Normandy, oppo∣site to Rye in Sussex. Digue, a City and Bishoprick in Provence. Dijon, the chief Town of Burgundy, and seat of a Parliament. Dinan, a Town within the Bishoprick of Liege, which boasts of 17 Sieges it hath with∣stood.
Dingle, a Port Town in Ulster in Ireland. Dinkespiel, an Imperial Town in Swabe∣land. Diu, a Fortress of the Portugals, in a lit∣tle Island, near the mouth of the River In∣dus. Dol, a City and Bishoprick in Britanny in France. Dole, the chief Town in the Franche County. Dombes, a Principality in Bressia in France, belonging to Madamoiselle the eldest daugh∣ter of the late Duke of Orleans. Donavert, an Imperial Town in Swabe∣land, a great pass upon the Danube. Donquerque, a strong Town and Port in Flanders, having several time been under the subjection of the French and Spanish, is now in the possession of the King of England. Donzi, a Town of the Dutchy of Nevers in France. Dorchester, the chief Town of Dorsetshire, in the South part of England. Dordogne, a River in France, which falls into the Garomne five leagues below Bor∣deaux. Dordrecht, a Town in Holland, famous for the National Synod held there in the year 1619. Douay, a Town in Flanders, where the
English of the Romish Church have a Col∣ledge. Douglas, a Castle in the County of Clid∣desdale in Scotland. Doullens, a Town in Picardy. Douro, a River in Spain, rising in old Ca∣stille. Doutling, a Town in Swabeland, where the French Army had a harsh entertainment in the year 1643. Dover, a famous Port and Castle in the County of Kent, where King Charles the se∣cond upon his happy restoration to his just Rights first landed. Dresde, the chief Town of Misnia, and residence of the Elector of Saxony. Dreux, a Town within the Government of the Isle of France, famous for a great battle fought there in the year 1562. Drogedah, a Sea Port in Ulster in Ireland, where Cromwell most barbarously murthered the Garrison in cold blood after quarter gi∣ven. Drontem, a chief Town of Norway. Dublin, a Port, City, Arch-Bishoprick and University in Ireland, the chief Town of that Kingdom, and usual residence of the Lord Lieutenant. Dungarvan, a Port Town in Munster in Ireland.
Dunghall, a County and Castle of the same name in Munster in Ireland. Dunkelden, an ancient Town in Scotland. Dun le Roy, a Town in Berry in France. Dunstafag, a Town in the West part of Scotland, anciently the residence of the Scot∣tish Kings. Durance, a very rapid River in Provence, which infesteth the Countrey with frequent inundations. Durazzo, a Port Town in Albani in Greece. Durham, a City, Bishoprick, and County Palatine in the North of England, where was fought a memorable battle between the English and the Scots in the year 1346. Durlach, a Town and Marquisate of the Empire in Alsatia. Dusseldorp, the chief Town of the Dutchy of Bergh upon the Rhine. Dwelande, an Island in Zealand, famous for the passage of the Spaniards through the Sea in the year 1575. Dwina, a Town of great traffique in the North part of Moscovy, in a Province, and upon a River of the same name.
E. ECclofiastique State, the Popes Dominions, lying in several Countreys in Italy. Ecija, a Town in Andalusia. Edinbourgh, the chief Town of Scotland. Egra, a Town and Seigniory in Bohemia, where in the year 1634. Wallestein Duke of Freidland, and Generalissimo of the Impe∣rial forces, was assassinated. Egypt, a Countrey of Africa, lying upon the Red Sea. Elbe, a River of Germany, which rises in Bohemia, also an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, on the coast of Tuscany, belonging to the Duke of Florence. Elbing, a Hans Town in Prussia. Elnbogen, a Town and Seigniory in Bohe∣mia. Elsenore, a Town in the Isle of Zeland in Denmark, whose Castle commands the Sound. Elsimbourg, a Town in Schoneland in Den∣mark, upon the Sound. Elvas, a Town in Portugal, famous for the excellency of its Oyls. Embden, a Town and County of the Em∣pire in Westphalia. Embrun, a City and Archbishoprick in Dauphiné in France.
England, a Kingdom in the West part of great Britain, New England, a Countrey in Canada. Ems, a Town in Austria, upon a River of the same name. Ensistheim, the chief Town of the higher Alsatia. Epirus, a Province, anciently a Kingdom in Greece. Erfort, the chief Town of Turingia in Germany. Ervansarat, the chief Town of Bosnia. Escaut, a River in the low Countreys, ri∣sing in Picardy. Escuriall, a Royal Castle near Madrid, built by King Philip the second of Spain, in form of a Grid-iron, in memory of the bat∣tle of St. Quentins; this structure cost him twenty Millions of Gold. Eslingen, an Imperial Town in Swabeland. Estampes, a Town and Dutchy in Beausse in France. Este, a Town in the Venetian Dominions, from whence the family of the Dukes of Mo∣dena have their name. Estella, a Town in the Kingdom of Na∣varre; it is also called Merinda. Esthonia, a Province & Dutchy in Livonia. Estotilande, a Countrey in the North part of America.
Estrac, a County in Gascony. Estramadura, a Country in Castille, and Portugal. Etna, a Mountain in Scicily, famous for the flames it oftentimes breaths forth at the top of it. Euphrates, a River in Turkie in Asia. Evora, a City and Arch-bishoprick in Portugal. Eureux, a City and Bishoprick in Norman∣dy. Europe, one of the four parts of the world. Exceter, the chief Town of the County of Devonshire in the South-West of Eng∣land. F FAience, a Town in Provence, famous for the white earthen ware there made. Falaize, a Town in Normandy, the Coun∣trey of William the Conquerour. Famagousto, a Port Town in the Isle of Cyprus. Faso, a Town in Georgia. Fer, The most Western Island of the Ca∣naries, famous for a most miraculous Tree growing there, which supply the Inhabi∣tants with as much water as they have need of.
Ferden, an Imperial City and Bishoprick, now a Dutchy, given up to the Crown of Sweden by the treaty of Munster 1648. La Fere, a strong Town in Picardy. Fermo, a City and Arch-bishoprick in the Ecclesiastique state, in Marcha Anconitana. Ferrara, a Dutchy and City of the same name near the River Po, now subject to the Pope, anciently governed by a Duke of its own. Fez, a Kingdom and City of the same name, with an University, in Barbary. Final, a Town and Marquisate upon the coast of Genoa, under the subjection of the King of Spain. Fino terra, The most Western Cape in Eu∣rope in Gallicia. Finland, a Province of Sweden. Finmarque, the most Northern part of Norway. Fiumo, a Town in Dalmatia near unto I∣taly, belonging to the house of Austria. Flanders, the most noble County of Christendom, and one of the 17 Provinces, subject to the King of Spain. La Fleche, a Town in Anjou, famous for the Colledge of Jesuits, which by the do∣nation of Henry the fourth, have nested themselves in one of the Royall Palaces. Flensbourg, a Port town in Jutland, where the
assembly of Estates of Denmark is usually held. Flushing, a very strong port town in Zea∣land. Florence, the fairest city of Italy in Tusca∣ny, an Archbishoprick and residence of the Great Duke. Florida, a Countrey in America. Fogie, a town in Anatolia, upon the Archi∣pellago, where the Venetians obtained a me∣morable naval victory over the Turks in 1649. Foligui, a town in the Ecclesiastique State in Umbria. Fountain bleau, the fairest of the King of France his houses, within the Government of the Isle of France. Fontarabie, a strong fortress in Biscay, where the French received a defeat in 1638. Fontenay le Comte, the chief town of the lower Poictou. Forden, a strong town in Scotland. Forez, a Province in France near Lyonnois. Fournoue, a town in the Dutchy of Parma, where King Charles the eighth of France ob∣tained a signal victory over the Princes of Italy 1494. France, a brave Kingdom of Europe, whose King carries the title of the most Christian. Isle of France, a province in which Paris stands.
Franckfort upon the Maine, an Imperial town in Franconia, famous for the fairs, and the Election of the Emperours. Frankfort upon the Oder, a town in Bran∣denbourg. Franch Comte, a province within the King∣dom of France, but subject to the King of Spain. Franconia, a province in Germany. Frankendale, a strong town in the lower Pa∣latinate. Frieberg, a town in Misnia, the burial place of the Electors of Saxony. Freiuis, a city, Bishoprick and port in Pro∣vence. Fribourg, a town in Alsatia, and chief of the province of Brisgaw. Fribourg, a Canton and Town of the same name in Switzerland. Friuli, a province in the Venetian Territo∣ries. Friseland, one of the seven united pro∣vinces. Friseland, a countrey in the North Sea, ta∣ken for a part of Groenland. Fromigni, a Village in the lower Norman∣dy, where the English were defeated by the French in 1450. Frontignan, a small town in Languedoc, fa∣mous for the excellence of its Wines.
Fulde, a Town and Abby in Hesse, whose Abbot is a Prince of the Empire, and first Abbot of Germany. Funchal, the chief town of the Isle Ma∣dera. Fures, the chief town of the province of Forez. Furnes, a town in Flanders, where Philip the Fair of France gained a memorable victo∣ry over Guy Count of Flanders, who lost there 16000 of his men. G GAietta, one of the strongest Towns in the Kingdom of Naples. Gallicia, a province in Spain. New Gallicia, a province in New Spain. Gallipoli, a town in Romania, upon a streight of the same name, otherwise called the Dardanelles, St. George his arms, and the Hellespont. Galloway, a port town in Connaught in Ire∣land. Gand, the chief town in Flanders, former∣ly so populous that it could raise an Army of 80 thousand men. Ganges, a River in India, which divideth it into two parts.
Gapi, a City and Bishoprick in Dauphine. Garomne, one of the four principal Rivers of France, it rises in the Pyrennean Hills, and falls into the Ocean below Bourdeaux. Garnzy, an Island upon the coast of Nor∣mandy, subject to the King of England. Gascogny, a province in France. Gostinois, a small countrey near Beausse in France. Gaure, a small countrey in Gascogny. Gemblours, a town in Brabant, where the Confederates of the low Countreys were de∣feated by the Spaniards in 1578. Genoa, a Republique and famous City of the same name in Italy, governed by an Ele∣ctive triennial Prince. Geneva, a considerable Town and Com∣monwealth, seated upon a Lake of the same name, leagued with the Switzers; the first seed-plot and nursery of Presbytery. Gennep, a town in the Dutchy of Cleves, taken by the Hollanders 1641. Georgia, a countrey in Asia. Germany, a countrey in the North part of Europe, it hath the title of an Empire, and comprehendeth many great provinces and principalities. Gex, a town and Bayliwick in France, be∣tween Bressia and Switzerland. Gibraltar, a town and famous streight be∣tween
Europe and Africa, at the entry of the Mediterrancan Sea. Girone, a town in Catalonia, formerly the apportion of the eldest Son of the Kings of Arragon. Gisors, a Town in Normandy, in the Coun∣ty of Vexein. Givaudan, a countrey in the Cevenes in Languedoc in France. Glandeve, a City and Bishoprick in Pro∣vence. Glantz, a Canton and Town of the same name in Switzerland. Glascowe, a City and Arch-bishoprick in Scotland. Glatz, a town and county appendant to Bohemia. Gloucester, a shire, with a town and county of the same name, famous for the combat be∣tween Edmond Ironside and Canutus King of the Danes. Glukstad, a fortress in Holsatia, upon the Elbe, subject to the King of Denmark. Gnesne, a City and Bishoprick, the Prima∣cy of all Poland, whose Archbishop executes the Regal Office in the Interregnum or Va∣cancy of the King. Goa, a City and Archbishoprick in the East Indies, the Residence of the Vice Roy of Por∣tugal.
Goime, a Kingdom and town of the same name in Abissinia, where is supposed to be the source of the River Nilus. Goritz, a county and town of the same name, belonging to the house of Austria. Gorlitz, the chief town of Lusatia. Gothbourg, a port town in Gothland. Gothland, antiently a Kingdom of it self, now subject to the King of Sweden. Gothland, an Isle in the Baltique Sea, be∣longing to the King of Sweden. Gottingue, a Town and Dutchy in the coun∣trey of Brunswike. Gouletta, a fortress at the entry of the port of Tunis. Grace, a City and Bishoprick in Provence. Gradisque, a town in the county of Goritz, belonging to the house of Austria. Gran, or Stiggonia, a City and Archbi∣shoprick in Hungary upon the Danube, now under the Turk; the Archbishop of that place is perpetual Chancellour of that King∣dom, and hath the honour to Crown the King after he is Elected. Granoon, a town in Switzerland, where Charles Duke of Burgundy with an Army of 50000 men was defeated by 5000 Switzers, who came too late to the relief of the Town, in the year 1476. Granville, a port town in Normandy.
Graveline, a Town in Flanders, one of the strongest of all Europe. Greece, a countrey of Europe, now subject to the Turk. Greez, the chief town of Stiria. Grenada, a Kingdom in Spain, very consi∣derable in the time of the Moors Dominion there. Grenada, a town in the same Kingdom, one of the biggest of all Spain. New Grenada, a Kingdom in Castille d'Oro in America. Grenolle, a City and Bishoprick in Dauphine, and seat of a Parliament. Grisons, a people bordering upon, and leagued with the Switzers. Gripswalde, a Town and University in Po∣merania. Grol, a town in the county of Zutphen in the Low Countries. Groeneland, a great countrey towards the Arctique Pole, it is an Island or Peninsula. Gronengue, a Town and Seigniory, one of the united provinces. Glogaw, a town in Silesia upon the Oder. Gruiers, a town in the Canton of Fribourg in Switzerland. Grunninguen, a town in Saxony in the prin∣cipality of Halberstat. Guadalaiara, a town and province in New Spain.
Guadaloupe, one of the Islands called the Azores, of which there are many upon the coast of America. Guadalquivir, one of the greatest Rivers in Spain, it runs to Sevill. Fuadarfuj, the most Eastern Cape of A∣frica. Guadiana, a River in Spain, which its said, runs under ground. Guanahani, one of the Azores, the first that was discovered by Columbus. Guastella, a town and principality under the Duke of Mantoua. Guatimala, a province and town of the same name in New Spain. Gueguere, an Island in Aethiopia, in the River Nilus. Guelderland, a Dutchy, and one of the seventeen provinces, divided between the King of Spain and the Hollanders. Gueret, the chief town of Marche, a pro∣vince in France. Guiana, a countrey in the South part of America. Guienne, a province in the West part of France. Guinée, a countrey in Africa. New Guinée, a countrey lying East of the East Indies. Guinegat, a small town in Artois, famous
for a defeat the French there received in the year 1478. Guise, a town and Dutchy in Picardy in France, strengthened with a brave Castle. Gustrou, a town in Mechlenbourg, and resi∣dence of the Duke of Mechlenbourg. H. HAbsbourg, a ruined Castle in Switzerland, it hath the title of an Earldom, and was the first possession of the house of Austria. Hadersluven, a port town in Jutland. Harlem, a town in Holland, famous for the first Invention of Printing. Hag, a town and county of the Empire in Bavaria. Hague, the fairest, best built and most plea∣sant village of Europe, the residence of the Prince of Aurange, and the Councel of the united provinces. Haguenau, an Imperial town, and chief of the lower Alsatia. Hailbron, an Imperial town in Swabeland, upon the Nekar. Hainaut, one of the seventeen provinces, under the subjection of the King of Spain. Halberstat, a city, Bishoprick and principa∣lity of the Empire in Saxony, now belonging to the Elector of Brandenbourg.
Halderstein, a small Seigniory in Switzer∣land, near to Coire. Hall, an Imperial town in Swabeland; there are many other places of the same name in Germany. Ham, a Hans town in the county of Mark in Westphalia. Hambourg, a Hans town of great traffique upon the Elbe in the lower Saxony. Hamiltown, a Castle in the South part of Scotland, the possession of one of the princi∣pal families of that Kingdom. Hanau, a town and county in Veteravia, a countrey of Germany, which makes up part of Hesse. Hartford, a town in a Shire of the same name in the Eastern part of England. Hastings, one of the cinque ports in the county of Sussex, famous for the victory ob∣tained there by William the Conquerour. Havana, an eminent port town in the Isle of Cuba, the Rendezvous of the Spanish Fleets Havre de Grace, or New Haven, a very strong port at the mouth of the River Seine in Normandy, fortified with a most impregnable Cittadel. Hebrides, Islands to the number of 300. upon the coast of Scotland. Hecla, a mountain in Isleland, famous for the fires it sends out.
Heiterskeim, a Castle in Brisgow in Alsatia, the residence of the grand Prior of the Order of Malta. Henday, a town of France, in the county of Biscay, famous for the exchange of two Queens, Anne of Austria, married to the French King, and Isabella of Bourbon, married to the King of Spain. Henneberg, a county of the Empire in Franconia. Herac, a town in Arabia deserta. Hermanstad, the chief town of Transilva∣nia. Harmanstein, a fortress near the Rhine, in the Archbishoprick of Triers. Hesdin, a strong Town in Artois. Hesse, a countrey of Germany, the Sove∣raign of it is known by the title of Land∣grave. Hieres, a town in Provence, which gives name to the neighbouring Islands. Hispaniola, an Island, one of the chiefest upon the coast of America. Hoentwiel, a Fortress in Swabeland in Ger∣many, belonging to the Duke of Wirtemberg, seated upon a Rock, and hath bravely with∣stood seven or eight Sieges against the Impe∣rialists. Hola, a small town in Island.
Holac, or Hoenloe, a county in Franconia, whose chiefest town is Veikersheim. Holland, the most considerable of the se∣ven united provinces. Holdenby, a Castle belonging to the Crown, in Northamptonshire, where King Charles the first was first kept a prisoner by the Parlia∣mentarians. Holsatia, a province between Germany and Denmark. Honduras, a province and Gulph in New Spain. Honnecour, a small town upon the Fron∣tiers of Picardy, where the French received a notable defeat in the year 1642. Hudson, a streight in a Sea in the North of America, otherwise called Christian. Hulst, a town in Flanders, taken by the Hollanders, in 1645. Hungary, a Kingdom upon the North-East of Germany, divided between the house of Au∣stria, and the Turk. Hutons, a people of Canada. J JAcca, a city and Bishoprick in Arragon, strengthened with a fair cittadell. Jaon, a town, formerly a Kingdom in An∣dalusia in Spain.
Jamaica, an Island upon the coast of Ame∣rica, now subject to the Crown of England, the pittiful return of many thousands la∣vished by Cromwell in his expedition for Hi∣spaniola. Jametz, a strong place in Lorraine, yielded to the King of France in the year 1632. Jamsuquiam, a River in China, otherwise called Nanquim. Janewits, a town in Bohemia, where in the year 1645 the Swedes gained a great battle o∣ver the Imperialists. Japan, an Island in Asia. Jarnac, a town in Angoulmois in France, famous for a great battle fought there, in the year 1569. Jaroslaw, a town and Dutchy, the appor∣tion of the eldest son of the great Duke of Moscovy. Jarzy, an Island upon the coast of Norman∣dy, but subject to the Crown of England, and with its neighbour Island of Garnzey, un∣der the Bishoprick of Winchester. Java, an Island of Asia. Javarin, or Raab, a Fortress in Hungary, belonging to the house of Austria. Jaycza, the chief Town of Bosnia. Jegerndorf, a Town and Dutchy in Silesia. Jemmingen, a small town in Westphalia, famous for the defeat of the Confederates of
the Low Countries, under the command of Lewis of Nassau, by the Spaniards, under the conduct of the Duke d'Alva. Jerusalem, a town in the Holy Land in A∣sia, the Theatre upon which were acted the chief Mysteries of our Salvation. Indus, a River in the East Indies, giving name to that great countrey, in Asia. Indies, West, the same with America. Ingolstat, a town upon the Danube in Bava∣ria. Ingria, a province in the Kingdom of Swe∣den. Inspruck, the chief town of Tyroll, and seat of a Parliament. Joinville, a town and principality in Cham∣pagne in France. Jordan, a River in the Holy Land in Asia, it falls into the dead sea. Joux, a Fortress in the Franch county, ta∣ken by the French 1639. Ipre, a town in Flanders, where Cornelius Jansenius was Bishop. Ireland, an Island in the Western Ocean, formerly a Kingdom of it self, but long since conquered by the English, to whose King it is still subject. Iroquis, a people of Canada. Ischia, an Island and Fortress not far from Napl.
Isembourg, a county of the Empire in Vete∣ravia, in Germany. Isere, a very rapid River in Dauphine, falls into the Rhone, not far from Valence in the same province. Island, an Island belonging to the King of Denmark. Isenach, a Town and Dutchy of the Empire in Turingia. Ispahan, the chief town of Persia, and re∣sidence of the Sophy. Issoudun, a town in Berry in France. Istria, a province in Italy, upon the Gulph of Venice, and subject to that State. Jucatan, a peninsula in New Spain. Juliers, a Town and Dutchy of the Empire, in Germany, not far from the Low Countries. Ivree, a Town and Marquisate in Piedmont, belonging to the Duke of Savoy. Ivry, a Town in Normandy, famous for a memorable victory there gotten by Henry the fourth of France, in 1590. Jutland, a peninsula in Denmark. K KAmenieck, the chief town of Podolia in Poland. Kanisa, a town in Hungary, the residence of a Turkish Bashaw.
Kempen, a town in the Archbishoprick of Colen. Kendall, a town in Westmorland in the North of England, which gives a title to the eldest son of the Duke of Espernon in France, who is called Duke of Candalle. Kildare, a town in a county of the same name in Lemster in Ireland. Kilkenny, a town in a county of the same name in Lemster in Ireland. Kimpercorentin, a City and Bishoprick in the lower Britanny in France. Kingstown, the chief town of the Kings County in Lemster in Ireland. Kingsail, a port town in Munster in Ire∣land. Kiow, the chief town of Volhinia, upon the Boristhenes a River in Scythia, very strong∣ly sortified, by reason of the vicinity of the Tartars. Knock feergus, a port town in Ʋlster in Ire∣land. Kolding, a town in Jutland, where there is an Imposition of a Rix-dollar upon every head of great Cattle that passes there. Komorre, a Fortress upon the Danube in Hungary, belonging to the house of Austria. Konigsberg, the chief town of Prussia Du∣call, belonging to the Duke of Brandenbourg. Krempe, a very strong town in Holsatia.
L. LAdoga, a town and lake in Moscovy, upon the frontier of Sweden, the greatest in Europe. Laguibraj, a town in Normandy, famous for the Fairs held there. Lahor, a town in a Kingdom of the same name in India, belonging to the great Mogol, where the Caravannes pass. Laiazzo, a town in Anatolia upon the frontiers of Souria, where Bajazet the second Emperour of the Turks was defeated by the Soldan of Egypt. Lancaster, the first town of the county Pa∣latine in Lancaster, and a Dutchy title of one of the younger sons of the King of England. Lanciano, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Landes, a county in Gascogny. Landrecy, a strong town in Hainault. Landsberg, a town in Brandenbourg. Langres, a City and Bishoprick of Cham∣pagne in Bassigni, whose Bishop is Duke and Peer of France. Languedoc, a province of France upon the Mediterranean Sea, and bordering upon Ca∣talognia.
Lantriguet, or Triquier, a City, Bishoprick and Port Town in Britany in France. Laon, a City and Bishoprick, the chief of a small countrey in Picardy, the Bishop is a Duke and Peer of France. Laponia, or Lapland, a province, part of which is subject to the King of Sweden, the o∣ther part to the great Duke of Muscovy. Laredo, a port town in Biscaye, where in the year 1539 the Archbishop of Bourdeaux defeated the Spanish Fleet. Larmiro, a port town in Thessaly in Greece. Larta, a town in Epirus. Lavaur, a City and Bishoprick in Langue∣doc in France. Laubach, the chief town in Carniole. Lave munde, a town in Corinthia. Lauraguais, a countrey in Languedoc. Lausanne, a City and Bishoprick in Swit∣zerland, the Bishop resides at Fribourg. Lawenbourg, a Town and Dutchy of the Empire in the lower Saxony. Lawingen, a town in Swabeland upon the Danube, the countrey of Albertus Magnus. Leoa, a town in the Kingdom of Naples, reputed the second best of that Kingdom. Leicester, a town in a Shire of the same name about the middle of England. Leipsick, a town in Misnia, famous for three memorable battles in 1631, 1632, and
1642. all to the advantage of the Swede. Leith, a small town not far from Edinbourg in Scotland. Leitour, a City and Bishoprick in Gascogny. Lemster, a province in the East part of Ire∣land. Leon, a Kingdom in Spain, also the chief town of that Kingdom, where many of the Kings of Spain are interred. Leondule, or St. Pol de Leon, a City and Bishoprick in Britany in France. Leopolis, see Lewemberg. Lepanto, a town in Greece, where the Chri∣stians obtained a memorable victory over the Turks, in 1571. Lerida, a town in Catalognia. Lescar, a City and Bishoprick in Bearne. Lespece, a Town and Gulph upon the coast of Genoa. Leucatc, a Fortress in Languedoc. Leuchtemberg, a Landgraviate in the upper Palatinate. Leutmaritz, a town in Bohemia. Levin, a valley in the Valtoline, where the Duke of Roban General of the French defea∣ted the Army of the Imperialists, 1635. Lewarden, the chief town of West Frise∣land. Lewemberg, a Soveraignty in Pomerania, sub∣ject to the Crown of Poland.
Lewemberg, or Leopolis, and Luvou, a City and Arch-bishoprick in Black Russia. Leuvin, a Lake and Castle in the South part of Scotland, once the prison of that famous Princess, Mary Queen of Scotland, and Do∣wager of France. Leyden, a town in Holland, famous for its University, and that memorable srege of the Spaniards it withstood in the year 1574. the besiegers there receiving a total rout. Libourne, a town in Guienne in France. Liesse, a small town in Laonnois, a countrey in Picardy, famous for the Devotions there paid to our Lady. Ligorne, or Livorne, a brave new port and town in Tuscany. Lisle, a town of great traffique in Flanders. Lillo, a Fortress below Antwerp, belonging to the States of Holland. Lima, or Los Reyes, an Archbishoprick and chief town of Peru, the residence of the Vice Roy of Spain. Limaigne, a rich valley in Auvergne, a pro∣vince in France. Limbourg, a Town and Dutchy, one of the 17 provinces, subject to the King of Spain. Limerick, a town in a county of the same name in Munster in Ireland. Limoges, the chief town of Limosin, a pro∣vince in France.
Lincolne, the chief town of a county of the same name in England, upon the German sea. Lindau, an Imperial town of Swabeland, upon the lake of Constans. Lingen, a strong town in Westphalia. Linithgo, a town and county in Scotland, West of Edinbourgh. Lints, a town in the upper Austria. Lipars, Islands in the Mediterranean sea, upon the North of Sicily. Lire, a town in Brabant. Lisbone, the chief town of the Kingdom of Portugal, one of the fairest, richest and most populous town of Europe. Lisieux, a City and Bishoprick in Norman∣dy. Lithuania, a Province and Dutchy in Po∣land. Liverdune, a town in the Dutchy of Lor∣raine. Livonia, or Leifland, a province in Poland, subject to the Crown of Sweden. Locarne, a Town and Bayliwick in Italy, belonging to the Switzers. Loches, a town in Tourraine, a province in France. Locomoriens, a people of Tartary. Lodere, a City and Bishoprick in Langue∣doc in France.
Logan, a Town and Bayliwick in Italy, belonging to the Switzers. Loire, one of the principal Rivers of France, it rises in the Gevennes in Languedoc, and falls into the Western Ocean below Nantes in Britany. Lombardy, a countrey in Italy, upon the Po. Lombez, a City and Bishoprick in Gascogny. London, the chief Town of England, sea∣ted upon the River Thames, one of the fairest and richest of the world. Lopia, a countrey of Tartary. Loretto, a town in the Ecclesiastique State, upon the Adriatique Sea, famous for the De∣votions and Pilgrimages there made to our Lady. Lorraine, a Dutchy, Soveraign in Europe. Los Isleos, a Government in Bresill. Los Reyes, see Lima. Los Santos, a Fortress in Bresill. Lot, a River in Cahors in France. Loudun, a town in Poictou, gives name to a little countrey in that province. Louvaine, a town in Brabant, with an emi∣nent University. Low Countries, the seventeen provinces of Belgia or lower Germany; there is also ano∣ther countrey in Canada which bears the same name.
Lubeck, an Imperial Hans town, in lower Saxony. Lublin, a town in the higher Poland, the seat of a Parliament in summer. Lugon, a City and Bishoprick in Poictou, the first preferment of Cardinal Richlieu. Luequa, a Town and Republique in Tusca∣ny in Italy, lyes between Genoa and Florence. Lunden, a City and Bishoprick in Sconeland, the Metropolis of Denmark. Lunebourg, a Hans town, and Soveraign Dutchy of the same name in Saxony. Lure, an Abbey and Soveraignty in the Franche county. Lusatia, a province in Germany. Lusignan, a town in Poictou in France, from whence is issued a family some of whose bran∣ches have been Kings of Cyprus and Jerusalem; famous also for the noble Castle of Melusine. Lutzeilstein, a County in Lorraine. Lutzen, a town in Misnia in Germany, fa∣mous for the last victory and death of the King of Sweden, in 1632. Luvou, see Lewembourg. Luxembourg, a Dutchy and one of the 17 provinces of the low Countreys. Luxembourg, the chief town of that Dut∣chy; also the name of one of the noblest Palaces of Europe in Paris, built by Queen Mary de Medicis, the wife of Henry the Great of France.
Lyege, a town upon the Meuse, chief of a Bishoprick of the same name. Lygeois, a Bishoprick and Principality bor∣dering upon the low Countreys. Lyons, an antient City, standing upon the Rhone, and the Soane, one of the fairest, ri∣chest, and of greatest traffique of France, the Archbishop of Lyons stiles himself Metropoli∣tan of France. Lyonnois, a province of which Lyons is the chiefest City. M. MAcao, a town in an Island of the same name upon the North part of China, subject to the Portugals. Madagascar, vid. St. Laurenslis. Madera, an Island upon the West of Barba∣ry, lying in the Western Ocean, belonging to the King of Portugal. Madrid, a town in Castillia nova, the chief town in Spain, and residence of the King. Magdebourg, a Hans town in Saxony, often sacked by the Imperialists, against whom it withstood a memorable siege for the space of fifteen months, in the year 1545. one half of the Town is free; the other half is subject to the Elector of Brandenbourg, who was put into the possession of it by the peace concluded in the year 1648.
Magellan, a famous streight upon the South of America. Magellanica, a countrey in the Southern part of America. Mahamorra, a Fortress upon the coast of the Kingdom of Fez, belonging to the King of Portugal. Maienne, a town in the Dutchy of Maine. Maine, a province in France. Maillezais, a City and Bishoprick in Poi∣ctou in France. Maina, a small Republique in the Morea. Majorque, a town in an Island of the same name upon the coast of Spain in the Mediter∣ranean sea, antiently a Kingdom. Malabar, a countrey in the East Indies, on this side the River Ganges. Malaca, a town in a Peninsula made by the River Indus; it is now in the possession of the Hollanders, who took it from the Portugals. Malaga, a port town in the Kingdom of Granado, famous for the Wines it sends forth. Maldives, an Island in Asia. Male, the chief town of that Island. Malespine, a Marquisate, and Soveraignty in Tuscany in Italy. Malines, a Town and Soveraignty in Bra∣bant, one of the 17 Provinces, belonging to the King of Spain, and seat of the chief Par∣liament, of all the Catholique part of the low Countreys.
Malleguetta, a countrey upon the coast of Guinée. Malta, an Island in the Mediterranean sea, between Sicily and Africa, whose Knights are a considerable Bulwark of Christendom. Malvoisia, a town in the Morea, famous for the Wines it yields. Man, an Island lying in the Irish sea, be∣tween Lancashire and Ireland. Manar, a small Island upon the coast of Cei∣lan, an Island of Asia, famous for the abun∣dance and excellency of the Pearls there ta∣ken; The Portugals have a Fortress there. Manfredonia, a City and Arch-bishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples, it lyes upon the Gulph of Venice. Manheim, a Fortress in the lower Palati∣nate, where the Rhine and the Neckar meet, it is now dismantled. Manilha, a City and Archbishoprick, the chief of the Philippine Islands. Manoa-el dorado, a town in Guiana. Le Mans, the chief town of the Dutchy of Maine. Mansfeld, a Town and County of the Em∣pire, in the upper Saxony. Mant, a town in the Government of the Isle of France. Mantouan, a Countrey and Dutchy in I∣taly.
Mantoua, the chief town of that Dutchy, and residence of the Duke. Maranhox, or Miari, a River, and Govern∣ment in Bresill. Marche, a province of France. Margaias, a people of Bresill. Margareta, an Island upon the coast of Ca∣stille d'Oro, famous for the Pearls which come thence. Mariembourg, a strong town in Hainault. Marignan, a town in the Dutchy of Milan in Italy. Marmora, a sea between Asia and Europe, formerly called the Propontis, between the Hellespont and Constantinople. Marne, a River in Champagne in France. Marocco, a town in a Kingdom of the same name in Africa, upon the West of Barbary. Marpurg, a town in Hessen, a province of Germany. Marquenterre, a countrey in Picardy. Marsalquivir, a port town in the Kingdom of Algiers, possessed by the King of Spain. Marsan, a countrey in Gascogny in France. Marseilles, a City and Bishoprick in Pro∣vence upon the Mediterranean Sea, the most antient town of all France, accommodated with as secure a port as any in the world be∣sides; the antient inhabitants have expressed their dexterity and courage in opposing two
of the greatest Emperours of the world, Ju∣lius Caesar, and Charles the fifth. Martegues, a port town in Provence. Mascon, a City and Bishoprick in Burgundy. Mase, see Meuse. Massa, a town in a Soveraign principality of the same name in Italy, between Tuscany and Genoa, famous for its Marble Quarries. Masseran, a principality in Piedmont. Mastrich, a town in Lyegois upon the River Mase, subject to the States of Holland. Matapan, the most Southern Cape of Eu∣rope, in the Morea. Matera, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Mauleon, a town in Biscaye. Mazagan, a Fortress of the King of Portu∣gal, upon the coast of Marocco. Mazara, a town in Sicily. Mazzo, a small town in the Valteline, where the French, under the conduct of the Duke of Roban gained a memorable battle against the Imperialists, in the year 1635. Meaco, the chief town of Japan. Meaux, the chief City and Bishoprick of Brie in France. Mecqua, a town in Arabia, where Mahomet was born. Medellino, a town in Castille nova. Medina, a town in Arabia, where Maho∣mts Tombe is.
Mediterranean Sea, lyes in the midst of our Continent, between Europe, Africa, and a part of Asia. Medoc, a countrey in Guienne in France. Mechelbourg, a Countrey and Dutchy of the Empire, in Germany. Meliapor, or St. Tomaso, or St. Thomas, a town in the Peninsula made by the River Indus, on this side Ganges. Meldola, a Marquisate and Soveraignty in the Ecclesiastique State. Mellila, a town in Barbary, subject to the King of Spain. Melinda, a Kingdom and Town in it, in Zanguebar in Africa. Melun, a town in the Isle of France. Mentz, a free town upon the Rhine in Ger∣many, which gives name to an Electoral Arch∣bishoprick. Mende, a City and Bishoprick in the coun∣trey of Givaudan in the Cevenes. Meotides, Lakes and Marishes between Eu∣rope and Asia. Mergetheim, a town in Franconia. Merida, a town in Castille nova, antiently so populous that it could raise an Army of 80000 foot, and 10000 horse. Mersbourg, a City and Bishoprick in Misnia. Messina, a City and Archbishoprick in Sici∣ly, the bravest port in the whole Island.
Metelene, a town in an Island of the same name in the Archipellago, upon the coast of Asia, under the Turk. Metz, a City and Bishoprick in Lorraine, now subject to the French Crown, and seat of a Parliament. Meulan, a Town and fortress upon the Seine, in the Government of the Isle of France. Meurs, a town in a country of the same name in Germany, bordering upon the Rhine. Meuse, or Mase, a River running through Lorraine, Champagne, and the low Countreys. Mexico, an Archbishoprick, and chief town of New Spain, residence of a Vice Roy, and famous for its silver, which is esteemed to be the best in the world. Mexico, or New Spain, a countrey in Ame∣rica. New Mexico, a countrey of great extent in the West part of America. Mezieres, a town in Champagne, strengthe∣ned with a brave Cittadel. Micona, a small Island in the Archipellago, belonging to the Venetians. Middlebourg, the chief town in the Island of Zealand. Middlebourg, a town in Flanders, under the subjection of the States of Holland. Milan, the greatest and fairest town in Ita∣ly.
Milanez, the fairest Dutchy in all Italy. Milforde, a port town in Wales. Mingrella, a county in Georgia in Asia. Minorqua, an Island in the Mediterranean sea, upon the coast of Spain. Mirandola, a town in a Dutchy and Sove∣raignty of the same name near Mantouan, in Italy. Mire Court, a town in Lorraine. Mire poix, a City and Bishoprick in the county of Foix in France. Misistra, antiently Sparta, a ruined town in the Morea in Greece. Misne, or Meissen, a City and Bishoprick in Misnia. Misnia, a province of Germany. Mocandan, a streight at the entrance of the Persian sea. Modena, the chief town of Modenois. Modenois, a County and Dutchy in Italy. Mogacz, a place in the lower Hungary upon the Danube, where the Christians had a great overthrow by the Turks. Moldavia, a county of Europe, but tribu∣tary to the Turk. Molueques, Islands of Asia. Mombase, a Kingdom in Zanguebar, with a fortress in an Island of the same name, be∣longing to the King of Portugal.
Mombelliard, a Town and County in the Franche County, belonging to the Duke of Wittemberg. Mombrisson, a town in Forez in France. Momgommery, a town in Normandy, the title of that Gentleman who unfortunately slew Henry the second of France, with a lance, in a jest. Mommedi, a strong town in Lorraine. Mompellier, a City, Bishoprick, and antient University in Languedoc in France. Mompulcian, a town in Tuscany in Italy. Monaco, or Mourgues, a port town and for∣tress upon the coast of Genoa, governed by a Prince under the protection of France, since 1641. Mon Castell, a town in Flanders. Monson, a town in Arragon in Spain. Moncontour, a town in Poictou in France. Montferrat, a province of Italy, divided between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantoua. Monmouth, a town in a county of the same name in Wales. Monomotapa, a Countrey and Kingdom in Africa. Monce, the chief town in Hainault. Monserat, in Catalonia, famous for the de∣votions there paid to our Lady. Monsoreau, a town in Anjou in France.
Monstieres, a City and Archbishoprick in Tarantaise in Savoy. Mont, a Marquisate in the Ecclesiastique State in Italy. Montaldo, a small place in Piedmont, sub∣ject to the Pope. Montargis, a town in Gastinois upon the East of Beausse, a province in France. Montauban, a City and Bishoprick in Quercy in France, famous for the memorable sieges it hath withstood. Mont de Marsan, a town in Gascoigne in France. Montefiascope, a town in the Ecclesiastique State in Italy, famous for the Muscatello Wines. Montelimark, a town in Dauphine in France. Monterreau-faut-yonne, a town in the Go∣vernment of Champagne, where was killed the Duke of Burgundy, the sworn enemy of the house of Orleans. Monte St. Angelo, a City and Archbishop∣rick in the Kingdom of Naples. Montesia, a town in the Kingdom of Va∣lentia in Spain, it gave name to an Order of Knights. Montgommery, a town in a shire of the same name in Wales. Montleherry, a town in the Isle of France.
Montlian, a Town and Fortress, the Key of Savoy. Montreal, a City and Archbishoprick in Sicily. Montreuill, a Town and Fortress in Picardy in France. Montrose, a Marquisate in the North of Scotland, made famous by the last Marquesse there of, one of the greatest Captains in our age, who most faithfully supported the Inter∣est of King Charles the first, and the second, against the Covenanters, who ro their eternal ignominy most basely Murthered him. Moravia, a province in Germany. Morea, a peninsula in Greece, antiently called Peloponesus. Moock, a town in Guelderland upon the Mase, where the Spaniards gained a memora∣ble battle against the Confederated Dutch. Mora, a town in Switzerland, where Charles Duke of Burgundy received a defeat in 1476. Morlaix, a port town in Britany in France. Mortaro, a Town in the Dutchy of Milan, where Charles le Magne formerly obtained a signal victory over the Lombards. Moscou, the chief town of Muscovy, resi∣dence of the Great Duke, and a Patriarch. Moscovye, see Russia Blanche, or the White.
Moselle, a River running through Lorraine and Germany. Mosul, antiently Nineve, a town in Diar∣bech in Asia. La Mothe, a Fortress in Lorraine, razed by the French in 1645. Moulins, the chief town of Bourbonnois in France. Mountains of the Moon, Mountains upon the North of Monopotapa in Africa. Mourgues, see Monaco. Mouzon, a town in Champagne, famous for the brave resistance it made against the impe∣rialists, under the Command of Picolomini, one of the greatest Captains of his time. Mozambique, a Kingdom in Zanguebar in Africa, with a Fortress in an Island of the same name, the most considerable Government which the Portugals there have. Mulberg, a town in Misnia in Germany, where Charles the fifth defeated the Elector of Saxony. Mulhausen, an Imperial town in Alsatia. Munick, the chief town of Bavaria, and residence of the Duke. Munster, a province in the South of Ire∣land. Munster, a City and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire in Westphalia.
Murcia, a Kingdom in Spain upon the Me∣diterranean Sea. Murcia, a chief town in that Kingdom, fa∣mous for its traffique of Silk. Muret, a town in Gascoigne in France, where Simon Earle of Montforde obtained a great victory over the Albigeois, and Arrogonois, the King of Arragon being there slain upon the place, with above 20000 others, in the year 1206. N NAgera, a place in Navarre, where was instituted the Order of Knights of the Flower de Lys, in 1048. Namur, the chief town of the County of Namur, one of the 17 provinces, subject to the King of Spain. Nancy, the chief town of Lorraine: Be∣fore this town was Charles Duke of Burgundy slayn by Rene Duke of Lorraine, in 1477. Nangasachi, a town in Japan. Nanquim, a city in China, near a River of the same name. Nantes, a City and Bishoprick upon the River Loire, in Britany. Naples, a fair town in a Kingdom of the same name in Italy, subject to the King of
Spain, for which he payes a small yearly tri∣bute to the Pope. Napoula, a town in the Morea. Narbone, a City and Bishoprick in Langue∣doc in France. Narsingue, a town in a Kingdom of the same name in India. Navarre, a Kingdom in Spain. Navarrin, a port town in Morea. Navarrins, a Fortress in Bearne in France. Naumbourg, a City and Bishoprick in Mis∣nia. Negrepont, a town in an Island of the same name in the Archipellago, subject to the Turk. Nemours, a Town and Dutchy in the Go∣vernment of the Isle of France. Nerac, a town in Guienne, and chief of the Dutchy d'Albert. Nermonstier, an Island upon the coast of Poictou in France. Nerva, a strong town in Livonia. Newbourg, a Town and Dutchy of the Em∣pire in Bavaria. Newcastle, a strong town in the County of Northumberland, whence come great abun∣dance of Coales. Neuf Chastell, a Town and County belon∣ging to the Duke of Longueville. Nevers, a City, Bishoprick, and Dutchy, the chief town of Nivernois upon the Loire.
Newport, a town in the Isle of Wight, also a port town not far from Ostend in Flan∣ders. Newark, a town in Nottinghamshire upon the Kiver of Trent. Newsell, a Fortress in Hungary. Nicaregua, a province in New Spain. Nice, a City and Bishoprick in a County of the same name in France, upon the Medi∣terranean Sea, strengthened with a fair Cita∣del. Nice de Paille, a town in Montferrat. Nicosia, a town in the Isle of Cyprus. Nieper, or Bonithenes, a River in Poland. Nigeboli, a town in Bulgaria, where Baja∣zet Emperour of the Turks gave a great de∣feat to the Christians. Nigritia, a Countrey in Africa. Niger, a River in that Countrey. Nile, a River in Africa, running through Abissinia and Aegypt, where it falls into the Mediterranean sea. Nimmeguen, a town in the Dutchy of Guel∣derland. Niort, a town in Poictou. Nitaw, the residence of the Dukes of Cur∣land. Nivernois, a province in France. Nogent le Retrou, the fairest Village of France, in Perche.
Noion, a City and Bishoprick, and one of the antient Peerages of France, which assist at the Kings Coronation. Nombre des Dios, a town in Castille d'Oro, whose commerce is now translated to Porto Belo. Norfolk, a rich County in the East part of England. Norlinguen, an Imperial town in Swabe∣land. Normandy, one of the fairest provinces of France. Northampton, the chief town of a Shire of the same name about the middle of Eng∣land. Northausen, an Imperial town in Turin∣gia. Northumberland, a County in the North of England. Norway, a Kingdom in the North of Eu∣rope, subject to the King of Denmark. Norwich, the chief City in Norfolk, fa∣mous for the manufactury of stuffs. Notebourg, the chief Fortresse of In∣gria. Noto, a Town, and Valley in Sici∣ly. Nottingham, a town in a Shire of the same name about the middle of England. Novara, a Town in the Dutchy of Milan,
where in the year 1512. the Switzers gave the French a great overthrow. Novelare, a Town and County under the Duke of Mantoua. Novogrode-Veliki, or the Great, a City and Archbishoprick in Moscovy. Nisi Novogrode, or the Lesse, a town in Muscovy, upon the River Volga. Nubi, a Kingdom in Africa, also the chief town of that Kingdom. Nuremberg, an Imperial town in Franco∣nia. Nuys, a town in the Archbishoprick of Co∣len upon the Rhine, famous for its brave resi∣stance against the siege of Charles Duke of Burgundy, in the year 1474. O. OBI, a River in Asia. Ocziacow, a town in Podolia in Poland, where the River Boristhenes falleth into the Black or Euxine Sea, belonging to the Turk. Oder, a River in Germany, running through Silesia, Brandenbourg, and Pomerania. Oelande, an Island in the Baltique Sea.
Offembourg, an Imperial town and chief of the County of Ortnau in Alsatia. Oldembourg, a Town and County of the Empire in Westphalia. Oleron, a fair Island and Fortress in the Western Ocean upon the coast of Xaintonge, a Province of France. Oleron, a City and Bishoprick in Bearne. Olinde, a town in Bresil, taken by the Hol∣landers in 1630. Olite, a town in Navarre. Olmuts, a City and Bishoprick in Mora∣via. Olonne, a port upon the coast of Poictou in France. Ombria, a province in the Ecclesiastique State in Italy. Oneille, a Town and Marquisate upon the coast of Genoa, belonging to the Duke of Sa∣voy. Onspach, a Town and Marquisate of the Empire in Franconia. Oran, a town upon the coast of Barbary, subject to the King of Spain. Orange, a town and principality upon the Rhone, bordering upon the County of Avig∣non, and the province of Dauphine in France. Orbitelle, a town upon the borders of Tus∣cany in Italy.
Orcades, Islands upon the North of Scot∣land. Orehelana, a River between Guiana and Bresil. Oristano, a City and Archbishoprick in Sardignia. Orleans, a City and Bishoprick upon the Loire in France, it was antiently the head of a Kingdom, but now the title of the French Kings second son. Ormus, a Town in a Kingdom in Persia. Ornano, a Seigniory in the Isle of Corsica. Orvietto, a town in the Ecclesiastique State in Italy. Osma, a City and Bishoprick in the Old Ca∣stille. Osnabrug, a Hans town in Westphalia. Ostend, a strong port town in Flanders. Ostia, antiently a famous port at the mouth of Tiber. Otranto, a City, and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples, where they imbarque for Greece. Ottansee, the chief town of Fionia. Overisle, one of the united provinces of the Low Countreys. Ouessant, an Island upon the West of Brita∣ny in France. Oviedo, the chief town of Biscay, where sonie of the Gothish Kings retreated up∣on
the approach of the Moores. Ourque, a town in Portugal, famous for the victory of King Alfonso over five Kings of the Moors. Oxford, a town in a Shire of the same name, it is also the most eminent University in the world. Oyse, a River running through Picardy and the Isle of France. P PAderborne, a Hans town in Westphalia. Padoua, a City and Bishoprick, and fa∣mous University, about 25 miles from Venice, and subject to that Commonwealth. Palatinate, a province in Germany upon the Rhine. Palamos, a port town in Catalognia. Palermo, a City and Bishoprick in Sicily, and residence of the Vice Roy of the King of Spain. Palmela, a town near Setuvall in Portu∣gal. Palma la nova, a Fortress in Friuli, the the most regular Fortification in the world, guarded with nine Bastions, and 700 pieces of Cannon. Palos, a port town in Andalousia, where
Columbus set fail, when he went to the disco∣very of the West Indies. Pamiers, a City and Bishoprick in the County of Foix in Languedoc in France. Pampeluna, the chief town of the King∣dome of Navarre. Panama, a town in Castille d'Oro upon the South sea. Para, a fort and Government in Bresil. Paraguay, a Country in America, compri∣sing Tucuman and Plata. Paraiba, a town in Bresil, possessed by the Hollanders. Paria, or Ore noque, a River between Ca∣stille d'Oro and Guiana. Parime, a Sea or rather Lake in Guiana. Paris, a most noble City and Archbisho∣prick, the chief town of France, and residence of the King, and seat of the chief Parlia∣ment. Parma, the chief town of a Dutchy of the same name in Italy. Parmezan, the Country where Parma stands. Passage, a Port town in Biscay. Passau, a town of the Empire in Bavaria, upon the Danube. Patagous, a people in Magellanica, ten foot high.
Patay, a town in the Province of Beausse in France, where the French under the conduct of John Duke of Aleneson, got a memorable Victory over the English, com∣manded by the great Talbot, the terrour of the French. Patras, a town in the Morea in Greece. Patrimony, of St. Peter, a province in the Ecclesiastick stare in Italy. Pavia, a great town in the Dutchy of Milan, where Francis the first of France was taken prisoner. Pavoasan, a town in the Isle of St. Thome. Pegu, a town in a Kingdom of the same name in India. Peguin, the chief town of China, and re∣sidence of the King. Pembroke, a town in a County of the same name in Wales. Penon de Veloz, a Fortress of the King of Spain's, upon the Coast of Barbary. Pirche, a province in France. Perigord, a province in France. Perigueua, the chief City and a Bishoprick in Perigord. Peron, a very strong town in Picar∣dy. Perpignan, the chief town of the County of Rousillon strengthened with one of the
fairest and best fortified Citadells in Eu∣rope. Persia, a great Kingdom in Asia. Perthois, a Countrey in Champagne. Peru, a Countrey in America. Perugia, a town in a province of the same name in the Ecclesiastique State. Petillano, a soveraign County in Tuscany in Italy. Petrikow, the seat of the Parliament in Poland in the winter time. Psalzbourg, a principality in Lorraine. Phenicia, a province in Asia. Philippe ville, a strong Town in Hainault. Philippine, Islands upon the coast of Asia, of which Lucon is the chiefest. Philisbourg, a Fortress in the lower Palati∣nate, one of the Keys of Germany, subject to the Archbishop of Tryers. Pica, a Mountain in the Island of Tenariffe, one of the Canary Islands, and one of the highest in the world. Picardy, a province in France. Piedmont, a Countrey of Italy, subject to the Duke of Savoy. Pignerol, a Town and Citadel in Piedmont, the Key of Italy. Pilsen, a town in the Kingdom of Bohe∣mia. Piombino, a Town and Principality upon the coast of Tuscany.
Pisa, a City and Archbishoprick in Tus∣cany, between Ligorne and Florence, resi∣dence of the Knights of the Order of St. Stephen. Placentia, a City and Bishoprick in the Kingdom of Leon. Plaisensa, a town in a Dutchy of the same name in Lombardy, subject to the Duke of Parma. Plata, a River; also a Countrey in A∣merica; also a City and Archbishoprick in Peru. Pleskow, a strong town in Muscovy, upon the frontiers of Sweden and Poland. Pleurs, a town in the Grisons Countrey, overwhelmed with a fall of a Mountain, in the year 1618. Plimouth, a town of great traffique by rea∣son of its two ports, in Devonshire, in the South-west part of England. Pludents, a small Seigniory in Tyrol, be∣longing to the King of Spain. Po, the greatest River of Italy, it runs through Lombardy, & falls into the Adriatique Sea or Gulph of Venice in several branches between Venice and Ravenna. Poblet, a Monastery in Catalognia, where the Kings of Arragon were antiently bu∣ried.
Podolia, a province of Poland. Poissi, a town upon the Seine in the Isle of France. Paictiers, a City and Bishoprick, the chief town of Poictou, and one of the great∣est circumference in France, famous for its University, and many memorable battles, especially that of the black Prince. Poictou, a province of France. Pola, a town in Istria. Polaquia, a province of Poland. Pomejok, a town in Virginia. Pomerania, a country in Germany, shared between the crown of Sweden, and the E∣lector of Brandenbourg. Pont a Mouson, a town in Lorrain. Pont de Ce, a small town and Castle upon the Loire, in the province of Anjou in France. Pont de l' Arche, a strong town in Nor∣mandy. Pont du Gard, three bridges built, one o∣ver the other, over the River Gardon, for the continuing of an Aquaduct to Nismes, the lowest Bridge having six Arches, the second eleven, and the highest thirty four, a thing of great antiquity. Pont eau de Mer, a town in Normandy, be∣tween Caen and Roven.
Pont l'Evesque, a town, not far from Caen in Normandy. Pont Oise, a town in the Isle of France, not far from Paris. Pont Orson, a town in Normandy, upon the frontier of Britanny. Pont St. Esprit, a town in Languedoc upon the Rhone. Ponthieu, a County in Picardy. Pontremoli, a Town and Signiory between Genoa and Tuscany, belonging to the Duke of Florence. Popaien, a town in a Countrey of the same name in Castillia d'Oro. Porentru, a town in Switzerland, the resi∣dence of the Bishop of Basil. Port Hercole, a town and port in Tuscany, belonging to the King of Spain. Port Lewis, or Blavese, a secure and well fortified port in Britanny in France. Porto Royale, a port in Acadia in New France. Porto, a town in the Ecclesiastique State, at the mouth of the River Ti∣ber. Porto, a town of great traffique in Portu∣gal, which first gave name to that King∣dom.
Porto Belo, an eminent port in Castillia d'Oro, where arrive all Marchandises from Spain to Peru. Porto Longono, a fortress and port in the Isle of Elve, upon the coast of Tuscany. Porto Seguro, a Government in Bresill. Portsmouth, a strong town and port in Hampshire. Portugal, a Kingdom in Europe, inclosed by Spain on all sides, except where it opens to the Western Ocean. Posega, a town in Sclavonia, subject to the Turk. Posna, the chief town of the Lower Po∣land. Povengi-O-Rio Grande, a Fortress in Bre∣sill. Potosi, a Town and Mountain in Peru, where are the richest Silver-Mines in the world. Prague, the chief City, and an Archbisho∣prick in Bohemia. Precop, a town in the Lesser Tartary, which is thence called Precopense. Presbourg, the chief town of that part of Hungary which is under the house of Austria. Preveza, a town in Epirus in Greece. Provence, a gallant province of France. Provins, a town in Brie. Prussia, a province of Poland: it is distin∣guished
into Royal and Ducal, the latter be∣longing to the Elector of Brandenbourg, who does homage for it to the Crown of Swe∣den. Le Puy, a City and Bishoprick in Vellaj, in the Gevenes in Languedoc. Puy Cerda, the chief town of the County of Cerdaignia between France in Spain. Pyrenean Hills, Mountains which separate the Kingdoms of France and Spain. Q. QƲebec, a town upon the great River in the County of Canada or new France. Quedelimbourg, an Abbey in Saxony. Quercy, a province in France. Quieras, a town in Piedmont. Quiloa, a town upon the coast of Zangue∣bar, belonging to the Portugals. Quimpercorintin, a City and Bishoprick in the Lower Britany. Quito, a town in Peru.
R. RAab, or Ravarin, a Fortress in Hunga∣ry belonging to the house of Austria. Radicofani, a Castle and Signiory in Tus∣cany, between Siena and Rome. Ragusa, a City, Archbishoprick, and Re∣publique in Dalmatia, tributary to the Turk. Ranzou, a Castle in Holsatia. Rappers viler, a town in a County of the same name in Switzerland. Rattisbone, a City and Bishoprick of the Empire, it stands upon the Danube in Bavaria. Ravenna, a City of great antiquity in Ro∣mania in Italy, not far from the Gulph of Ve∣nice. Ravensberg, a County of the Empire in Westphalia, belonging to the Elector of Bran∣denbourg. Razebourg, a town in Finland. Re, an Island in the Western Ocean, not far from Rochelle. Red Sea, the Sea of Meca, or the long Sea, a Gulph or Sinus, extending it self from the Arabian almost to the Mediterranean Sea, and dividing Africa and Asia. Redding, a Borrough town in Bark-shire upon the Thames.
Rees, a Town and Dutchy in Cleves, now under the power of the States of Holland. Reggia, a town in Modenois in Italy. Rheggio, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Rheimes, a City and Archbishoprick in Champagne, the Archbishop hath the title of Premier, or first Duke and Peer of France, to him belongs the priviledge to Crown the French King. Remorentine, a town in Sologne in France. Rendam, a Castle in Auvergne, before which died the Constable Guesclin. Rennes, a City and Bishoprick, the seat of the Parliament of Britanny. Renti, a Fortress in Artois. Retel, a town in Champagne, near which did the French obtain a notable victory over the Spanish Forces, in the year 1650. Retimo, a town in Candia, taken by the Turk in 1646. Revel, a port town in Livonia. Rhimberg, a town of Germany upon the Rhine. Rhinfeld, a town of Swabeland upon the Rhine, famous for the defeat of the Imperia∣lists, and the taking of John de Wert, by the Duke Bernard Weymar, in the year 1638.
Rhodes, a town in an Island of the same name near Anatolia, in the Mediterranean Sea, formerly the Residence of the Knights of the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem, who most exquisitely fortified, and as brave∣ly defended it against Solyman Emperour of the Turks, to whom after a long siege they were forced to yield it; it was at the en∣try of this port that stood the huge Colossus, from whence the Rhodiots were called Co∣lossians. Rhosne, a River which rises in Switzer∣land, and running through the Lake of Geneva, and a great part of France, at length falls into the Mediterranean Sea near Aygues mortes in Languedoc. Richelieu, a new Town and Dutchy in Poictou in France. Richemonde, a Town and Dutchy in Tork∣shire. Rieti, a Town in the Ecclesiastique State in Ʋmbria, about the midst of Italy. Rieux, a City and Bishoprick in Langue∣doc. Riez, a City and Bishoprick in Pro∣vence. Riga, a City and Archbishoprick in Livo∣nia, of which it is the chief town. Rimini, a Town in the Ecclesiastique State.
Riogrande, a Government in Bresill. Riom, a town in Auvergne. Ripaille, a town in Savoy upon the Lake of Geneva. Rivoli, a town in Piedmont. Roanne, a town upon the Loire in Forez, not far from Lyons, where Travellers usually take the convenience of that River to descend to Orleans, &c. Rochelle, a strong town and port in the Countrey of Aulnis. Rochester, a port town in Kent. Rocroy, a strong town in Champagne, near to which the Duke d'Enguyen, now Prince of Conde, defeated the Spanish Forces, in the year 1643. Rodez, a City and Bishoprick in Rouergue in Languedoc. Romagnia, a province in the Ecclesiastique State. Romania, a province in Europe, subject to the Turk. Romans, a Town in Dauphine in France. Rome, a town in Italy upon the Tiber, the seat of the Pope, and formerly the head of the most flourishing Empire of the world. Roncevaux, a place in Navarre, where the French received a great defeat under Charle∣magne, in the year 792.
Roneiglione, a County in the patrimony of St. Peter. Rose-Comn, a County in Connaught in Ire∣land. Rosevecq, a small town in Flanders, famous in History for a battle which Charles the sixth won against the Rebels of Gante; of whom were slain 40000. upon the place, and their General Philip d'Artevill was taken and han∣ged. Roses, a very strong town and port in Ca∣talognia. Rosette, a port town in Egypt. Roskill, a City and Bishoprick in the Isle of Zeland in Denmark. Rossano, a City and Archbishoprick in Ca∣labria, a province in the Kingdom of Naples. Rostoc, a town in Mechlebourg. Rothsaye, a Castle in an Island in the Gulf of Dambritton, it hath the title of a Dutchy, and was formerly the Apportion of the Prince of Scotland, from whence, its said, issued the Royal Family of the Stewarts. Rotterdam, a port town in Holland, fa∣mous for the Birth of the learned Eras∣mus. Rotweil, an Imperial town in Swabe∣land. Rouen, a city of great traffique, and an Archbishoprick in Normandy.
Rovergue, a country in the Province of Languedoc. Rovigo, a town in Italy, subject to the Ve∣netians. Rousillion, a country between Languedoc and Catalognia. Royans, a town in Xaintonge near the mouth of the River Garomne. Ruyen, an Island and principality upon the Coast of Pomerania, subject to the crown of Sweden. Ruremond, a town in Guilderland, belong∣ing to the King of Spain. Rushin, a town in the Isle of Man. Russia, black Russia, a province in Poland. White Russia is the same with Moscovy, a great Empire in the North part of Europe. S. SAbaria, a town in Hungary. Sabionetta, a strong town and Soveraign Dutchy in Mantouan. Saguenay, a town in new France. Sahid, a town in a country of the same name in the higher Aegypt. St. Andrew, a City and Archbishoprick in Scotland. St. Antonin, a Town in Rovergue in France.
St. Aubin, a small town in Britany, fa∣mous for the Victory there obtained by Lewis of Fremoville, General for Charles the eighth over the Duke of Britany and other Princes, in 1488. Cap of St. Augustin, the most Eastern of all Africk. St. Augustino, a port town in Florida. St. Beaume, a town in Provence where is the Grotto of Mary Magdalen, whose body is said to be there yet preserved. St. Bertrand de Gominges, a City and Bisho∣prick in Gascony. St. Borondon, an Island upon the West of the Canaries, supposed inaccessible by reason of the clouds which perpetually obscure the coasts of it. St. Brieux, a City and Bishoprick in Bri∣tany. St. Christopher, an Island lying towards A∣merica, possessed by the English and French. St. Denis, a town in the Isle of France, four miles distant from Paris, the Sepulchre of the French Kings. St. Dizier, a town in Campagne. St. Domingo, the chief town of the Island called Hispaniola. St. Fe, a town in new Mexico. St. Fe de Bogosa, a town in the new King∣dome of Granada.
St. Flour, a City and Bishoprick in the up∣per Auvergne. St. Foy, a town in Guienne upon the Dor∣dogne. St. Gal, a town and Abby in Switzerland. St. George de la Mine, a Port town and Fortress in Guinee, belonging to the Hol∣landers. St. Germane in Laye, one of the noblest of the French Kings Palaces, seated upon the Seine in the Isle of France, seaven leagues distant from Paris. St. Guirtrembourg, a strong Town in Hol∣land, famous for the Salmon-fishing. St. Helene, an Island in the Aethiopian sea very remote from the Terra Firma, and called the sea Inn, by reason of the abundance of fresh water, which ships take in there. St. Hubert, a City and Bishoprick in Lux∣embourg. St. Jago de chili, the chief Town of Chili. St. Jago, de Compostella, the chief Town of Gallicia, famous for the Pilgrimages made thither in devotion to St. James, whose Relicks are reported to be still there reser∣ved. St. Jago del Estero, a town in Tucuman a country in America.
S. Jean d' Angeli, a town in Xaintonge in France. St. Jean de Loon, a town in Burgundy upon the Saone. St. Jean de Luz, a small town in Biscay. St. Jean de Morienne, a City and Bishoprick in Savoye. St. Jean Pie di Porto, a town in the lower Navarre, subject to the french King. St. Joan de Porto Rico, a town in the Island Briquen. St. Johns town, a town in Scotland. St. Laurens, or Madagascar, an Island upon the East of Africa, one of the greatest in the World. St. Laurence, a river and gulfe in Can∣ada. St. Legar de Conserans, a City and Bisho∣prick in Gascony. St. Lucar, a port town of great traffick in Andalusia, at the mouth of the River Guadal∣quivir. St. Malo, a City, Bishoprick, and famous port in Britanny. St. Marguerite, an Island upon the Coast of Provence. St. Marino, a town and smal Republick in the Ecclesiastick state. St. Matheo, a port town in Florida. St. Maure, and Island and Fortress of the
Turks upon the Coast of Epirus. St. Menehoud, a town in Champagne. Mont St. Michel, a town built upon a rock in the sea between Britanny and Normandy, whence came the first institution of the Knights of the order of St. Michel. St. Michel Aroange, a port town of great traffick in Muscovy. St. Michel, the chief town of Barrois. St. Morris, a town in the country of Val∣lesia. St. Nicholas, a port town in Moscovy, which gives its name to a Gulfe, which is also called the white sea. St. Omer, a strong town in Artois. St. Palaci, the chief town of the lower Navarre. St. Papoul, a City and Bishoprick in Lan∣guedoc. St. Patrick, a place in Ʋlster, called the purgatory of Ireland. St. Pierre le Moustier, a town in Niver∣nois. St. Pol de Leon, a City and Bishoprick in the lower Britanny. St. Pol trois Chasteaux, a City and Bi∣shoprick in Dauphine. St. Pons de Tomiers, a City and Bishoprick in Languedoc.
St. Quentin, a town in Picardy, near which in the time of Francis the second were defeated the French in the year. 1557. St. Salvador the chief Town of Bresil, sub∣ject to the Portugalls. St. Salvador the chief town of Congo. St. Sever, a town in Gascony. St. Sebastian, a port Town in Biscaye. St. Thomas Meliapor a town in India. St. Thome, an Island and Gulfe in the Ae∣thiopian sea. St. Veit, the chief town of Corinthia. Saintes, a City and Bishoprick, and chief of Saintonge. Saintonge, a province of France not farr from Rochelle. Salamanca, a town in the Kingdom of Le∣on, famous for its University. Salces, a Fortress in Roussillion. Salerna, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kindom of Naples, famous for its Physick School, it is also a principality, and was an∣ciently the Title of the eldest son of the King of that Kingdom. Salfeld, an Abby of the Empire in Turin∣gia. Salisbury, a noble City in Wiltshire. Sallies, a town in Bearne, famous for a fountain of White-salt issuing there. Salme, a county in Lorrain.
Isle of Salomon, an Island in the pacifick sea; so called by the Spaniards, as if Salomon had sent thither for his Gold. Salon, a town in Provence. Salone, a ruined town upon the Coast of Dalmatia. Salonicque, a town in Macedonia. Salzbourg, a City and Archbishoprick in Bavaria, whose Archbishop is a Prince of the Empire. Samarcanda, a town in Tartary, the Re∣sidence of the great Tamerlane. Samogitia, a province in Poland. Samoiedes, a people in Tartaria deserta. Sancerre, a town in Berry in France. Sanchoan, an Island upon the Coast of Chi∣na, where the Portugalls first landed in those parts, where also Francis Xaverius, a brother of Ignatius of Loyola, who with him first in∣stituted the order of Jesuites dyed. Sandwiche, a port town in Kent. Sanguessa, a town in Navarre. Sanscverina, a City and Archbishoprick in Calabria. Sanferre, a country in Picardy. Santoss, a fortress in Bresil. Saone, a River of France, falling into the Rhosne, just below the city of Lyons. Sarbruc, a County between Lorraine and Germany.
Sarragosa, the chief City of Arragon. Sardinia, an Island in the Mediterranean sea, opposite to Genoa, and subject to the crown of Spain. Sargan, a county subject to the Switzers. Sarlat, a City and Bishoprick in Perigord in France. Sarzana, a frontiere town between the Republick of Genoa, and the dutchy of Tus∣cany. Sas de Gand, a Fortress in Flanders, taken by the Hollanders in 1644. Sassari, a City and Archbishoprick in Sar∣dinia. Sattalia, a town in Anatolia. Saverne, a town in Alsace, and residence of the Bishop of Strasbourg. Savillan, a town in Piedmont. Saumure, a town in Anjou upon the Loire. Savoye, a Soveraign Dutchy between France and the Switzers country. Savona, a Port upon the Coast of Genoa. Saxony, a country and dutchy in Germa∣ny, it is divided into the higher and the lower Saxony. Scagen, a town and Promontory in Jutland. Scardona, a town in Dalmatia. Scarlin, a Castle upon the coast of Tuscany, before which was slayn the famous Strozzi Prior of Capoua, in the French quarrel.
Scarpanto, an Island upon the coast of Anatolia, belonging to the Turk. Scaffhausen, a town, and one of the Prote∣stant Cantons in Switzerland. Scalold, a town in Island. Sconeland, a Countrey upon the coast of Denmark. Schwerin, the chief town of Mechlenbourg, it stands upon a Lake, and is the residence of the Dukes of that Countrey. Scenk, a Fortress in Guelderland, belong∣ing to the States of Holland. Scouven, an Island in Zeland, famous for the bold attempt of the Spanish Captain Mondragon. Schwartzembourg, a County of the Empire in Turingia. Schweinfurt, an Imperial town in Franconia. Schianhai, a port town in China. Sclavonia, a Countrey upon the South of Hungary, divided between the Turk and the house of Austria. Scone, a famous Abbey in the County of Perth in Scotland, made more illustrious by the Coronation of the Kings there celebrated. Scotland, a Kingdom upon the North of England, united by the happy succession of King James the undoubted heir to both those Crowns. Scutars, a town in Albany upon a Lake
of the same name subject to the Turk. Sebenico, a town in Dalmatia, which most bravely repulsed the Turks four several times. Sedan, a very strong town and chief of that Province, upon the frontiers of Cham∣pagne and Luxembourg. Seez, a City and Bishoprick in Normandy. Segui, a town in the Ecclesiastick State, whére its said was the first invention of Or∣gans. Segovia, a town in Castille, famous for an Aquaduct of 177 arches in length. Seine, a river of France, runs through Paris, Roven and falls in the British sea at Hauvre de Grace. Sempach, a town in Switzerland, under the protection of the Canton of Lucerne. Senega, a town and river, a branch of the river Niger in Nigritia. Senez, a City and Bishoprick in Provence. Sentis, a City and Bishoprick in Valois. Seni, the chief town of Senois, a small Pro∣vince under the Government of Cham∣pagne. Seregippa, a town and Government in Bresil. Serraliona, a mountain, and town in Guinee, called also Cachieu. Servia, a province of Europe subject to the Turk.
Setines, anciently Athenes, a ruined town in Greèce, Setaval, an eminent port town in Portugal. Seville, a City of great traffick in Anda∣louzia, where the West India Fleets usually land their merchandises. Sfachia, a town in the Isle of Candy, which gave name to the Sfachiots, the bravest souldi∣ers of that Island. Shetlande, and Island upon the North of the British Isles. Sian, a town in a Kingdom of the same name beyond the river Ganges. Sicily, an Island and Kingdom lying in the Mediterranean sea at the lower end of Italy, from whence it is apassage but of half a league, and the mouth of the gulfe of Venice; subject to the King of Spain. Sienna, a City and Archbishoprick in Toscany, distant about a dayes journey from Florence. Silesia, a province in Germany. Syllyes, see Sorlinges. Sion, a City and Bishoprick, the chief Town of Vallesia, a country leagued with the Cantons of the Switzers, and lying be∣tween them and Geneva. Syracusa, a port town in Scicily, memo∣rable in history for the defence it received
from the Engines invented by Archimedes. Simmeren, a principality of the Empire in the lower Palatinate. Sinobi, a port town in Anatolia upon the Black, or Euxine sea. Siponte, a City and Arch-bishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Sisseg, a town in Croatia, belonging to the house of Austria. Sittia, a town in Candia. Sisterou, a city and bishoprick in Provence. Sixenne, a Priory in Arragon of Ladies, of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem. Slaboda, a town in Muscovie. Sleswick, a Town and Dutchy in Jutland. Sluyse, a most impregnable town in Flan∣ders, under the power of the States of Holland Smirna, a great port in Anatolia. Smolensko, a town in Muscovy, now under the power of the Polander. Soczou, the chief town of Maldavia. Sodor, a town in the IIsle of Sura, one of the Hebrides, where are interred 48. Kings of Scotland, 4. Kings of Ireland, and 8. Kings of Norway. Sofala, a Castle and a, River in Cafreria, subject to the King of Portugal, near to which he gets great quantity of very pure Gold. Soissons, a City, Bishoprick, and County in Picardy.
Solfarin, a small Signiory in Mantovan. Soloturne, a town and canton of Switzer∣land. Sologne, a country upon the South of Or∣leance. Solms, a county of the Empire in Veteravia Solsona, a town in Catalonia. Somme, a River in Picardy. Sonde, or Sounde, a streight in Denmark, and key of the Baltick sea. There is also a∣nother streight, called by the same name, be∣tween the Islands of Sumatra & Java in Asia. Sonnemberg, a town of Brandenbourg, ancient∣ly the residence of the Grand Prior of Malta. Sophia, the chief town of Bulgaria. Soria, a town in Castile, near to which are the ruines of the ancient Numantia. Sorlinges, a great many small Islands, upon the West of England, 6. of which are inhabited Sorrento, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Souria, a province of Tur comania in Asia. Southhampton, a town of great traffique, and chief of the county of Hampsh. Sous, a Kingdom in the West part of Bile∣dulgerid. Spa, a small Town in the principality of Lyege, famous for its Medicinal wa∣ters.
Spalatro, a City, Archbishoprick and Port in Dalmatia. Spandau, a Fortress in Brandenbourg. Spigelberg, an Island or Peninsula towards the Artique Pole not yet well discovered. Spire, a City and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire. Spiritu Santo, a town and government in Bresil. Spirlinga, a small town in Sicily, the only one that was Innocent of the conspiracy of the Sicilian Vespers. Spoleto, the chief town of Ombria in the Ecclesiastick State. Staffanger, a City, Bishoprick, and Port in Norway. Stafford, the chief town of Staffordshire. Stalimene, an Island in the Archipelago. Stavelo, an Abbey of the Empire, between the Archbishop of Triers, and the Low Coun∣tries. Stenai, a town in Lorraine upon the Maase. Stendel, a town in Brandenbourg. Sterlin, a town in Scotland. Stetin, a hans town, and chief of Pomerania, its now under the Swede. Stives, anciently Thebes, a ruined town in Greece.
Stockholme, a port and chief town of the Kingdom of Sweden at the mouth of the Lake of Meler. Solberg, a county of the Empire in the upper Saxony. Stralsonde, a hans town in that part of Po∣merania, which is subject to the Swede, and port upon the Baltick sea. Strasbourg, an Imperial town in Alsatia, famous for its Arfenal clock and tower, that hath 630. stairs up to the top of it. Strido, a town of Stiria the Country of St. Jerom. Stugarde, the chief town of Wirtemberg. Suaquem, a town in the coast of Abex, upon the Red sea, under the power of the Turk. Suda, a port town and Fortress in Candia. Sues, a port town of Aegypt, at the end of the Red sea, the Turks Arsenal or Magazine. Sulmone, a town in the Kingdom of Naples. Sulzbach, a Seigniory of the Empire in the upper Palatinate or Bavaria. Sumatra, an Island upon the coast of Asia. Sundenberg, a town and Dutchy in the Isle of Alsen near Jutland. Surate, a port town in Cambaia, a King∣dom in India. Susdal, a City, Archbishoprick and Dutchy in Muscovy.
Swabeland, a province of Germany. Sweden, a Kingdom in the most Northern part of Europe. New Sweden, a country in the North of A∣merica, not far from Virginia. Switzerland▪ the country of a most Warlike Nation in Europe, lying upon the Alpes, and the borders thereof, and divided into thirteen cantons, each of which is a particu∣lar republick. Suz, a town in Persia, the ancient residence of its Kings. T TAbasco, a town in New Spain, where Correz the spanish General gave an irrecovera∣ble defeat to the Mexicanes. Tabor, a very strong town in Bohemia. Tadousac, a town in New France upon the great river. Tagus, a river in Spain, anciently famous for its golden Sandes, it passes through Tole∣do, and Lisbone. Taillebourg, a town in Saintouge. Tamaraca, a town and Government in Bre∣sil, belonging to the Hollanders. Tanacy, otherwise called Dom, a river which divides Europe and Asia. Tangier, a town in Africa, upon the streight
of Gibraltar, subject to the King of Portugal. Tangermund, a town of Brandenbourg, where the Emperor Charles the fourth kept his court. Tannez, a town of Sundgow, in the upper Alsace. Tarascon, a town in Provence, upon the Rhosue. Tarbes, a City and Bishoprick, and chief of Bigorre, a small country in Gascogny. Tarentum, an Archbishoprick, and port town in the Kingdom of Naples. Tarne, a river in Languedoc, running to Albi and Montauban. Tarragone, a town upon the sea coast in Ca∣talonia, one of the most ancient of all Spain. Tartar, or Tatar, a town in the North part of Tartary. Tartarie, a country in Asia, of the largest extent of any other of the world. Tartarie the lesser, a principality in Eu∣rope, oftentimes called Precopensis or Crimea, leagued with the Turk. Tarudante, the chief town of the King∣dom of Sous in Biledulgerid, a country in A∣frica. Tauris, a town in Persia, sometimes the re∣sidence of the Sophy. Tay, a river in Scotland, dividing it in two parts, the Northern and the Southern. Telusin, see Tremisen.
Temesvar, a very strong town in Hungary, the residence of a Beglerbeg. Tende, a town and Seigniory in Piedmont, Tenedos, an Island in the Archipelago, be∣longing to the Venetians. Tercera, an Island in the West Ocean. Tergovis, or Tervis, the chief town of vae∣lachia. Ternate, the chief of those five little Islands called the Molucquaes. Terouene, a town in Artois ruined by the Emperour Charles the Fifth. Terracino, a town in the Champagne of Rome. Texel, an Island and Port in Holland. Thames, commonly the Temmes, the fairest and most pleasant river in the World, it runs through London to Gravesend, &c. Thessalonica, a town and gulph in Macedo∣nia, a province of Greece. Thoursan, a country in Gascony. Thionville, a very strong town in Luxembourg Thoulouse, the chief City and Archbishop∣rick in Languedoc, the seat of the Parlia∣ment of that province. Tiber, a River running through a great part of Italy, through Rome, a little below which place it falls into the Mediterranean sea.
Tierache, a country in Picardy. Tigris, a River in Turquic of Asia. Tillemont, a town in Brabant, pillaged by the French and Hollanders, 1635. Timerais, a small country in Perche. Tingocses, a people of Tartay. Tirconnel, a Castle in a County of the same name in Ʋlster in Ireland. Tirol, a county in Germany, one of the big∣gest of Christendom. Tokay, a very strong town in Hungary, be∣longing to the House of Austria. Toledo, a very ancient City and Archbi∣shoprick in Castile, it had anciently the title of a Kingdom under the Moores. Tolen, a town in Zealand. Tolentino, a town in the Ecclesiastick state. Tomar, a town in Portugal. Tombut, a town in a Kingdom of the same name, the most considerable of Nigritia. Tongres, a very ancient town in the country of Lyege. Tor, a port town in Arabia Petrea or the Stony. Torgan, a town in Misnia. Tornus, a town in Burgundy. Tortona, a town and castle in the Dutchy of Milan. Tortosa, a City and Bishoprick in Catalog∣nia.
Torreglia, a Sovereign Marquisate, between the Countreys of Milan and Genoa Toscany, a Dutchy in Italy, the Duke of it has the title of Great Duke, he keeps his Court at Florence. Toul, a City and Bishoprick of the Empire in Lorraine, and seat of a Parliament. Toulon, a City, Bishoprick, and port in Pro∣vence, the Rendezvous of the French Kings Galleys. Tonpinamboas, a people of Bresil. Touraine, a province of France. Tournai, a town in Flanders. Tournon, a town in Vivaretz in Languedoc in France. Tours, the chief town of Touraine, seated on the Loire, near which town Charles Martel overthrew 400000 Sarazens, of which 375 thousand were slayn upon the place. Touvres, a famous fountain in Angoulesme. Trans, a City and Archbishoprick in the Kingdom of Naples. Transylvania, a principality of Europe, tri∣butary to the Turk. Transisalane, otherwise Overissel, one of the united provinces of the Low Countreys. Trebisonde, a town in Anatolia, seated on the Black or Euxine Sea, antiently the head of an Empire, which was subjected to the Turk by Mahomet the second, who put the Empe∣rour thereof to death.
Treguier, or Lantriguet, a City and Bishop∣rick in Britanny in France. Tremisen, or Teleusen, a town in a King∣dom of the same name in Barbary. Trent, a City, Bishoprick, and Principality of the Empire in Italy, almost incompassed with the Venetian territories, famous for the Councel held there. Treviso, a town in the Venetian territories, and chief of the province called Marchia Tre∣visana. Trevaux, the chief town of the principa∣lity of Dombes in France. Triers, a City and Electoral Archbishop∣rick of the Empire, whose surprise by the Spaniards in the year 1635 was one of the chiefest occasions of the War between France and Spain. Triest, a port town in Istria, subject to the house of Austria. Trin, a town in the province of Monterrat in Italy, subject to the Duke of Savoy. Tripoli in Barbary, a town in a Kingdom of the same name in Africa, seated upon the Mediterranean Sea, and subject to the Turk. Tripoli in Souria, a port town in Asia upon the Mediterranean Sea. Troyes, the chief City and an Archbishoprick in Champagne. Tucuman, a Countrey in America, subject to the King of Spain.
Tudela, a town in Navarre. Tulles, a City and Bishoprick in Limosin. Tunis, a city and port in a Kingdom of the same name in Barbary, subject to the Turk, near the place where Carthage formerly stood. Turcomania, a province in Asia. Turgow, a Countrey subject to the Swit∣zers. Turin, the chief town of Piedmont, and usual residence of the Dukes of Savoy. Turingia, a Countrey and Langraviate in Germany. Turquestan, one of the greatest parts of Tar∣tary in Asia. Turkie in Asia, a countrey so called in A∣sia. Turkie in Europe, a countrey so called in the Eastern part of Europe. Tuy, a City and Bishoprick in Gallicea. Tyre, or Syr, a port town in Phenicia, at the end of the Mediterranean Sea in Asia, an∣tiently more famous than it is at this day. Tyrone, a county in the province of Ʋlster in Ireland. Tzebona, a very strong town in Bohemia.
V. VAbres, a City and Bishoprick in Rouergue in France. Vai, a port town upon the coast of Ge∣noa. Vaijon, a city and Bishoprick in the country of Avignon. Valaquia, a principality in Europe, tribu∣tary to the Turk. Valdivia, a town in Chili, a countrey in America. Valence, and city and Bishoprick upon the Rhone in Dauphine. Valentia, a city and Archbishoprick in a Kingdom of the same name upon the Medi∣terranean Sea in Spain. Valentia, a strong town in the Dutchy of Milan. Valencrennes, a town in Hainault. Valette, a town in the Isle of Malta, resi∣dence of the Grand Master of the Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem. Valadolid, a town in Castille, one of the fairest of all Spain, antiently the seat of the Kings of Spain. Vallage, a countrey in Champagne. Vallai, or Vallesia, a countrey in a valley
ly between the Alps and Geneva, leagued with the Switzers. Valois, a country and Dutchy in the Isle of France. Valona, a port town in Albania, subject to the Turk. Valteline, a province in Switzerland, sub∣ject to the Grisons. Van, a fortress of the Turks upon the fron∣tiere of Persia. Varna, a place in Bulgaria upon the black or Euxine sea, where the Turks gave the Christians a great overthrow. Varnemund, a port town in Mehelbourg. Vasserbourg, a town in Bavaria, where the Duke keeps his chiefest treasures. Vaucluse, a fountain in the County of Avig∣non, famous for the frequent resort of the learned Poet Petrarck thither. Vaudre vange, a town in Lorrain. Ʋdenheim, or Philisbourg, a fortress in the Bishoprick of Spire. Ʋdino, the chief town of Friuli, and resi∣dence of the Patriarck of Aquilea. Veissel, or Vistule, a river in Poland, it runs to Cracovia, Warsovia, and Dantzik. Vellai, a country in the Cevennes in Lan∣guedoc in France. Venaissen, a county in which stands the town of Avignon, between Languedock Pro∣vince,
and the principality of Aurange. Vence, a City and Bishoprick in Provence. Vendosme, a Town, Dutchy, and small countrey upon the West of Beausse, a province in France. Venice, a famous City and Head of as no∣ble a Republique, seated in the sea, five miles distant from any land. Venlo, a town in Guelderland, subject to the King of Spain. Vennes, a City and Bishoprick in Britanny in France. Vera-Cruz, a port town in New Spain, where arrive the Fleets which usually came to St. John d'Ʋlloa. Veneeil, a City, Bishoprick, and Seigniory in Piedmont. Verdemberg, a County subject to the Switzers. Verdun, a City and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire in Lorraine. Verdun, a town in Burgundy. Verdun, a town in a countrey of the same name in Gascony. Vermandois, a countrey in Picardy. Vermeio, a Sea, or rather a Streight near New Mexico. Verneuil, a town in Normandy, famous for the overthrow the English there gave to the French in the year 1424, where 4500 French
were slain upon the place, and the Earle of Narbone being taken was hanged, for assi∣sting at the massacre of John Duke of Burgun∣dy. Verona, the chief town of a Countrey of the same nam ithin the Venetian Territo∣ries in Italy. Vervins, a town in Picardy. Vesel, a town in the Dutchy of Cleves, pos∣sessed by the States of Holland. Veser, a River in the lower Saxony. Vexin, a Countrey in Normandy and the Isle of France. Veteravia, a Countrey in Germany upon the West of Hessen. Viana, a town and principality in Navarre, antiently the apportion of the Prince of Na∣varre. Vie, a town in Lorraine, where was held the treaty in the year 1632 between the French King and the Duke Charles of Lor∣raine. Vicenza, the chief town of a small coun∣trey in Italy, not far from Padua. Vie le Comte, a town in Auvergne. Vienna, the chief and strongest town of Au∣stria, and residence of the Emperour of Ger∣many. Vienne, a City and Archbishoprick upon the Rhone in Dauphine, 5 leagues distant from Lyons.
Vienne, a River which runs to Limoges, a town in France. Vigevan, a town in a small countrey of the same name in the Dutchy of Milan. Vignoris, a town in Champagne. Vihitz, the chief town of Croatia, posses∣sed by the Turk. Vilaine, a River in Britanny, runs through Rennes, the chief city of that province. Vilne, the chief town of Lithuania, a pro∣vince in Poland. Villach, a town in Carinthia. Villa France, a town in Piedmont, where the French defeated Prosper Colomna in the year 1516. Ville Franche, a town in Rouergue. Ville mur, a town in Languedoc. Vimeux, a countrey in Picardy. Vindau, a town in Curland. Vineros, a port town in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain. Vire, a town in Normandy. Virginia, a countrey of a vast extent in America. Visapor, a town in India, on this side Ganges. Visbui, a town in Gothland. Viterbo, an antient town in St. Peters Patri∣mony, 40 miles on this side Rome. Vitre le Francois, a town in Champagne.
Vitstock, a town in Brandenbourg, where the Swedes and Saxons got a great victory o∣ver the Imperialists, in 1636. Viviers, the chief town of Vivaretz, a country in Languedoc upon the Rhone. Vivaretz, as in Viviers. Ʋlme, a town in Germany, where the Da∣nube begins to grow navigable. Ʋlster, a province in the North of Ire∣land. Volfembutell, a fortress, and residence of the Dukes of Brunswick. Volga, a river in Moscovy, and one of the greatest of Europe. Volhinia, a province in Poland. Vouille, a place near Poictiers in France, where Clovis King of France gained a great victory over Alaric King of the Gothes, whom he slew with his own hand. Voutenai, a place near Auxerre in Burgundy, where Charles surnamed the Balde, got a great Victory over Lothaire, in the year 841. Ʋpsal, a City and Archbishoprick, the Me∣tropolitane of Sweden, where the Kings and Queens of that Kingdom are usually crowned. Ʋraniborg, a Castle in an Island near Copenhagen, made famous by the residence of that learned Mathematician Tycho Brahe.
Ʋrbin, a City and Archbishoprick in the Ecclesiastick state, formerly the head of a Dutchy, which is now escheated to the church. Ʋscoqs, a people in Dalmatia, subject to the house of Austria. Ʋtrecht, a Seigniory, and one of the united provinces of the Netherlands. Ʋtrecht, the chief town of that province, and one of the noblest in the low countries. Ʋserch, a town in the province of Limosin in France. Ʋses, a City, Bishoprick, and Dutchy in Lau∣guedoc in France. W WAles, a principality upon the West of England, of which the King of Eng∣lands eldest son carries the title of Prince. Wardhust, a Castle in Norway. Warrington, a town in Lancashire, upon the edge of Cheshire, where the scottish Army un∣der Duke Hamilton were defeated by the Par∣liamentarians, in the year 1648. Warsovia, the chief town of Mazovia in Po∣land. Warwick, a town in a County of the same name, about the middle of England. Waterford, a port town in Munster in Ireland. Wiegats, a streight upon the south of new Zemble, through which the Hollanders in vain sought a passage China.
Weikersheim, the chief town of the County of Holac in Franconia. Weymar, a town and Dutchy of the Em∣pire in Turingia, the title of one of the greatest Captains of his time, Duke Barnard Saxon Weymar, Weisemburg, an imperial town in Swabeland. Weisembourg, a small province of the Em∣pire in Alsatia. Werthaim, a County of the Empire in Franconia. Westphalia, a province of the Empire. Wexforde, a port town in a County of the same name in Lemster in Ireland. Wibourg, a town of great traffick in Leif∣land. Wibourg, a city and diocess in Jutland. Wighte, an Island upon the South of Eng∣land in the British sea, under the Sheriff of Hampshire. Winchester, a City and Bishoprick in Hamp∣shire, the Bishop of which is prelate of the Garter. Windsor, a castle Royal, upon the Thames, where are performed the ceremonies of the noble order of Garter. Witzbourg, a City and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire, whose Bishop has also the title of a Duke. Wismar, a Hanse and Port town in Mekel∣bourg, given up to the crown of Sweden in 1648.
Wirtemberg, a Castle and dutchy of the Em∣pire in Swabeland. Wittemberg, the chief town of the Electo∣rate of Saxony, famous for its fortifications, University, Regence of Luther, and residence of the Electors. Whadislaw, the chief town of Cujavia a pro∣vince in Poland. Wolodimer, a town in Moscovy, formerly the residence of the great Dukes. Wolgast, a town in Pomerania. Wologda, a dutchy and fortress in the north part of Moscovy, where the great Duke keeps his chiefest treasures. Worcester, a City and Bishoprick, the chief of Worcestershire about the middle of England. Wormes, a City and Bishoprick of the Em∣pire, in the lower Palatinate. X. XAintonge, the same with Saintonge. Xarandille, a town in Castille near to Placentia, in Spain. Xativa, a town in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain. Xeres de la frontera, a town in Andaluzia, where the Moores gave the Gothes a great o∣verthrow in the year 712.
Y. YArmouth, a port town in the county of Norfolke. Yenne, a town in Savoy upon the Rhone. York, a City, County, Archbishoprick and Dutchy, the second son of the King of Eng∣land, has the title of the Duke of York; it is fa∣mous for the Residence of two Emperours, Severus and Constentine, who dyed there. Youghall, a port town in Munster in Ireland Yverton, a town in the Canton of Berne in Switzerland. Yvetot, a Signiory in the country of Caux in Normandy, it bore antiently the Title of a Kingdom. Yvice, a town in an Island of the same name in the Mediterranean sea, upon the Coast of Spain. Z. ZAara, or the Desart, otherwise called Ly∣bia, a country in Africa. Zagathai, a part of Tartary in Asia. Zagrab, a town in Sclavonia, belonging to the house of Austria.
Zahaspe, a port town in the Caspian sea in Zagathai. Zaire, a River of Congo, also a Lake of the same name in Abissinia. Zamosy, a town in Poland. Zanguebar, a country in Africa. Zanhaga, a country and wilderness in Lybia. Zante, a town in an Island of the same name upon the West of Greece, subject to the state of Venice. Zara, a very strong City, Archbishoprick, and Port, the best in all Dalmatia, subject to the Venetians. Zegne, a port town in Dalmatia, subject to the house of Austria. Zeland, an Island in Denmark. Zeland, an Island and one of the united Provinces of the Low countries. New Zemle, an Island in the Northern seas near Europe and Asia, newly discovered. Zerbi, a small Island upon the coasts of Barbary, near the Kingdom of Tripoli. Zibith, a town and Kingdom of Turkey in Asia, in Arabia the happy. Ziden, a port town in Meca▪ in Arabia the happy. Zimbao, a town and fortress in Monomotapa. Zoaro, a town in Barbary upon the coast of Tripoli. Zocotora, a town in an Island of the same
name upon the coast of Zanguebar. Zollingen, a town in Germany near the Rhine Zuhal, one of the Philippine Islands, made eminent by the death of the famous Magellan. Zug, a town and Canton in Switzerland. Zuickau, a town in Misnia. Zulch, or Zulpich, formerly Tolbiac, a town in the Dutchy of Juliers. Zurich, a town and Canton in Switzerland. Zutphen, a county, and one of the united Provinces, also the chief town of that county Zweibruck, a Dutchy of the Empire in the lower Palatinate. Zygeth, a town in Hungary, at the siege of which dyed the great Emperour of the Turks, Solyman the Magnificent, in the year 1566. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for H. Brome' at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. THe alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Li∣turgies of Engl. since the Reformation, by Hamon L'estrange in fol. The Souls Conflict, being eight Sermons preach'd at Oxford, and so much recommended by Dr. Hewit, in 8 Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns and Garden of Cyrus, in 8 Two Essayes of Love and Marriage, in 12 The Royal Exchange, a Comedy in 4. by R. Brome. Five new Playes, by R. Brome, never belore printed in 8 Poems by the Wits of both Universities, in 8. A Treatise of Moderation, by Mr. Gaule in 8 St. Boniventure's Soliloques, in 24. Mr. Baxters treatise of Conversion, in 4 Golden Remains, by that most learned R. Stuart, D. D Dean of Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet to King. Charles the first, being the last and best Monuments that are likely to be made publick, in 12 Mr. Sprats plague of Athens, in 4 Jewes in America by Mr. Thorowgood, in 4 The Royal Buckler, or a Lecture for Traytors, in 8. A review of some late remarkable Transactions, leading to the happy Government under our gracious Soveraign K. Charles the Second, by R. L'estrange Esq; in 4. The Holy Cheat, proving by the undeniable practises of the Presbyterians, that the whole design of that par∣ty is to enslave both King and People under the colour of Religion, by R. L'estrange Esq; The Relaps'd Apostate, or notes upon the Presbyte∣rians petition for peace. State Divinity, or a supplement to the Relapfed A∣postate, all by R. L'estrange. A Caveat to the Caveliers.
A modest plea both for the Caveliers and the Author All the Songs on the Rump, in 8 The Pourtracture of his sacred Majesty King. Charles the Second, from his birth 1630 till this present year 1661 being the whole story of his escape at Worcester, his travels and troubles. The Covenant discharged by John Sussell, in 4 The compleat art of Water-drawing, in 4 Mr. Boys his Translation the 6th book of Virgil, in 4 Mr. Walwin's Sermon on the happy returne of Kng Charles the second. A perfect Discovery of Witchcraft, very profitable to be read of all sorts of people, especially Judges of As∣size before they passe sentence on condemned persons for witches, in 4 A short view of the Lives of the Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of Gloucester, and Mary princess of Orange deceased, by T. M. Esq; in 8 Aeneas his Voyage from Troy to Italy, an Essay upon the third Book of Virgil, by J. Boys Esq; in 8 Mr. Grenfields Sermon in behalf of the Loyal party. Mr. Stones Sermon at St. Pauls October 20. 1661. The Harmony of the World, in 8 Blood for Blood in 35 Tragical stories; the five last being the sad product of our late Rebellion; in 8. FINIS.
