d663 r41087 19618458 109203
A DECLARATION Of the daily grievances of the Catholiques RECVSANTS of ENGLAND. With Protestations to the same for their Loyaltie and truth to their King and Countrey. Whereunto is annexed by them a Prayer for the King. And also a Prayer for the Honourable House of Parliament, for their quiet proceedings, good succession, and happie ending. LONDON, Printed for IOHN THOMAS, 1641.
The DECLARATION. WHereas wee the poore di∣stressed Catholiques Recu∣sants of England, have by reason of the penall Lawes in former time made and e∣nacted against us, whereby we have to our great hinde∣rances many times bin con∣strained to part with our good Chattills and money, and sometimes imprisonment also to the great hinderance of our estate and calling. Yet nothing more grievous un∣to us, then the remembrance of that most detestable plot of the Powder-Treason, onely wrought by some decayed furous discontented and evill minded persons, professors of the same Religion, but quite contrary to all godly or humane Lawes, neglecting, transgressing and most inhu∣manely forgetting all goodnesse, duty, and obligation to God their King and Counry, which detestable or rather most dmnable plot still singing in the eares of the people and daily augmenting and encreasing the memory of the same, by many strange Discoveries of unknowne Plots, wherein we that truth hath little share, onely divised and set forth by some evill willers to Catholique Religion, to make us hatefull to the world, knowing the vulger sort apt to believe (through the evill minds of some bad Ca∣tholiques
or rather detestable Traytors) actors of the Plot, whatsoever is or can be invented, or set forth a∣gainst us in any other newly divised Plots, now daily spred about the City and Country, in many pamphlets which we hope and perfectly know to bee false other waies we should have more hanging, drawing, and quar∣tering then now we have, but hartily wish it to all offen∣dors in such like hands that shall deserve it and desiring that we being innocent and cleare from all Conspiracies or Plots of Treason, or any such things hurtfull to our King and Countrey, may not be alwaies made reproacha∣ble and contemptable to the world. Let not the faults of some detestable persons be still inflicted and laid to our charge, doe not for a few despe∣rate or ill conditioned Traytors condemne the whole Church to be so, but let a more gracious conceit spring from your hearts, and truely concurre us, as you would your selves be censured by the highest and most dreadfull Judge, for wee ought not to judge of others more then certainly we can prove for truth, least that judgement light upon our selves. If any of us deserve to suffer, let us suffer, but let us not scourge the innocent, least we suf∣fer stripes, forgive, as you would be forgiven, and esteem of us, as you would be esteemed, true Subjects, as wee have alwayes beene and ever will be, in witnesse whereof we have here set downe some little Protestations for our Royalty and truth to our King and Country.
The Protestations. WE the Catholique Recusants of Eng∣land, doe truly confesse, and acknow∣ledge King Charles, to be our true and Lawfull King, and chiefe Governour under God. And that next unto God, we ought, and are bound in all duty, to Love ho∣nour, and obey him in all things, not contrary, to Catho∣lique Religion. Wherein we heere protest, as befitting good Catho∣liques, and Loyall Subjects, to be true to our King Charles, not giving, or yeelding any Obedience, or Allegiance to strangers, but will with all our Powers, Lives, and Fortunes, defend, and maintaine his Right▪ and the Right of our Countrie, against all Forraigne Kings, or Princes whatsoever, though of our owne Religion. We doe protest likewise, not to have hand or heart in any conspiracie, or plot of Treason, or any such thing that may any waies condescend to the hurt, or prejudice of our King or Countrie. Jn like manner we protest, never to entertaine into our houses any Ammunition, as Gunnes, Powder, or Halberts, Pikes, or Swords, or any other Jnstruments of Warre thereby to defend our selves, or to rayse any forces against our Royall King Charles, or Native Countrie.
Also we deo protest, and yeeld our selves, as true loyall Subjects to our King, as in all respective duty we are bound, Loving friends to our Country, and most humble Submittees, to the Honourable assembly of Par∣liament, Hoping they will as prudent, Fathers, and mer∣cifull Judges, one day give a Iuditious eare to all our agrievances, (and in their good consideration of our loy∣altie) grant a gracious censure to the same, and so make us free from this imputation, and scandall now layd upon us by the vulgar, for which we shall be ever bound to pray for happie successe in this world, and their ever∣lasting joyes in the world to come, in the meane time we have thought good to adde to rhis little Protetation, a Prayer for his Majesty, and another for the Honourable assembly of Parliament. A Prayer for the King WE besehch the O Almighty God, to blesse thy Servant Charles out King, and pre∣serve him from all conspiracies, dangers or hurts of his Enemies, who through thy mercy, hath taken upon him the Government of this Kingdome, or Kingomes, and mercifully grant that he may to thy Honour, ond glory, raigne in peace and quiet∣nesse, and that he may also receive the increase of all vertues, wherewith being decently adorned, he may both
be able to avoyde the monstrousnesse of vices, as also to come to thee right gracious, who art the way, the truth, and the life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Sonne, who liveth and raigneth God with the and the Holy Ghost, world without end, Amen. A Prayer for the Honorable House of Parliament. O Almighty and everlasting God who of thy great Providence for the generall good of this Kingdome hast called and gathered together from all parts thereof this most Honourable Assembly of Parliament, mercifully grant unto them true knowledge of thy holy will therein, and a right firme un∣derstanding of what they take in hand, that they may set∣tle all things according to thy blessed will and pleasure, to the good of the King, and the Common-wealth. Grant them O Lord a quiet proceeding a good successe, and a most happy ending in all their actions, that what they doe may be to thy Honour and glory, to the good of the King∣dome, and to the everlasting happinesse of their owne soules health, inspire them O Lord with thy heavenly grace with Ghostly wisedome and true vnderstanding, that they may happily consumate all things, that we may live together in true peace and vnity, to the Everlasting praise of thy most holy name, and our eternall good and theirs, through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Sonne, who liveth and raigneth, God with thee in the vnity of the holy Ghost, world without end, Amen. Laus Deo. in Eternum. FINIS.
