D605 11805689 49440
THE DECLARATION of Colonel Rich's Regiment. With the Engagement they have Entered into. ALSO Major Braman's Letter to Lievtenant Colonel Lagoe, upon their going into PORTSMOUTH. To which is added another Letter sent from Major Braman to a Friend of his in London. London, Printed by T. M. for Livewell Chapman, at his shop in Popes-head Alley, 1659.
The Declaration of Coll. Riche's Regiment. DEarely beloved Brethren, Friends and fellow-Soul∣diers; Wisdome is justified of her children, and we therefore hope shall not be condemned by you; We cannot but believe concerning you, that the same trouble and perplexitie of spirit hath possessed you as our selves; and the same enquires, after our good old Cause, hath been in you as in us; and we humbly hope, that the God of all our mercies, whose will we desire to follow in all things, will shew you as (blessed be his Name) he hath done us, what is our dutie in this dark Day. We have, as you, silently sat down and seen a lawfull Authoritie, yea, that very Parliament, that raised and maintained us, after all the eminent and honourable Services done for God and their Generations, kickt out of their Seats with contempt and scorn: At which time we desire to remem∣ber to our own shame, that our poore native Country, not∣withstanding their feirce intestine wars and trouble, just gone over its head, was so settled and composed, that hardly could be perceived the Tract of that trouble they passed through; our Trade quick and flourishing, and such abundant blessing from above, that the Poore were satisfied with bread in that plenty, that neither we nor our Fathers has seen the people of God countenanced and encouraged, growing up in union in all parts, and the publike enemy desponding, At this juncture, we say, when England thus flourished, Ireland reduced, and Scotland Con∣quered, the Dane, Dutch and French afraid of our Fleets, and begging amity with us; and we a terrour to all the Nations round about, and when we were constantly paid before it was due, and our Navy not a penny in Arrears; we Jeserum like waxed fat and kicked against our dear God and those glorious Instruments in his hands; and suffer∣ed our selves, through want of courage (forgetting conscience and our Duty) to be led to the emposing an
Arbitrary Power over our selves and the Free-born People of England; by which means our Fleets are lost and les∣sened, our Trade decayed and ruined, our poore Coun∣trey wasted and empoverished, the Poore starved, the Land unsetled, the Souldiers unpaid, the People of God rent and divided, publike enemies encouraged, and we become a derision to them we were a terrour too: We say having run our selves and poore Nation, from such a happy settlement, into such throngs of exegencies and distresses, from which we could no way imaginable ex∣tricate our selves, and save the people thereof from inevi∣table ruine and distraction. But the calling in that fa∣mous Long Parliament, we so wickedly and unworthily had turned out, which accordingly was done; and they no sooner sat again, but the antient Presence of our blessed God, appeared for them as formerly, and while they were intent upon their Generation-Work of laying foundations, for future Settlement, seeking out wayes to satisfie the Army, greatning the Navie, propa∣gating Trade, &c. But that old spirit of Pride, Disobe∣dience and Ambition sought occasion; First, to quarrel, then interrupt their Power again, to the utter exposing of that just and righteous Cause and Interest to an un∣avoidable ruine and destruction. And as if one former apostacy which we pretended to repent of, had not been sufficient to have attracted the hate and obloquie of God and all good men; They have run us into a Second evill, of a far greater magnitude than the former, and have emproved our easinesse and aptnesse to follow them im∣plicitely, so as that they have brought us point blanck a∣gainst our very Cause and Company, and in the face of the Sun, do Command us to sheath our Swords in the bo∣wels of the Supream Authority of this Nation, against which never any yet lift up their hands prospered; and to take away the blood of our dear Brethren old and faith∣full friends, and as a Cheat, to compasse their designes the better, they would engage us to blood against this Parliament, under pretence of calling another. As if any Parliament could take the like care of us, both as Soul∣diers
and Englishmen, as they whose Army we are, for you cannot but take notice, that all Parliaments, that ever yet hath been in the intervales of this, were never freinds, but enemies to the Army, this being most obvious to us, and we hope to you, we cannot but ac∣quaint you with our Resolutions, which is, that as the Army in Scotland, the Fleet unanimously, our bre∣thren at London, and Col. Berries Regiment have Declared against this repeated Apostacy; and for the famous Long Parliament; So we in honour, duty and conscience are bound with Swords in our hands to assert their just, and lawfull Power, so often acknowledged by our selves, against all that shall oppose it, Us, or any that have or do appear therefore. There being no other expedient to ex∣piate our guilt, appease our God, pacifie our Conscience, clear our Reputations, to keep true to our Promises and Engagements, to Cement Gods People, to satisfie the Souldery, to settle the Nation, and to give us the Fruit of all the Blood spilt, Treasurie spent, Prayers put up, Tears poured out, in which we hope, we shall have your chearfull concurrence, and that you will not suffer your selves to be led any longer against your true Interests both as men and Christians: Such of your Officers as shall joyn with us in the work, we desire may have double Honour; but such as shall perswade you to persist in their Apostacy, we hope, you will as we shall doe, displace as persons per∣fideous and treacherous to God and their Trusts: Thus have we nakedly and freely unbosomed our selves, and broken the Ice, we shall now leave all to him, who is able to set your Dutie home upon your hearts, and save by few as by many, before whom we have mutablie Engaged our selves to Live and Dye together; which Resolution the Frowns nor Flatteries of none shall make us to recede from; and in him rest dear Brethren and fellow-Souldiers, yours and the Common-wealths Friends and Servants. We have enclosed sent you the Copy of our Engagement, subscri∣bed by all, none dissenting; we also desire you to elect two of each Company to treate with the like number elected out of each Troop, to carry on the work.
The Engagement. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, do solemnly in the sight of God; whose we are, and who knows our hearts, in our present undertaking, engage that we will Adventure for each other to the last drop of our Bloods in the just defence of the Parliament, against our consents most violent∣ly and treacherously interrupted; and for that good and com∣mon intrest so long contended for; and do once again say that we will neither divide nor suffer our selves to be divided till the liberties both civil and Christian of all men be full setled and se∣cured, and from this our engagment neither by Art nor armes, will we be withdrawn, till we die. Testified in the presence of him who is able to make us do valiantly, on whom alone we desire to de∣pend, and who we humbly hope will issue our undertakings so as glory will redound to him: and such good to present and future generations, as babes unborne may bless us for, Portsdown, Decemb. 20. 1659. Major Braymans Letter to Lievtenant Colonel Lago. BY Order from the Commissioners, by Authority of Parliament I am to Randesvows my Colonels Regi∣ment at Portsdown this day, and in obedience there∣to, am upon my march; I am also commanded to send to them for farther Orders. I therefore desire all stops may be removed between them and me, that I may know and execute their commands, if you shall refuse, I shall march my Troops and endeavour by other wayes to do my du∣ty. I desire no blood may be effused, if there be, con∣science and your Commission, will first accuse, and then condemne you: I nor those with me, having nothing upon our hearts but a healing that Breach that's rejoyced at, by none but them that seek your Ruine as well as ours, and an earnest desire that all heats and Animosities be∣tween
the Parliament and their Army may be forgotten and forgiven, which shall be no more heartily pursued by you than Sirs, Havant Decemb. 20. 11. clock, 1659. Your Freind and Servant John Braman I desire you would communicate this to our dear Brethren, Fellow Freinds and Souldiers with you and expect your speedy answer. Superscribed for Leiutenant Colonel Lagoe at Cosiam. A letter from Major Brayman to a friend of his in London. My dear freind, BEcause no reputation's so clear, nor act so honest, but envy will attempt to detract: I thought good to give you the trouble of a right understanding, to the end you may assoile me from Mr. Needham's charge that I foresee will furiously come upon me: My principle you know: Nor did I ever endeavour to abscond it. Equall and u∣niversall Liberty, you are my witnesse I have loved. And never yet thought my little all too much to venture for it: the paucity of its owners is matter of sorrow. But can ne∣ver make him vary that eys his duty. What you believed others feared concerning me; that I was guilty of that capitall Crime, of being constant and Faithfull to my Trust: a sin that ever yet stuck as close to me as my shirt; and therefore our Commander in chief here gave me the benefit of an easie bed, at a convenient distance, till I dee∣med it necessary to draw somewhat neerer him; which I did yesterday, with my Colonels Troop Merimans and my own; and from Havant sent him the enclosed. But it found him absent: for in the morning an houre or two
before, two or three ouldiers went from my troops, to the Leagure with the enclosed Resolution and Engagement, one to each Company, which the Lieutenant Colonel un∣derstanding, whether he thought he could not weather the Point, or what other reason he best knows: But as I said, he took an occasion to be absent: After my letter I marched for Portsdown, dismounted Barrington, and se∣cured Ducket, and took their Troops with me, who wil∣lingly followed; I spake one word or two to the troops, desired them to consult with their Conscience, and re∣solve either to own the true Interest they had fought and bled for; or use their Liberty otherwise. But as with one mouth, they cryed all, all, to the enclosed Engagement (which if you judge necessary may be made more publike) I then imediately marched: But the Foot before we came at them, had took up their Resolution, they would not fight us, and were marching with their Colours for Ports∣mouth, where they now are; the Officers have liberty to return if they please: Not one Musket was fired on either side, which truly I judge a signal mercy; and certainly it is instructive, and doth tell us, that our duty is to pursue peace with each other and not war; which was the main improvement I begged of our Commissioners to make of this mercy: For though my blood and hundred else is too imcompetent for that precious Cause of God, and our generation: Yet a composure by us is rather coveted; nor shall any blood be spilt by us, can we conserve our Cause without it: Pretty contradictory and inconsistant are the objections of well minded people; one cryes out the Parliament was infringing liberty of Conscience, an∣other places this Objection, that they were too much en∣larging it; Christ eat and drank, John did neither, yet a Devill, and as bad were they both, in the esteem of most; and truly prejudice, nor desire of Dominion can scarcely be pleased. I would not willingly judge the generation of the just; though I see they are preyed upon, and loose their own reputation, and bring a reproach on that bles∣sed name they professe, to lift up and exalt poore mortal
changeable Creatures: whereas if things not persons were more respected by us; we should look a little more before we leap, and not umbrage unhandsome acts, under a Christian Visor. I speak it not to upbraid, but wish I could convince any of this errour: but he that believes makes not hast; God has his season, to work his will in: I wish we may be found waiting upon him in well doing, and I doubt not then, but the issue of this sad affaire will bring peace and settlement to these poore distracted Nations, Then which nothing is more coveted by, Petersfeild, Decemb. 21. 59. Dear sir, Your Affection and faithfull servant, J. Braman. FINIS.
