D883 R24883 8642194 41511
The Lord DELAMERE's SPEECH TO THE Grand Jury at CHESTER, APRIL 13. 1692.
THE SPEECH OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY Earl of WARRINGTON, Lord Delamere, TO THE Grand Jury at Chester. APRIL 13. 1692. LONDON; Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane. 1692.
THE SPEECH OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY Earl of WARRINGTON, &c. Gentlemen of the Jury, THE Preservation of the Publick Peace, is the Occa∣sion that hath called us to∣gether at this time; in which no man can be re∣miss or negligent, when he considers, that his parti∣cular Interest, as well as his Duty, doth indi∣spensably oblige him to do what in him lies to support it. In order to this, that which is now more especially expected from us at this time, is,
1. To Enquire into the Neglects of those in whom the Law hath reposed any Trust: And, 2. To discover those who have broken or violated the Laws; that such Criminals may be brought to condign Punishment. And since the Execution of the Laws is our proper business; and that the Laws should have their course is absolutely necessary to the Being of the Government; therefore it may not be impertinent (as I conceive) at this time, to say something of the Nature of Govern∣ment, and particularly of our own Constituti∣on; or rather, it seems necessary to take all oc∣casions to explain it, considering what variety of Opinions there are amongst us, of that which is, or ought to be, the Supreme Autho∣rity or Power in England. Many Wise and Learned men have written of the Nature of Government, and given ex∣cellent Definitions of it; but of all others, the Learned Aquinas seems to me to have done it in the fewest and plainest words; says he, It is a rational Ordinance for the Advancing of the Publick Good. And next to him is Plato,
whose words are these; Government, or Law, says he, is to Preserve the huge and indigest∣ed Lump of a Multitude; and to bring all Disorder into Proportion, so as to become a Harmony. Several others have spoken to the same pur∣pose, which I omit, because I will be as little tedious as I can: But two things are observa∣ble from hence. 1. That Order and Peace is, or ought to be, the end of every Government. 2. That in every Government there is some particular Principle that runs through the whole Scheme of that Constitution; and as that Prin∣ciple is followed or neglected, so accordingly it goes well or ill with the Publick; that is, When those who are intrusted with the Execu∣tive Power, do pursue that Principle, every thing moves regularly, and the Government is firm and stable; but when they steer by any other Measures, the State doth unavoidaby fall into Disorders and Convulsions: So that who∣ever he be that is placed at the Head of the Go∣vernment, if he desires to have the Hearts and Prayers of his People whilst he lives, and that After-Ages shall bless his Memory, it is neces∣sary.
1. That, in general, he resolve to Govern well: And 2. Throughly and rightly to apprise himself of that Principle that is the Soul of the Go∣vernment; or at least that he be advised by such as are most likely to know it, and will give him faithful Counsel; otherwise he will be like a Traveller, that in the Night misses his way upon some large Plain, wandring he knows not whither, and is more like to meet with some disaster, than to find his way. Having said this, it is natural for you to ex∣pect that I should tell you, what that Principle is, which is the life and foundation of this Go∣vernment. If I am not much mistaken, and I am verily perswaded that here I am not, I take it to be this. 1. That every Subject of England hath so clear a Property in his Life, Goods, and Estate, and every thing else which he lawfully Possesses, that they, nor any of them, can be taken from him, nor ought he to be disturbed in the enjoyment of them, without his voluntary Consent, or for some Offence against the Law. 2. And in the next place, That there be not a failure of Justice, that is, that no man be left without Remedy,
where his Right is concerned, and that every Criminal be Punished according to the demerits of his Offence. I am apt to believe, that every man will think, that this is very agreeable to natural Reason, and then I do not see how it can be inconsistent with the Prerogative of the Crown; though I know that not very long since, and I fear yet, there are some who carry the Prerogative much higher than it ought, in placing it above the Law: But no∣thing, save the iniquity of the times, and the de∣pravity of such mens Manners, could support or give countenance to so senseless a thought; for they are very ignorant of the nature of Pre∣rogative, if they think it is a Power to do hurt, and not to do good. Certainly the King's Pre∣rogative is to help and relieve the People, where the edge of the Law is too sharp and keen; and not a Power by which he may Oppress and Destroy his Subjects. Men are to be Governed by a Power that is guided by Reason, unless we can suppose that they have no more under∣standing, and are of no greater value, than the Beasts that perish.
It was said by one who was a very compe∣tent Judge in the case, as I remember, it was Sir John Fortescue, That it is a greater Power in a Prince to be restrained by Law from Oppres∣sing, than to have an Absolute Regal Power. And says another, The Way of Governing must be both Right and Clear, as well as is the End; and how this can be expected, when a King is guided by no other Rule, than that of his un∣bounded Will and Pleasure, I do not see, any more than a man can depend upon the Weather. Do not all examples of it that ever were, prove, that Absolute Power and Oppression are inseparable, and as naturally proceed the one from the other, as the Effect doth from the Cause? 'Tis a Riddle to me, how that Prince can be called God's Ordinance, who assumes a Power above what the Law hath invested him with, and useth it to the Grieving and Op∣pressing of his Subjects: May not the Plague, Famine, or Sword, as well be called God's Or∣dinance, since one, no less than the other, is sent by him for the Punishment of that People whom he so visits?
We may reasonably suppose, that Order and Peace are much rather the end of Government, than Oppression and Violence, because God is a God of order; and when he sent the greatest Blessing upon Earth, it was Peace; and though God was often very wroth with the Kings of Israel and Judah for their Idolatries, yet the Inno∣cent Blood they shed, and the Violence and Oppression which they committed, provoked him more highly, and with his severest Judgments he always testified his Displeasure against it. I could run out into a large Discourse upon this Subject, but I will stop here, because I am perswaded, that what I have already said, is sufficient to convince any one, who is unprejudi∣ced. That an Absolute Power is so far from being the Right of the King of England, that the exercise of such a Power is Unlawful in any King. I know very well, that in the late Reigns this Doctrine would not have been endured; to have said then less than this, would have cost a man his Head: For whoever would not then
comply with Arbitrary Power, was called a Factious man, and an Opposer of the Government; but is it not nonsense, or very near a-kin to it, to call that Seditious, that is for bringing things into Order, and for maintaining the Laws and supporting the Government? Arbi∣trary desires never did any King good, but have ruined many. It shook King Charles the Se∣cond's Throne, and tumbled down his next Suc∣cessor; and though such Kings are left without excuse when Ruined; yet I may say, they are not only in the fault, for their overthrow is in a great measure occasioned by those who Preach up, and advise the King to Arbitrary Power. Did not other People cocker up, and cherish Arbitrary Notions in Kings minds, though such Conceptions might sometimes get into their heads, yet they would never fructifie, nor come to perfection, if they were not cultivated by Parasites, who make their Court that way, in hopes to raise themselves, tho with the hazard of their Master's Crown: A befel the late King James, whose Male Administration render∣ed him unmeet to sway the Scepter: And I am very well satisfied that the Judgment upon him
was just; for unless a People are decreed to be miserable, which God Almighty will never do, except thereto very highly provoked by their Sins; certainly he will never so tye up their hands, that they shall not be allowed to use them, when they have no other way to help themselves. Several Artifices were made use of in the Two late Reigns, for the introducing Arbitrary Power and Popery; one of which was to insinu∣ate into the minds of the People, that the Suc∣cession of the Crown was the Chief Pillar of the Government; and that the breaking into it upon any pretence whatsoever, was no less than a Dissolution of the whole Constitution, and nothing but Disorder and Confusion could ensue. This Doctrine was boldly then Preached up, and prevailed with many, and obtained no less than if the Crown had been setled in that Family by an Ordinance or Decree dropt down from Heaven, and that every one of that Line or Race had been distinguished from the rest of Mankind, by more than ordinary vir∣tues and endowments of Mind and Body. But we know not of any such Divine Revelation,
and happy had it been for this Nation, if that Family had been so signal for its Justice and its Piety; we might then have prayed, That there might not want one of them to sit upon this Throne to all Ages. How much this Nation is obliged to that Family, we ve∣ry well remember; for the Wounds they gave us, are not yet healed. Election was certainly the Original of Succes∣sion; for as the living more safely, and with the freer Enjoyment of their Goods, was the Original Cause that people associated them∣selves into a Nation or Kingdom; so for the better attaining that End, they did set over themselves the best and wisest of their brethren to be their Rulers and Governours; and this Administration was trusted in one or more hands, according to the Temper and Disposi∣tion of the Person; in which Authority they continued either for their lives, or for one year, or for some other stated Period of time. Where the Government was under a King, he usually held it for life; and then upon his Decease the people proceeded to a New Election,
till at last it fell into the hands of some very excellent Person, who having more than or∣dinarily deserved of his Countrey, the people, as well in Gratitude to him, as believing they could not expect a better Choice, than in the Branches that would grow out of so excellent a Stock, entailed that Dignity upon him and his Posterity. And this seems to be the most Natural and Lawful Rise of Succession. I do not deny, but some Successions have arisen from Force, but that was never lasting; for it could not subsist, or seem Lawful, any longer than there was a Force to support it. Now when Princes come to the Crown by the first way of Succession, I mean, by the Consent and Approbation of the People, does not that plain∣ly imply, That they ought to use that Power for the Good and Advantage of their Subjects, and not to their hurt; and enjoy the Crown only upon that condition? No man would ever suffer a Monster to inherit his Estate; and Kings are no more exempted from the Acci∣dents of Human Nature, than their meanest Subjects; and it is every days practice in pri∣vate
Families, to exclude those that will waste their Estates, and ruin the Family; and if the reason will there hold good, then it is so much the stronger in the Descent of the Crown, by how much the good of the whole Kingdom is to be preferred to that of one Family. Nor is Succession so very Ancient in Eng∣land, as some people may apprehend: Till the time of William the First, commonly, though falsly called the Conqueror, it was look'd upon as a very precarious Title; the next in Succession could make but little reckoning on the Crown, further than his good Inclinations and Sufficiencies to sway the Scepter, did recommend him to the Af∣fections of the People. It being then very common, not only to break into the Suc∣cession, but even to set aside all that Family and Line, whenever it was known that the Publick might suffer by their being at the Head of the Government; the Publick Good being the only Rule and Consideration that go∣verned that Point.
William the First declared upon his Death∣bed (and that is a time when men do seldom prevaricate), That he did not possess the Crown by an Hereditary Right. William the Second must be allowed by all people to come in by Election, because Robert, his Elder Brother, was alive, and survived him. Next to him was Henry the First, who also came in by Election, because his Eldest Brother Robert was yet alive; and this Hen∣ry in his Charter acknowledged that he owed his Crown to the Mercy of God, and the Common Council of the Realm. King Stephen, Henry the Second, Richard the First, and King John, all came in by Election; so that till Henry the Third, there is scarce to be found any Presi∣dent of Succession; and since his Reign, the Succession hath been broken into several times, and the Crown shifted from one Family to ano∣ther by Act of Parliament; and being so trans∣ferred by that Authority, it is the greatest proof that can be, that Succession is a very fee∣ble Title, without something else to support it, and I think I may say, Defective.
For, says one of great Authority, never did any take pains to obtain an Act of Parliament, to settle his Inheritance on his Heirs, except he were an Alien, or Illegiti∣mate; and therefore considering, that by vertue of an Entail of the Crown by Act of Parliament in Henry the Seventh's time it is, that the Four last Kings have swayed this Scepter, I could never understand that Divine Right that was by some stampt upon the Title to the Crown, or that the Succession was preferable to the Publick Good. I have endeavoured to explain this Point the more, by reason that some object a∣gainst the Sufficiency of this King's Ti∣tle to the Crown, because the Succession was broke through, to let him into the Throne; as if nothing could give a King a good Title to the Crown, but Succes∣sion. For my part, I never saw any rea∣son to be of that Opinion; and if there be nothing but the Interruption of the Suc∣cession to object to this King's Right, if
he continue to govern according to the Principle upon which the Crown was gi∣ven him, and according to the good and laudable Customs of the Realm, I think every man that wishes well to the Interest of his Countrey, ought to bless God for this Revolution. In my poor opinion, I do not appre∣hend, that a King that comes to the Crown by Election, should think worse of his Ti∣tle, than if he had come in by Successi∣on, but rather the more securely; because the People are under a more immediate Obli∣gation to stand by, and support the King they have Elected, than any other that takes the Crown by Succession; nor that the people should suspect that they hold their Properties and Rights more pre∣cariously under a King that is Elective, than under one that claims the Crown by Succession, but rather the contrary; be∣cause it more highly imports him, as well in point of Gratitude, as in that of Po∣licy, to preserve the good opinion of the
people, by Governing well, than if his Title was by Succession; for I am far from believing that a King who comes in by Election, may make more bold with the Laws, than he that claims un∣der any other Title; or that his Right to the Crown continues any longer, than by his Administration it doth appear that his Interest is the same with that of the Nation. The next deceit by which the Nation was to be gull'd into Popery and Slavery, was by fomenting Divisions amongst Pro∣testants, and especially about the Terms of Communion, making them so strict and narrow, as to exclude the greatest part of the Protestants in England, and Nine parts in Ten, of the rest in the world. That this was not to promote God's Glory, and the Salvation of mens Souls, but to serve some new Design, is clear to me from several Reasons.
First, Because the Laws against Dis∣senters were stretched and executed be∣yond their genuine and natural Intent or Construction: Where fair Play is intended, such Tricks are altogether need less; but daily experience proves, that when they are made use of, some o∣ther thing is designed, than what is pre∣tended. True Religion needs no such methods to support it the nature of which is Peace and Charity; and be∣sides, such forced Constructions, being nothing less than summum Jus, are ab∣horred by our Laws, and are looked up∣on no less than summa Injuria, the highest Injustice. Secondly, The Second Reason for my O∣pinion is, because that several Laws were put in execution against the Dissenters, which were plainly and directly made for other purposes; by which the Law it self suffered Violence; and so it became evident to every man that had a mind
to see, that some foul Design, and not the Church, was at the bottom of the business. Thirdly, Another Reason is this, Be∣cause more Diligence and Care was employed to Punish People for Non∣conformity, than to Reform their Lives and Manners: For if a man were ne∣ver so openly Wicked and Debauched, and very scarce, if ever, saw the in∣side of a Church, yet if he could talk loud, and swagger bravely for the Church, and storm against, and pull the Dissen∣ters to pieces, he was cry'd up by all means, for a good Son of the Church, an honest man, and truly affected to the Government: Whilst those who could not come up to all the Ceremonies en∣joined in the Rubrick, though their lives in all other respects were upright, and their conversations unblameable, yet were called Villains and Rogues, and Ene∣mies to the Government; as if the out∣side and Ceremonious part of Religion
was more to be valued, than the sub∣stance and essence of it: Which puts me in mind of a passage I have met with in a Play, which is worthy your hearing, if I do not spoil it in the telling; it is in the Play called Sir COURTLY NICE, betwixt two Per∣sons, one is called Mr. Hothead, a very Idle Profligate Fellow, but who yet sets up for a great Son of the Church, and cannot speak or think with patience of any thing that inclines to Moderation; the other Person is called Mr. Testimony, as Rigid and Ridiculously squeamish on the other hand in his way; these Two falling into a great Dispute about their Opinions, Hot-head out of his great Zeal to the Church, treats Mr. Testi∣mony with very scurrilous Language, and bitter Invectives against him and all Dissenters; as that they were the plague of the State, and that he ho∣ped to see them all Hang'd, and de∣clares the mighty concern he hath for the Church: To which Testimony replies,
pray, Good Mr. Hot-head, forbear your indecent language, you are too rude in your Expressions; what need you trou∣ble your self so much about the Church, seeing you your self never go to Church? To which Hot-head in great fury presently makes answer, with a horrid Oath, What though I do not go to Church, yet I am for the Church? This, Gentlemen, I believe you, and every man else, can easily apply. I could never yet meet with any precept in all the Gospel, that doth justifie such proceedings as I have mentioned; but there are several that expresly condemn it. To me it seems altogether inconsistent with that Charity which is expected to be found in all those that hope to enter into Heaven; and it seems to be little less than Teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of men, and to add to God's Word, which is prohibi∣ted under no less a penalty, than that of Dam∣nation.
I am far from being against Order and Decency to be observed in the Church, yet under that pretence we are not to for∣get the Rule of Charity: And I cannot see wherefore those should be terms of Com∣munion, that are not terms of Salvation. I was always of Opinion, That it would never go well with England, till every man might Worship God in his own way; for nothing can be more unreasonable than to expect, that a man should believe otherwise than according to the conviction that is upon him, or that one man's Opinion should be a Rule or Guide to another man's Con∣science. And therefore I cannot but wonder at those who take offence at the late Act of Indulgence; which tends so much to our Peace, by quieting the Minds of the People as to their Religion, which hath ever been the handle to our intestine Troubles; the In∣cendiaries of the State having ever made use of it as the best pretence to embroyl the Nation: And therefore I, for my part, do think that the Act of Indulgence was a necessary
and Pious Work, and cannot imagine why any man should think that to be a disservice to the Church, that tends to the Peace of the Nation. They who do so, I must be∣lieve, are not much concerned in the Cause of the Chureh and their Country, and care not what is uppermost, provided they can but make fair Weather for themselves. Therefore, Gentlemen, if any speak to the disadvantage of the Act of Indulgence, you ought to present them as disaffected to the Government, and sowers of the seeds of Division in the State. But I desire to be rightly understood; I do not say this to disswade any man from coming to the Church; For I go constantly thither my self, and I wish every body could do it as easily as I do; and I wonder 'tis otherwise, for I never yet heard any good reason for the pra∣ctising the contrary. Yet I think un∣less a man be satisfied in that way of Worship, it is better to keep away than to come; for otherwise it is to mock, and not to Serve God; and
on the other hand, it is no less a mocking of God, when a man from an over-assurance of the Gift of Prayer, shall adventure to Pray in Publick, without having before-hand well digested his Matter and Words; and therefore may happen to let fall crude and nauti∣ous Expressions, such as would be ridi∣culous in private Conversation; for I am far from believing, that Nonsence can be the effect of Fervency, but ra∣ther of Affectation, or something that is very reproveable. And here it will not be amiss, or improper, to take notice of those Per∣sons who go to no Church at all, but spend the Lords day, commonly called Sun∣day, (as the Statute hath it) in an Ale-house, or otherwise idle it away very unprofitably; against such as these, was that Law of Twelve-Pence a Sunday intended; and were it duly put in Execution, a great deal of that disho∣nour that is done to God by such Profanati∣on, would be prevented, and the Poor would be relieved with less charge to their respect∣ive
Parishes. I wonder the Petty Constables are not more careful to make true Present∣ments at every Petty Sessions, of those who herein offend; the Glory of God, and their own Interest being so nearly, I may say, so immediately concerned. The next thing I would recommend to you is, As far as in you lies, to suppress that horrible Sin of customary Swearing, whereby the Tre∣mendous Name of God is every day Blas∣phemed. It is too true, that scarce any man when Provoked, or in Passion, has guard enough over himself to prevent his taking the Holy Name of God into his Mouth; and if any of us fall into that sad misfortune, we ought solemnly to beg forgiveness of it: But yet that whereby God's Honour suffers most, is customary Swearing; when men do not think they express themselves handsomely without an horrible Oath, or more, to fringe off their Sentences. It is such a daring fami∣liarity with God Almighty, as no man would allow to his best Friends.
I believe there is not any of you, Gentle∣men, but would be very angry to have your own Names used upon every slight and trivial occasion; and if so, I will not imagine that you will be less concerned for God's Honour, than for your own. It is a shameful thing to see how very much the High ways are generally neglected, and out of Repair; the fault of which does mostly lye at the door of the Overseers, whose chiefest care in them now a days, is how to shuffle off the matter for their time, being very little concerned for what comes after them; and by this means they bring at last a great burthen upon their Townships, which would have been prevented by a small charge if but taken in time; and so the Township suffers through their neglect. There are very good Laws against Vaga∣bonds, but the Execution of them is shame∣fully neglected; and it is strange it should be so, considering what Incouragement the Law gives for the apprehending of such idle People; For who ever brings any of those Wanderers before a Justice of Peace?
The Towns through which they last past Unpunished, is to Pay Two Shillings a piece to him that apprehended them. Though this Reward carry no weight with it, yet the great Mischief that those sort of People bring upon the Publick, should make every body vigilant. It is an incredible Sum that they cost the Nation in a year; and considering how many Townships and Parishes are oppressed, and almost ruined by the Accidents that are here∣by brought upon them, it is wonderful that People should rather chuse to Forswear them∣selves, than do their Duty; but so it is in this Case. Were these Wanderers duly Punished, it would reform many of them, and discourage others from following so bad an example; whereas the great remisness of Constables and other Officers in this point, is a great tempta∣tion to many who otherwise would think of some more Lawful, as well as Profitable, ways of living: A neglect and slowness to Punish, increases the number of Offenders.
These things, Gentlemen, I in particu∣lar recommend to you, not as all your business, but yet as things that cry aloud for re∣dress; for there does fall within your En∣quiry, High-Treasons, Petty-Treasons, Fe∣lonies of all sorts, whether against the Per∣son, Possession, or Goods of a man: Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies, and eve∣ry thing that is an Offence against the Pub∣lick Peace; in which I am not more par∣ticular, because I fear I have held you too long already; and therefore I will trouble you no farther, but pray God to direct you in your Business. FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for R. Baldwin. MEourius Britannious: Or the New Observator. Containing Refle∣ctions upon the most Remarkable Events falling out from time to time in Europe, and more particularly in England. The Fifth Volume. Printed for Rit. Baldwin; where are also to be had the First, Second, Third and Fourth Volumes, with the Appendix to them. The Speech of the Right Honourable Thomas, Earl of Stamford, Lord Gray of Gry, &c. at the General Quarter-Sessions held for the Coun∣ty of , at Michaelmas, 1691. His Lordship being made Gustes Rotrum for the faid County, by the late Lord Commissioners of the Great Seal. Bibliotheca Politica; Or a Discourse by way of Dialogue, Whether Ab∣solute Non-Resistance of the Supreme Powers be enjoined by the Doctrine of the Gospel, and was the Ancient  of the Primitive Church, and the  Doctrine of our Reformed Church of England. Collected out of the most approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern. Dialogue the Fourth. Printed for R. Baldwin; where also may be had the First, Second, and Third Dialogues. A Project of a Descent upon France. By a Person of Quality. A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French upon the English Prisoners of War; being a Journal of their Travels from  in  to Thlon in Provence, and back again. With a De∣scription of the Scituation and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospletals, and the number of men that died under their Cruelty; Europe's Chains broke; or a sure and speedy Project to rescue her from the present Usurpations of the Tyrant of France. Reflections upon the late King James's Declaration, lately Dispersed by the Jacabites. Truth brought to Light; or the History of the first 14 years of King James I. In Four Parts. I. The happy state of England at his Majesty's En∣trance; the corruption of it afterwards. With the Rise of Particular Favourites, and the Divisions between this and other States abroad. II. The Divorce betwixt the Lady Frances Howard, and Robert Earl of Es∣sex, before the King's Delegates, authorized under the King's Broad-Seal: As also the Arraignment of Sir Jer. Ellis, Lieutenant of the Tower, &c. about the murther of Sir Tho. Overbury, with all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's gracious Pardon and Favour to the Coun∣tess. III. A Declaration of his Majesty's Revenue since he came to the Crown of England; with the Annual Issues, Gifts, Pensions. and extraor∣dinary Disbursements. IV. The Commissions and Warrants for the burning of two Hereticks, newly revived, with two Pardons, one for Theophilus Higgons, the other for Sir Eustace Hart. A Sermon preached before the General and Officers, in the King's Chappel at Portsmouth, on Sunday, July 24. 1692. Being the day before they Embarqu'd for the Descent upon France. By Willam Gallaway, A.M. Chaplain to Their Majesties Sea-Train of Artillery.
