E2528 R29775 11204919 46748
THE ARTICLES OR, CHARGE EXHIBITED IN Parliament against D. COZENS of Durham, Anno 1641. IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's device (McKerrow no. 268) London, Printed. 1641.
THE CHARGE AGAINST DOCTOR COZENS, consisting of these severall ARTICLES. 1. THat he was the first man that caused the Communion Table in the Church of Durham, to be removed and set Altar∣wise, in the erecting and beautifying wher∣of, he (being then Treasurer) expended two hundred pounds. 2. That he used to officiate at the West side thereof, turning his back to the people. 3. That he used extraordinary bowing to it. 4. That he compelled others to doe it, using violence to the persons of them that refused so to doe: for in∣stance, once some omitting it, he comes out of his Seat, down to the Seat where they fate, being Gen∣tlewomen, called them Whores and Jades, and Pa∣gans, and the like unseemly words, and rent some of their Clothes.
5. That he converted divers prayers in the book of Common prayers into Hymnes, to be sung in the Quire, and played with the Organ, contrary to the ancient custome of that Church. 6. That whereas it had been formerly a custome in that Church, at the end of every Sermon to sing a Psalme; this custome, when D. Cozens came thither was abrogated, and instead thereof they sung an An∣them in the Quire, there being no Psalm sung either at the Ministers going up into the Pulpit, or at his comming downe. 7. That the first Candlemas day at night that he had been in that Church, he caused three hundred waxe Candles to be set up, and lighted in the Church at once, in honour of our Lady, and placed threescore of them upon and about the Altar. 8. That in this Church there were reliques of divers Images, above which were remaining the ruines of two Seraphims, with the picture of Christ between them, erected in Queen Maries time in the time of Popery, all which when Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown, were demolisht by vertue of a Commission by her to that intent granted, which so continued de∣molished from that time, till D. Cozens came to that Church, who being Treasurer, caused the same to be repaired, and most gloriously painted. 9. That all the time that he was unmarried, he wore
a Cope made of white Sattin, never officiating in any other, it being reserved solie for him, no man except himself making use thereof, which after marriage he cast off, and never after wore. 10. That there was a Knife belonging to the Church, kept altogether in the Vestrie, being put to none but holy uses, as cutting the bread in the Sacrament, and the like, Doctor Cozens refusing to cut the same with any other but that, thinking all others that were un∣consecrated, polluted, but that, which he putting ho∣linesse in, never termed but the consecrated Knife. 11. That he in a Sermon preached in that Church, did deliver certain words in disgrace of the Reformers of our Church, for instance, the words were these, The Reformers of this Church, when they abolished the Masse, tooke away all good order, and instead of Reformation, made it a Deformation. 12. That he seldome or never in any of his Sermons stiled the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments by any other name then Priests, nor the Communion-Table by any other name then Altar. 13. That by his appointment there was a Cope bought, the seller being a convicted Jesuit, and afterwards imployed in that Church, having upon it the picture of the invisible, and incomprehensible Trinity. 14. That whereas it had been formerly a custome in that Church, at five of the Clock to have morning
Prayers read Winter and Summer, This custome when D. Cozens came thither, was abandoned, and in stead thereof was used singing, and playing on the Or∣gans, and some few prayers read, and this was called first Service, which being ended, the people departed out of the Church, returning at nine a Clock, and having then morning prayers read unto them, and this was called second Service, which Innovation be∣ing misliked, and complained of by Master Iustice Hutton, was reformed. 15. That he framed a superstitious ceremony in light∣ing the Tapers which were placed on the Altar, which for instance was this, A company of boyes that belonged to the Church came in at the Quire doore with Torches in their hands lighted, bowing towards the Altar at their first entrance, bowing thrice before they lighted their Tapers, having done, they withdrew themselves, bowing so oft as before; not once turning their back-parts towards the Altar, the Organs all the time going. 16. That he counselled some yong Students of the U∣niversity to be imitators and practisers of his super∣stitious Ceremonies, who to ingratiate themselves in his favour, did accordingly, and being afterwards reproved for the same by some of their friends, con∣fessed that D. Cozens first induced them to that pra∣ctice, and encouraged them therein. 17. That he used upon Communion daies to make the signe of the Crosse with his finger both upon the
seats whereon they were to sit, and the Cushions to kneele upon, using some words when he so did. 18. That one Sabbath day there was set up an unnecessa∣ry company of Tapers and Lights in the Church, which D. Hunt being then Dean, fearing they might give offence, being they were unnecessary, sent his man to pull them down, who did so; But D. Cozens being there at aggrieved, came to the fellow, and there miscalled him in most uncivill manner, and began to beat him in the publique view of the Congregation, to the great disturbance of the same. 19. That the Deane and Chapiter of that Church whereof D. Cozens was one, with many others being invited to dinner in the Town of Durham: D. Cozens then, and there spake words derogating from the Kings Prerogative: The words were these, The King hath no more power over the Church, than the boy that rubs my horse heeles. 20. That there being many of the Canons of the said Church present at that time, amongst the rest there was one took more notice of his words then the rest, and acquainted one of his fellow Canons with them when he came home; This Canon being a friend to D. Cozens, told the Doctor that such a man exclaim∣ed of him, and charged him with words that he should speak at such a time; The Doctor presently sends for him, and when he came into the house, the Do∣ctor desires him to follow him into an inner roome, who did so; But so soon as he came in, the Doctor
shuts the doore, and sets both his hands upon him, calling him Rogue and Rascall, and many other names, insomuch that the man fearing he would doe him a mischiefe, cryed out; Mistresse Cozens com∣ming in, endeavoured to appease her husband, and holding his hands, the other ran away. 21. That the Doctor did seek many unjust waies to insnare this man, that so he might take a just occasion to put him out of his place, but none of them taking effect, he put him out by violence, having no other reason why he did so, but because he had no good voice, when as he had served the place two yeares be∣fore D. Cozens came thither: For instance of which unjust waies to ensnare this man, D. Cozens hired a man and a woman to pretend a desire of Matrimony, and to offer a summe of money to this petty Canon to contract Matrimony between them in a private Chamber, so thereupon to take advantage of his re∣venge upon him; This plot being confessed by the parties to be first laid by D. Cozens, and that they were his instruments. FINIS.
