e2978b r216765 99828486 32913
England's Happiness: OR, The only way to make a Nation truly Hap∣py, Proved from the testimony of the Ho∣ly Scriptures. By an English-man, who heartily Desires the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation. HAppiness is the one thing desired by all persons, and of this desirable Subject have I now written: Of Happi∣ness there is two sorts. 1. Temporal Happiness, endu∣ring only for this Life. 2. Eternal Happiness, enduring for ever. The first of these I have treated on at this time, in this Shoet; and this Happiness is either National or Personal. The first of these I have made the Subject of my Thoughts and Pens Imployment; namely, the only means to make a Kingdom or Nation truly happy in this Life; which is so desirable, that it is suffi∣cient to cause all sorts of Persons that dwell in the land, high and low, rich and poor to rejoyce together: This Jewel (if it can be found) is of far greater value than the Philosophers Stone, for that inricheth but very few, because but few obtain it, but this may enrich a whole Nation at once, and make their Lives truly happy in this life, so far as Happiness is here attainable; and to enjoy this general Happiness, we must do these three things: First, Find out what it is. Secondly, How it may be obtained. Thirdly, Endeavour to obtain it. The two first of these I have undertaken to do, according to that measure of light and understanding which I have received of God; but
the third is the work of others as well as my self; namely, of the whole Nation in general. (1.) There is not any one Person of understanding to be concerned in any business in the Nation, but is, or ought to be concerned to get this Jewel that will make the whole Nation happy: And this precious and desirable Jewel I understand to be a sincere and hearty Love be∣tween the Rulers and the People, and between all the People towards each other, that so it may run through the Nation from the highest to the lowest, and have its fruits and effects in every work that is done; this will cause the Rulers to do all that lyeth in them for the Safety, Comfort and Prosperity of their Subjects; and also the Subjects to do all that lyeth in them alwayes for the Comfort and well being of their Rulers, that as in the natural Body the Head is considering and find∣ing out what is most necessary for the whole Body, that it may be enjoyed; and the Hands and Feet are helping and carrying the Head, and all the Members of the Body are ready to help and assist each other in their places: So will it be in the body Politick, where this true and sincere Love is that we are speaking of, in all persons toward each other. The Rulers in such a Nation need not fear any hurt or detri∣ment from their Subjects, neither need the Subjects fear any wrong from their Rulers, nor from each other, as St. John saith, 1 Joh. 4.18. There is no Fear in Love, but perfect Love casteth out Fear: Such a state hath a resemblance of the holy Mountain of God, spoken of Isa. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, saith the Lord: Such a Nation is according to David's Prayer, Psal. 144.14, 15. That there be no complaining in our Streets; and then he concludes, Happy is the People that is in such a Case: It may be said of such a People or Nation, as is said of or concerning the Spouse, Cant. 1.9. I have com∣pared thee to a company of Horses in Pharaoh's Chariot; they are so united together by the bands of Love, that they are all labouring together for the good and prosperity of each other, as for their own, according to that good Exhortation of the Apostle to the Philippians, chap. 2. v. 2, 4. Having the same Love, being of one accord, of one mind; look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others: Thus in any Nation or people where this true and sincere Love is dwelling in every one, it causeth every one to have equal Respect to others good as to their own, and such Love dwelling and abiding in every one to∣ward each other, hath this great Blessing attending it, viz. Thore is much of the Presence of God with such a People, 1 Joh. 4.16. God is Love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him: See what a great measure of the Presence of God such are said to have;
and this is so needful a Blessing for any People, in order to their be∣ing happy, that Moses when he was the Governour and Leader of Isra∣el, saith unto God, Exod. 33.15. If thy Presence go not with us, carry us not up hence; knowing that the Presence of God was so needful for him, to teach him to Govern, and also to teach his People to be walking orderly under his Government, and to bless them with all need∣ful Blessings, that it was better for them to be alwayes in the Wilder∣ness with the Presence of God, than to go to their Promised Land without it. Therefore let none imagine that there can be any true and real Happiness to any People, where this true and real Love is want∣ing, for there is no way but this to fill the Nation with Peace and Plen∣ty; and where this Love is wanting, I may say to such a State as the Apostle saith to the Church, Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not Consumed one of another: Christ hath said, Mat. 12.28. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation; and sad ex∣perience hath made this plain and evident in many Ages, by shedding of much blood in several parts of the World, as might be instanced if need were; but I shall not go so far to fetch Examples in this Case, see∣ing we have had such sad experience at home in our own Nation, of the great want of this true and real Love amongst us in this land, and in our dayes too, which hath caused those sad Calamities amongst us, when the Inhabitants of this land have shed the blood of each other, as if they were without natural affection to their own Countrey-men: And therefore to make this Nation truly happy, to prevent those Calami∣ties for the future, and to enjoy those great and choice Blessings which this excellent Jewel will bring along with it, if it can be obtained, let every one of us labour therefore for it, as much as in us lyeth; for the Nation is made up of particular persons; and therefore if every one can but get it in themselves, it will be all over the Nation, and the Nation in general, and every person in particular will find and en∣joy the blessed effects thereof. (2.) And now come we to the second thing Promised to be done, viz. To shew the way by which this Jewel may be obtained. And, First, If we would injoy this great Happiness, we must all take spe∣cial heed to the Law of God: It was the breach of Gods Law that at the first brought Enmity into the World; and a due observing Gods Law, is an excellent means to root it up, and drive it out of the World again; for the Laws of God are binding every one to this great duty of Love, and one great reason why there is no more Love amongst men, is because the Laws of God are no more regarded; and take notice by the way, that by the Laws of God I intend all the Appoint∣ments
of God, so far as they are make known unto us: for that Man or Woman that maketh Conscience to perform their duty toward God, will certainly make Conscience of their duty towards men also, and there∣fore will deserve to be beloved; and if we love God and keep his Com∣mandments, we shall certainly love our own fellow Creatures and Coun∣trey-men; for the more we are acquainted with God, the more we shall learn to Love, For God is Love, 1 Joh. 3.8. And the whole scope and substance of all the Commands of God relating to men, between each other, either in requiring them not to wrong each other, or to do good one for another, is Injoyning us to this great Duty of Love; and to shew forth, in Obedience to Gods Laws, the fruits and effects of our Love to Men: See Mat. 22.35, — 40. We find one there ask∣ing Christ which is the great Commandment in the Law, Christ's an∣swer is, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind; this is the first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it; Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self; on these two hang all the Law and the Prophets: Mark here how Christ sets forth Love to God. 1. In the Manner, how it must be, viz. With all the Heart; and as if that Expression were not full enough, he adds, With all the Soul; and as if that were too little, he adds, With all the Mind. 2. He sets it forth in its Excellency, This is the great Commandment; and then (which is much to our purpose) he saith, The second is like unto it; How? not in respect of its Object, but in respect of its Na∣ture; it must be of a large extent, and therefore to be measured by our Love to our selves, which Love is that most excellent Jewel I am pressing you to get, every one in his own Heart, that we may all have it in Obedience to this great Command, all over the Nation, viz. To Love our Neighbours as our selves: Which Duty is so much wanted, that some can feed themselves beyond reason, whilst their poor Neigh∣bours are ready to perish with Hunger; some can drink Wine to Ex∣cess and Drunkenness, whilst their poor Neighbours drink Water; and some Cloath themselves with great superfluities, whilst their poor Neighbours are like to perish with Cold, not regarding this great Com∣mand, Love thy Neighbour as thy self: Yea, some are like the Law∣yers spoken of Luke 11.46. Whom Christ saith, Lade men with burthens grievous to be born, and touch them not themselves with one of their Fingers. Some also belye, reproach, and falsly accuse others, when they will not themselves bear the least Injury from any Man; all these, and ma∣ny other, do live in Disobedience to this great Command, Love thy Neighbour as thy self: Which, were it observed, would in its fruits and
effects, make much for the Comfort and well being of the whole Na∣tion; for every one in the Nation loving others as themselves, they would seek as much for the Comfort, Prosperity, and well Being of others as for their own; this would prevent therefore all the wrong∣ing, defrauding and cheating each other, that is too much used now a dayes; this would prevent also all the reproaching and reviling each other, this would also prevent all the betraying and seeking to kill one another; nay, were this observed in all places, it would prevent all the Oppression and Cruelty that is used in some parts of the World, and this would cause all persons to be careful not to grieve each other, as they would have others be careful not to grieve them; they would also Pity and Comfort all that are in Affliction, as they would be Pityed and Comforted, if it were their own Case: These are the excellent effects of having respect to the Laws of God in this matter. Secondly, If we would enjoy this precious Jewel, to make the Nati∣on happy, we must put on Humility, Colos. 3.12. Put on therefore bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of Mind: See how the Apostle here joyns these Graces together, as if it were impossible for Mercy and Kindness to be in any Person without Humility: Proud persons are full of Wrath and Revenge; if they do but think themselves the least Injured, it quickly removes their Love, but where Humility is in the Heart, it is not ea∣sily moved: They that are too much lifted up in themselves by Pride, beyond what they ought, do generally too much undervalue others beyond what they ought: hence it comes to pass, that Subjects have sometimes undervalued their Rulers, insomuch that they have presu∣med not only to speak against them without Cause, but also to act against them sometimes, to the great-disturbance of the Nation where they dwelt, as sad experience hath shewn; hence also it hath some∣times come to pass, that Rulers in some Countreys have too little va∣lued the Lives of their Subjects, being over perswaded thereto by some proud Persons, or Pride in themselves, as might be proved at large, but I shall instance but two: What a dreadful slaughter had King Ahashuerus made in his Kingdom, had not God prevented it; when he sent forth to destroy in one day all the Jews, both young and old, little Children and Women, he being Counsel'd and moved thereto by proud Haman? as is recorded Esth. 3. Do but consider also how low Benhadad King of Syria valued his Subjects, 1 Kings 2.20. when he could not have his Proud humour satisfied by the King of Israel, he threatens he would cause more men to follow him to Battle, than should be sufficient to take up the dust of Samaria in their hands. These are that sad effects of Pride, in opposition to true Love, therefore Humility
is very useful for all Persons, in the Case we are speaking of; namely, in order for all Persons to Love others as themselves, and to seek the good of each other as their own, and so to make the Nation truly Happy. Thirdly, As a further Direction in this Case, let us every one enter into a deep sense and consideration, 1. Of the great worth and excellency of this great Injoyment, that so we may be kept on in our Duty, every one labouring to obtain it, what∣soever Temptation we may meet with in this World to the contrary. 2. Consider, that so long as any Person is living in the World with∣out this true and real love to his fellow Creatures, he is living in the breach of one of the great Laws of God, and can expect no true and real Blessing; and therefore the gain that is gotten by wronging, cheat∣ing and defrauding those that God hath commanded us thus to Love, may justly be expected to be blasted by a Curse from Heaven upon it, or else to be made a Curse to such that thus do in their enjoyment of it, if it be continued unto them. 3. Consider, that Christ hath said, Mat. 7.2. With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again: Therefore knowing the Word of the Lord is true, we should always think, (when we meet with any Temptation to wrong others) if I do this evil, God will cause the like, or as great an evil to be done to me; and therefore we should from this consideration, nourish and keep alive the seeds of Grace, Love and Fa∣vour in our Hearts towards others, as we would be beloved, and en∣joy favour and kindness from others: And we should also bruise and crush the very Seeds, and quench the least Spark of Envy and Malice that would appear in us against others, as we would not have others hate and envy us. 4. Consider, that if this whole Nation in general will not be perswad∣ed to this great Duty, in order to enjoy this great Blessing, (which is very desirable they may, if it can be obtained) yet it will be a great happiness to all those that do get into the spirit of Love we are speaking of, and that will appear from that Union they shall have with God, 1 Joh. 4.16. God is Love, he that dwelleth in Love, dwelleth in God, and God in him; and those that have such near Union with God, must needs be happy; Though there should be any in the Nation that should not regard these directions, nor esteem this excellent enjoyment and happiness, but for want of this true Love should endeavour to wrong others; yet these that are walking in Union with God in this Love, it shall be well with them in the worst of times: See Isa. 3.5. we read there of a time When the People shall be oppressed every one by
another, and every one by his Neighbour; but God saith, ver. 10. Say to the Righteous, is shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings: Pray take notice, their doings were such as we are speaking of, that will make a People happy; and it appears from this Word of God, that the doings of others should not make them miserable, though it were such an evil time, they should be happy: And had all the Nation been in their Duty, as they were, it might have been a happy Nation. 5. And lastly, Consider the great Calamities and Mischiefs that have come upon other parts of the World, and this Nation also in times past, for want of this true Love we are speaking of; and what evils may yet befall us for time to come (if it should yet be wanting) God only knows. These Considerations, if they are duly weighed, and well considered, may be a means to put us all upon our Duties, and so be a means to make this Nation truly happy, with all that Peace, Plenty and Happiness that can be obtained in this Life. And now to Conclude, that no Impediment may hinder this great Duty and Blessing in this Nation, I have here set before you an Instance or two of very great and undeserved Love, for Imitation. The First is, the Love of God, which is the greatest Love that ever was, or will be in the World, which dwells plentifully in the Father, and in the Son, Luke 6.35, 36. the Love of God the Father is set forth for our Pattern and Imitation thus: Love ye your Enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the Children of the highest; for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil: Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful. And the Love of Christ the Son of God, is also far beyond the Love of Man; For greater Love hath no Man, than that a Man lay down his life for his Friend, Joh. 15.13. But when we were Enemies, Christ dyed for us, Rom. 5.8. Then let me say to my honoured Countrey-men, as St. John saith in his first Epistle, chap. 4. v. 11. Beloved, if God so lo∣ved us, we ought also to love one another. Secondly, Another Pattern and Example of Love (my beloved Coun∣try men) is to us that are Subjects; in the King, whom God hath given the Government of this Nation to, whom, though he had many Enemies in this Nation, yet since God hath given him the Kingdom, he hath shewed himself kind and loving unto all Men. Now then, seeing Love beins at the Throne, my dearly beloved Country-men, I beseech you, let it oblige us that are Subjects to manifest our true, hearty and sincere Love to our King, and to each other in general, by all those wayes and means whereby we can demonstrate it to be
such; that so this true and hearty Love running through the whole Nation, and having its fruits and effects in every work that is done, this Nation may be made truly Happy, with all the Happiness that is attainable in this life: Which, that it may be, shall be the hearty Prayer of your Countrey-man: That King and People may be blest, And live in Love, in Peace and Rest, Is the Desire of his Heart, Who doth to you these Lines impart. REASONS why the Authour Printed these Lines, and put not his Name to them. First, HE Printed it, 1. Because of that great Desire he hath for the good of the Nation. 2. Because of that great need there is of Love now in this juncture of Affairs. 3. That he might inprove his own Talent, so as not to be ashamed when Christ cometh. Secondly; He put not his Name to it, least any should think he did it more because he would be esteemed than to do good; and this I hope may take off all occasions of Offence. Gloria Deo, Pax Populo. Let the Nation have Good, and God the Glory. Licensed September the 15th. 1687. LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for the Authour. 1687.
