e3553 r42020 23236078 109503
EVERY WOMAN Her own MIDWIFE: Or a COMPLEAT CABINET Opened for CHILD-BEARING WOMEN. FURNISHED With Directions to prevent miscarriages: During the time of Breeding, and other Casualties which usually attend Women in Child-bed Publisht for the Publick Good. To which is annexed Cures for all sorts of Diseases incident to the Bodies of Men, Women and Children. LONDON, Printed for Simon Neale, at the Sign of the Three Pidgeons in Bedford-street in Covent-Garden. 1675.
A SHORT COMMENTARIE, Concerning the Care ought to be had of Women which are with child, such as are ready to bring forth, such as are brought to bed, and also of Infants. SInce many sad and incommodious things are wont to happen to women with child, and in bringing them into the world by ignorance and carelessnesse: I thought I should undertake a thing not unbe∣seeming a Christian Physitian, if I should reduce, as it were, into a breif Comment, what things were fit to observe, as well in their time of bearing, as also in the birth, from which, being somewhat more instructed, they might better enjoy their health, preserve their off-spring, and after birth better defend their bodies. CHAP. I. What things are to be taken heed of in the two first Moneths. SO soon as the woman shall begin to be with child, which she shall easily know, by stopping of her monethly flux,
without disease, or ancientnesse of yeares; she shall abstain from all vehement motions and excrcise, whether she walk on foot, or ride on horseback, or in a Coach, or be carried in a Horse-litter; For where the body is too much stirred, the internall membrane of the Womb is either accustomed to be broken, or to be loosly resolved, and thereupon abort∣ment presently followeth. To these things the woman with child must diligently be∣ware, that she lift not her armes up too high, nor carry great burthens, nor repose her self on hard and uneasie seats: But instead of exercise, which may alwayes in some precede be∣fore meat, she may walk on foot gently, or suffer her body and armes gently to be rubbed and stroked, or may stretch them forth with spinning or carding. Let her moderately use meat of good juyce and easie con∣coction, and Wine not too strong and too sharp, but a little mingled with water, or if she be abstemious, she may use water wherein Cinnamon is boyled: But she may not feed on sweet meats, sharp, and windy; she must also avoid fa∣sting, thirst, watching, mourning, sadnesse, anger, and all other perturbations of the mind. Her familiar freinds must present no unwholsome thing to her, nor so much as name it, least she should desire it, and not be able to get it, and so minister her an occasion of abort∣ment, or the Child carry with it some foule impressions. But if she desire chalk, clay, or coales, let beanes boyled with sugar be given unto her: or if she cannot get her long∣ing, let her presently drink a large draught of pure cold water CHAP. II. Order for the third Moneth. BEfore the fourth moneth be ended, she must neither be let bloud, nor have her body evacuated with any purga∣tive medicine. But if too much bloud abound, or some incident disease
happen, which may require evacuation, you shall use cupping-glasses with scarification, and a little may be drawn from the shoulders and arme, especially if she have been formerly accustomed to them. CHAP. III. From the fourth Moneth. VVHen now the fourth moneth is past, bloud-letting and physick is permitted, especially if it be gentle, and milde, such as best may agree with women with child, and tender or delicate persons: And by Hyppocrates pre∣cept may be conceded even untill the seventh moneth. CHAP. IIII. From the fifth,, sixth, and seventh Moneth, FRom that time forward none of the before mentioned remedies is wont, or ought from thence to be used, because the Babe being now become greater, standeth in need of greater nourishment and bloud, and also can bear no commo∣tion of physick. Although sometimes I have met with women, which have so much abounded with bloud, that unlesse they had been let bloud in the second moneth, they would have aborted in the third; others again, unlesse they should attempt the same in the seventh or eight moneth, they could not carry their great belly so long, or else would be delivered of a dead issue. But since these things happen but to few, they may not be granted to all, but we must provide for every one according to their nature and constitution. And this is to be prohibited to all which are with child, that they give not way to take any bloud from the ancle bone of the foot, during the whole time of the womans going, but in stead thereof, if the disease so require, an ounce of Manna in the broth of a Cock, or so much Cassia fistula,
or of Sirrups made of Damask-roses infused in May dew, about the quantity of an ounce, with a little water of Cinna∣mon, may safely be taken a little before meat. But if the belly be bound onely without any apparent disease, the broth of a Chicken, or of Veal sodden, with Oil, or with the decoction of Mallowes, or marsh-Mallowes, Mer∣cury, and Linseed, put up in a glister by the lower parts will not be amisse, yet in a lesser measure then is wont to be gi∣ven in other Children, to wit, of the decoction five ounces, of common Oil three ounces, of Sugar two ounces, of Cassia fistula one ounce. But sharper Purgations, as also Suppo∣sitories made of Honey and Salt, are altogether hurtfull to great bellyed women, or such as lie in childbed. But of fat Pork, which they call Lard, or the yolks of Eggs without salt, Purgations and Glysters are commended. But if she will not take a Glyster, either for modesty or otherwise, because she was not accustomed to take it, one or two yolks of new laid Eggs, or a few Pease pottage warm, with a little salt and sugar, supped up a little before meat, will be very conve∣nient. But if the belly shall be sometimes distended and stretched out with wind, a little Fennelseed and Anniseeds reduced in∣to powder, and mingled with Honey or with Sugar, made af∣ter the manner of an Electuary will doe very well. But if the thighs and feet swell, let them be annointed with Oxphrodinum (which is a liquid Medicine made with Vinegar and Rose-water) mingled with a little Salt. CHAP. V. The eighth Moneth IN the eighth moneth, which is usually perillous, the better diets, rather than plentiest, will be most commodious. But as they must abate their diet, so their bodily exercise must increase. And because then women with child, by reason of the sharp humours alter the belly, are accustomed to weaken both their spirits and strength; they may well take
before meat an Electuary of Diarrhodon, or Aromaticum Ro∣satum, or Diamargariton, in the morning before meat, and sometimes they may lick a little Honey; even as they which loath and nauseate their meat, may take green Ginger con∣dited with Sugar, or the rindes of Citrons and Oranges condited; as also it is usuall sometimes to take specificall Sirrups. Moreover, let the woman with child often use Ho∣ney for the strengthning of the Infant. When she is not farre from her labour, or bringing forth, she shall eat daily seven tosted Figs before meat, least the seconds may be bound up; but if they shall be restrained and stay firme, they may be resolved: But the woman with child may not eat salt and powdered meats, least the child be born without nail. CHAP. VI. In the ninth Moneth. IN the ninth moneth, being near their time, they must not be idle, neither sit much, nor stoop much, nor lie on their sides, so that the child may not well turn it self, but ought to lie with her face upward, neither shall she bend her self much, lest the child be infolded and wrapped up in the umbilical ligaments and bonds, by which meanes it oftentimes perisheth; but she must walk, and stirre often, and exercise her self, ra∣ther by going upward than downward: Let her use light and easie meats of digestion, as damask-Prunes with Sugar, or Figs and Raisins, before meat, and also the yolks of Eggs, flesh and broth of Chicken, Birds, Patridges and Pheasants, and Fish living in stony places, with good broth. And such meats shall not onely be convenient for this moneth, but also for the two succeeding moneths, that the na∣tural parts by them may be dilated. Also astringent meats, and roasted meats, and also Rise, hard Eggs, Millet, and others of that kind will be very pro∣fitable. Baths of sweet water, with emollient hearbs, used with intermission is meet: But the hot house, which they call a stow, is hurtful. After the bath, let the belly be annointed
with oyle of Roses and Violets; but the natural parts with the fat of Hens, Geese, Ducks, with oyle of Lillies, and the de∣coction of Linseed and Faenugreek, boyled with oyl of Linseed, marsh-Mallows, grains of Quinces, or with this which followeth. A Liniment. Take of Mallowes, both of them cut and sliced of each one ounce. Of marsh-Mallowes, both of them cut and sliced of each one ounce. Of Linseed also one ounce. Let them be boiled from twen∣ty ounces of water to ten; let them take three ounces of the boiled broth, of oyle of Hour-deluce, and of Almonds, of each one ounce, three ounces of Deer suet; Bath this from the rest, and annoint her with it warm. Also they may use, for fourteen dayes before the birth morning and evening, to bath and moisten the belly with Muscadine and Lavender-water, that the child may be the more strengthened thereby. She may every day eat toasted bread, that nothing may grow to the childe. The naturall parts may also be gently stroaked down with this Fomentation. The Fomentation. Take three ounces of Linseed. Of Mallowes, and of marsh-Mallowes sliced, of each M. i. Let them be put in a bag and boiled moderately: Let the woman with child, every morning and evening, take the va∣pour of this decoction in a hollow stoole, taking great heed, that no wind or air come to her in any part; and then let her wipe the parts so annointed with a linnen cloth, that she may annoint the belly and groins, as at the first. Being near her time to bring forth, so that she be within ten dayes thereof, if the woman with child shall begin to feel difficulty and pain, let her daily use this Bath.
The Bath. Take of Mallowes, Marsh-Mallowes, ana M. i. Cammomil, Mercury hearb, Maiden-hair, ana M. ss. Of Linseed four ounces. Let these be boiled in a sufficient quantity of water, as may suffice to make a Bath therewith. But let not the woman sit too hot on the seat, nor higher than a little above her Navill, nor let her sit longer on it than about half an hour, least her strength languish and decay; for it is better to use it often, than to stay too long at once in it. But if she cannot indure to sit over the water, let her che∣rish her naturall parts, with a spunge or with clothes wet in it. A Laconick and sweating Bath is not convenient at that time but hurtful, though we think women may use it. After the Eath she shall alwayes annoint her natural parts of her loines, her flankes, navil, sides, and other parts djoyn∣ing thereto, with the ointment or fat made of the fore-pre∣scribed thing, or cherish them with the fat marrow. And also fats melted sometimes, and rightly put up into the natural parts, with a spunge or glister-pipe, if the womb be hot and dry, and the party with child be of a lean and slen∣der body. Fumes also used, applied to the womb, conduce to faci∣litate delivery. Sffumigations of the genitals, to facilitate delivery. Musk, Ambergreace, Gallia Moscata, Aloes-wood, put upon hot coales, and also sweet Hearbs, Mint, Penniroyal, alamint, Origanum, Majoram, are of a pleasant and grateful smell, and open womens passages, and draw down conception. But we must beware, that such sweet smells of this kind be not used to the nostrils, but rather Balls of Galbanum, Assa foetida, Mirrh, or Rue.
What Meat is most usefull. Then Pottage of Hens, Capons, and such like are most in use; and I should advise them then to drink thinne generous Wine allayed with water. What manner of Chamber, the woman with child should lye in. It doth not a little avail to the happy delivery, that the Chamber, wherein the Child-bearing woman lyeth, be tem∣perate, and be neither too cold nor too hot, for that shutteth up the mouth of the womb, and this disperseth and digesteth the strength. In Summer time therefore if heat scorcheth, the Chamber may be strowed with Willow leaves, and Vine leaves, and Rose-water, with a little Vinegar. In Winter, a high or upper Chamber, moderately kept warm, shall be con∣venient, which shall be kept warm with a continued fire, as is accustomed to be done in Italy, France, and other hot Countries. But this is expedient every where, that the natural parts, and those nearest unto them, be moderately rubbed with hot clothes. CHAP. VII. What is to be done at the birth. THe birth being at hand, and paines oppressing them, it shall be fit, if the belly doe fall down of its own accord, but if it be bound, it must be provoked with a gentle Glyster; for the excrements being cast out, the womb and the passa∣ges, thorough which the Child issueth, are lesse pressed, and so the birth followeth more easie These things being well prepared, the child-bed woman must be put into bed, if tender, weak, grosse, and fleshly; but it ought to be made ready after this manner.
How, and wherewith, the child-bed womans bed ought to be fur∣nished. A large boulster made of linnen cloth, must be stuffed with straw, and be spread on the ground, that her upper part may lye higher than her lower; on this the woman may lye, so that she may seem to lean and bow, rather than to lye drawing up her feet unto her, that she may receive no hurt. CHAP. VIII. To whom the seat may agree and be fit. LEt the strong and lusty women be placed in a chair, which also must have the lower part not upright, but stooping a little, that the child-bearing woman may sit, as it were, bend∣ing backward, clothes, or close compassing garments, being cast about their backs. In this the belly, together with the whole burthen, may sooner goe down than in a bed; but it often cometh to passe, that the whole Babe lyeth at the mouth of the womb, before that it shall get forth, more loosly and openly with the ad∣joyning places, and by that meanes is compelled to stick lon∣ger there, from whence ariseth no small danger of life, CHAP. IX. What the Midwife shall doe in the very moment of the birth. VVHen now the pangs of child-bearing women increase more and more, let the Midwife inwardly annoint the secret or natural parts with oyle of Cammomil, and white Lillies, nor let her set the woman in the seat, before she per∣ceiveth the womb to be loosed and resolved, and the humours to flow over more plentifully. Moreover, she may not bring her to labour and strugling, before the birth shew it self to her view; for they doe but labour in vain, and doe violently distort and wrest away the strength of the labouring woman, that afterward,
when she shall have need, it will not be able to work it forth. But she shall sit fitly over against the woman in labour, and shall diligently observe on what part the birth moveth it self; for if it come the right way, she shall annoint and cherish the secret parts with odoriferous Oils; and if it de∣clineth to the sides, she shall with both hands govern and dispose the belly, that it may fall to the mouth of the womb. And if the hand or feet shew it self first, the Midwife, with a soft and gentle hand, moistened with broth of Fenugreek and Linseed, shall gently reduce it into the place. Certain women have the mouth of their womb so streight∣ned, that without great help, scarce or never they can part with the child. And that cometh to pass by reason of divers cau∣ses; for either some strong heat coming from the natural parts, doth two much streighten the inward parts, or the Creature is to big, or the child-bearing woman is to grosse and fat, or the child is dead, who cannot by motion be furthering and helping to nature, or else cold for the most part in the winter, especially in young ones, who have a narrow passage of the womb, doth more astringe and bind it up; or some∣times heat in some is so dissolved, that their strength faileth them in the birth. Therefore when there appeareth difficulty in bringing forth the Child, Jesus Christ, the onely preserver and saver in danger, is heartily to be called upon, that with his gra∣tious favour he would be pleased to be Assistant to the wretched party in travell. CHAP. X. When the Infant is come into the world. VVHen now the Child, or Issue, cometh into the world, either with the head or feet, the Mother must be in∣couraged, that as much as in her lyeth, she keep in her breath and restrain it, that by that indeavour she may put forth the Child. And the Midwife, in the mean time, must with her
hand gently compresse and keep down the region of the womb, which is above the navill, and urge the Infant to the lower parts: And although the astriction of the womb cau∣seth the bringing forth to be more difficult, the parturient woman is to be set in a Bath, in which Mallowes, Faenugreek, Linseed, and Barly are sodden, and the sides, hips, and flank, must be annointed, with oyle of Roses and Violets: let the thighs be well rubbed, with Oxysacchar. and half a drachm of Mint, and as much of Wormwood, be exhibited in drink to her: The woman bringing forth may gently be led to her bed; and they which assist her at her labour, must not look or gaze in her face, as such who are ashamed in their bring∣ing forth, that after it, as it falleth out, she strive not to bring forth her young one with sharper pain. CHAP. XI If the Secondines break not readily. BUt if the Skin containing the young one, called the Se∣condine, because it is brought forth after the birth, be lesse easily broken, but stifly resisteth, the Midwife must either break it with her nails, and laying hold on it with her fingers, cut it with a pair of Sizzers, taking care that the Child may be preserved safely in doing it: On the contrary, when the skins are broken or cut in peices, if all the humours presently shall overflow before the child come forth, and the naturall places shall be dried up, let Goose greace, with oyle of white Lillies melted, be poured in warm, or the white of an Egg with the yolk be put up. What is to be done after the child is born, if yet the Secondine, or after-birth, be retained. If the Child being born, the Secondines be as yet perti∣naciously retained, sneezing must be provoked, if it come not voluntarily, putting Ginger or some other sharp thing up into the nostrils; or a scruple of Unicorns horn beaen into pow∣der ought to be drunk hot in white Wine (in want of Unicorns
horn use good Harts horn, or Bezar four graines) or the juyce of Borrage exhibited in drink bringeth them down, because it easily moveth vomit, and they thereby are brought forth. Another approved Remedy for drawing them forth. Take of Sesely, Cinnamon, Of Mirrh, and of sweet Cassia, of each equall parts. Let these be exhibited with Mugwort-water. Another Receit. Take powder of the Jet stone exhibited in Mugwort-water, or else about a drachm of the powder of Mallowes seeds exhibited in hot water, or the suffumigations of Horse hoofes. CHAP. XII. To draw forth a dead Child. IF the child be dead, an equall quantity of Rue, of Mug∣wort, Wormwood, and black Pepper, being each of them reduced into fine powder, and boyled in Wine, must be ex∣hibited, or Vervain boyled in Wine, or Water, or Vinegar; or Savory bruised and tied upon the belly bringeth forth the Child, whether it be yet alive or dead; or Butter with Ho∣ney boyled in Wine; or decoction of Hysop well dryed ex∣hibited in hot water: but if it yeildeth not, nor cometh away with these, let Rue, Mugwort, Oppoponax, and Wormwood dryed, with a little Oil and Sugar, be laid to the groin, or the navill; and moreover, the skin of a female Snake put about the woman in the manner of a girdle. Also the stone Aetites, tied unto the thigh, after the Child is brought forth, ought presently to be taken away, least the womb, after the Child be brought forth, come forth also. Moreover, sneezing alone accellerateth delivery, but it ought to be sed with the mouth and nostrils close stopped, and Ginger, or some such thing, put up into them; for from
hence a great force of the spirits is thrust thence unto the inward part. CHAP. XIII. How the bellies of child-bearing women, being costive or bound may be loosned. IF the belly doe not evacuate the excrements, the first dayes of her being brought to bed, bring a Fig, cut in the middle, into the form of a sharp tent fashioned like a mans Yeard, and put it up into the Fundament instead of a Suppository; or else put a grain of Coriander, confected with Sugar, up into that place; or put a peice of Swines flesh powdered, or Lard, brought into the same form, up into the same place, or frame a Suppository of white Sope, and apply it thereto. About four or five dayes after the birth, you may use a gentle Glister of half a pound of Sallade oyle, with a quar∣tern of Barly boyled in broth, with two ounces of Sugar, with the yolke of an Egg, beaten together. But if at the eighth day the belly answer not their expecta∣tion in loosenesse, let three drachms of Cassia newly extracted, well confected with Sugar, be taken morning and at evening before supper in the manner of a bole, and presently let her eat thereupon. CHAP. XIV What things are to be applied to the naturall or secret parts. SO soon as the Child is born, let this astringent Fomen∣tation be applied unto the naturall parts. The Fomentation. Take of red Ro∣ses two pugils; a pugill is the quantity you may take up at once between your first three forefingers. Let them be boyled to a third part, in high red Wine in∣clining to a blackish colour, with a fourth part of water put thereunto, then put into the decoction a whole Egg, and let
it be mingled together, and applied to the place, with flanen rowlers, and kept on for the space of two dayes. Another. Take of oyle of Hypericon four ounces. Of Rose-water two ounces. Of the juyce of Solomons Seal one ounce. Mingle these well together, and let the rowlers dipped in them be applied to the secret parts. An Ointment. Let the belly be forthwith annointed with this Ointment, least it become wrinkled or deformed, and that it may be thereby better strengthened, and may return to the old form. Take two ounces of Rose-water. An ounce of Mirtles. Half an ounce of Cats fat. These things ought to be melted, and mingled with the before recited Oyles. A Girdle for the belly. After the Unction, put on a Girdle of Dog-skin, well pre∣pared by a Leather-dresser, and annointed with two ounces of oyle of Mirtles, and one ounce of oyle of Mastick, and half an ounce of oyle of Hypericon mingled together. But it must be so large, as it may comprehend or compasse the whole belly a little above the naviil, even unto the natu∣rall parts, and must streightly bind up the same, but without pain. And this will be fitly done, if it be sowed together with thred on the left side, and be put hot enough to the belly, and be compassed with four or five double linnen clothes, binding them with fit strings together, that the belly may be kept warm. But let linnen clothes, annointed with an equall proportion of oyle of Mirtles, and oyle of Hypericon, be applied unto the naturall parts, from the second day untill the seventh.
CHAP. XV. The order from the seventh day after the woman is brought to bed. SIx dayes being finished or past, on the seventh day let the naturall parts be fomented and cherished with this De∣coction. Take of red Roses, Of Agrimony, Mellilot, And Cammomil, of each one handfull. Of the leaves of Hypericon, Of the leaves of Quinces, And of Mirtle, of each two pugils. Let them be boyled in red Wine thick and astringent, with a little water to a third part, and let the naturall parts be fo∣mented therewith morning and at evening before sleep. On the eighth day. It is convenient to put to the belly, a plaister made with the white of an Bgg, and a little Pepper, and taken with flaxen rowlers, or boulsters. On the ninth day. If this plaister please not, besmear a Dogs skin again with oyle of Mirtles and Mastick, and apply it unto the belly, and it will avail and profit much, to keep it tied with swadling clothes unto the end of her child-bed. A Liniment to scatter and disperse the Milk. That the Milk flowing back to the breasts, may with∣out offence be dissipated, you must use this ointment. Take of pure Wax two ounces. Of Linseed oyle half a pound. When the Wax is melted, let a Liniment be made wherein linnen clothes must be dipped, and according unto their large∣nesse,
be laid upon the breasts; but when it shall be discussed, and paineth no more, let other linne clothes, dipped in di∣stilled water of Acorns, be put upon them. But this I onely advise them which cannot nurse their own children: And if swelling in their which give suck doe arise from abundance of milk in their breasts, seem to threaten an inflammation, use the former Ointment, but abstain from using the distilled water of Acorns. When, and what Bath they must use. From the twentieth day, if it be a male Child, if it be a fe∣male, from the five and twentieth day, this Bath may be used. Take of Majoram, Of Penniroyall, Mellilot, Hypericon, or Saint Johns wort, Of Millefoile, And of Pimpernel, of each M iii. Of Bay leaves two pugils. Three ounces of Pomegranades rindes. Of old Bean meal five pounds. Of Barly meal two pounds. Of Cummin bruised and beaten into powder, lb. iii. Put the hearbs, small chopt, into a bag, but the beans, and Barly, and Cummin, one upon another severally: Let them be sod altogether in a great Cauldron, which may contain two parts of Water, and one of Wine, let them be boyled the day before she would use the Bath, and be poured forth into a tub, which must be well covered: The next day heat the water of the Bath; but they must take heed they sit not on the Bath too hot; but two houres will be sufficient to sit be∣fore meat in the morning, and at evening. But let the child-bed woman sit on the bag, wherein the bran or meale is put, but not lower than the region of the mouth of the Ventricle.
Another. Let a barrell, wherein the dregs of white Wine are yet stick∣ing, be filled with river water, and let it be stirred to and fro, that all may be well mingled together, then let the dregs settle, and boyle in this water, Of Bay leaves, Of red Roses, With both the Comferies, Of Hypericon, Penniroyall, And Pimpernel, of each p. ii. Of old Bean meal lb. v. Of Barly meal lb. ii. Let the child-bed woman sit on the bag, in which the meales are, or on another, which may contain the brans of wheat. CHAP. XVI. Against the gripings of the belly in child-bearing women. THe gripings and gnawings of the belly, especially those which are contracted from the great striving and labour of the belly in bringing forth, and sometimes from a cholle∣rick matter contained therein, and sometimes of wind retained. Outward Remedies. Exceedingly therefore are usefull Musk, and Civet out∣wardly laid to the navill; moreover, oyle of Dill, chafed on the belly as hot as well may be indured. Inward helps in their meats. In stead of meat, the broth of an old Cock or Capon is best, being well sodden with a little Dill, and so taken. A Drink. For the drink, a water made up with Cinnamon and
Sugar, which they call Hippocras, which is made after this manner. Put unto water boyled, and hot, and drawn, unto ℥. xx. Of Cinnamon half an ounce, Of Sugar three or two ounces. Three grains of black Pepper. Mingle them well, and infuse them for six hours, and then strain them in a bag, which the Apothecaries call Hippocrates sleeve. Let the child-bearing woman use this potion warm, but very sparingly; but if she loath this, let her use thin, small, and clear wine, unlesse a Fever shall hinder her. A Potion also is made of Honey and white Wine, of each two ounces, to mittigate paine by reason of flatuous humours retained. Some exhibite the jawes of the Pickerell, with Amber, and Ginger, ana. finely powdered to drink in white Wine. CHAP. XVII. The government of the Nurse. LEt there be given unto the Infant new born Honey to lick, after let it be nourished with the Mothers Milk, which of all things best agreeth with it. But if by reason of some necessity it cannot enjoy it, a sound healthy Nurse is to be chosen, neither younger than four and twenty yeares, nor elder than five and thirty, of a white and ruddy complexion, which is not infected with other vices, nor yet hath too lately been brought to bed, nor hath not long given suck; let her not have sore Dugs or Breasts, nor to big, but a large Breast, and moderately fat. Let her use choise meats of easie and light concoction, engendring good bloud or juyce; let her ab∣stain from hot aromaticall Spices, as Pepper, Ginger, Car∣damome, and such like; also from Leeks, Onions, Garlick, Salt, austere and tart things: Let her avoid strong Wines, as also cold water: Let her eschew immoderate eating and drinking, for that corrupteth the Milk, and begetteth in chil∣dren lepry, or scurfe, and other contagious diseases: Let her
abstain from cares and vexations, and let her take heed, least she provoke her menstruous disease. She must not sleep much, or be given to sleep, for that maketh the Milk flegmatick; she likewise ought not to watch more than is meet, for from hence the Milk cometh to be more hot, sharp, and distastfull to the Infant; she ought moderately to excrcise her selfe, especially her armes, to wit, either in sowing, spinning, or knitting, for by this meanes evill humours are consumed, as by ease and sloth they are augmented. Also copulation of the Nurse exceedingly offendeth, and hurteth the Child, as that which cheifly retracteth and di∣minisheth the Milk, and maketh it of an unsavory taste, ta∣sting hot, and rank, or goatish, which bringeth no small inconvenience, and hurt to the Child. For which cause, in times past, Husbands were driven away from their Wives, and restrained from their companies. But if the Milk decrease, Pultesses of Bean meal, and Rise, are meet to be used; also like paps made of Bread, with Milk, and Sugar, to which may be added a little Fennel-seed. And if the Milk be thick, it must be made thinne, with slen∣der diet, and subtill Wine, and Sirrup of Vinegar, as also with exercises: But if it be too thinne, and waterish, grosse, and strong meats, and longer sleeps will be convenient and meet. For the corruption of the Milk, a litile Mugwort grosly bruised, and put into a linnen cloth, and so into broth, with a little Honey added thereto, will doe very much good. The care of the Infant. And if the Childes belly be loose, the food ought to be more grosse and strong, and her sleeps longer: But children may suck so long, as till they have brought forth sharp and great teeth: But if you suffer them to drink Wine, or strong drink, or other Potions, before they have toothed them, they will be corrupted; but when they have gotten these teeth,
their armes, and back bones are gently to be rubbed after their sleep. CHAP. XVIII. A Bath of sweet water, very profitable for children, as by whose meanes they may grow up and increase. THey are, fasting, to be bathed in water before meat, for the space of a quarter of an hour, yet so, that the belly may first goe down or be emptied, and then they are to be annointed with oyle of Olives made hot. And it is not of little concernment, in what swadling clothes children are wrapped; for when they are not tied up at all, or the clouts are too loose, they are subject to Fluxes, Imposthumes, apt to be crooked backt, and other discommo∣dities; but especially when their knees are too strictly tied and bound up, and their thighs left at liberty, they are la∣med. When they cry, or feel pain, or will sleep, they are to be pacified, either by shewing the breast, or by singing, or by rocking, either in Cradles, or hanging Beds, or by carrying up and down. But we must observe, that children may lie strait whensoever they lie down, and ought not to be co∣vered too much, or hot with coverings, nor yet with too few, least they may catch cold. Moreover, let the linnen cloth, wherein they are wrapped, be neat and clean, for children are offended, and infected by foul and filthy excrements. From three years of age till the seventh, they are to be educated gently and kindly, not to be severely reprehended, chidden, or beaten, for by that meanes they be made through∣out their whole life after too timorous, or too much terrified, astonished, and sotted. Being yet in their first years, they are not to be compelled to going, for seeing all their bones are soft as Wax, and the body fall the heavier, they either become lame, or universally resolved in their feet. Food must be daily given them thrice a day, till they are
three years old; for if they be much filled, they are sub∣ject and accustomed to be troubled with Convulsions, and other diseases. In the sixth or seventh year of their age, they are to be sent to schoole, and committed to the breeding and instruction of courteous and temperate Schoolmasters, who may not ter∣rifie them. Before these yeares they are not to be compelled or for∣ced to harder labours; otherwise they will not thrive well, but stand at a stay, and keep little, or become Dwarfes. CHAP. XIX. The Diseases of Infants. VVHen as the Infant beginneth to grow sick, as for example, from a cold disease, the Nurse is to be nourished with hot and dry meat and drink, so that thereby forthwith it may grow well again; so also if it be taken with other diseases, as with an Ague, the Nurse shall use plantain water, and such like things, Paps made for children of crums or morsels of bread broken or sliced, are more wholesome, than made of meal or flour. Till two years old give them Honey often, for that keepeth them from Convulsions, and costivenesse of the belly, and that the milk they eat hurt them not. When Infants cast up their milk, a Corrall should be hung about their neck down to their middle; for it is use∣full for them in teething, and Ivory also is good for the same purpose. Diseases and Symptomes, proceeding from the birth, in women with child. Gripings and pangs come often upon women from their birth, for the womb, as a wild beast, by reason of her suddain evacuation and emptinesse, by wandering up and down hither and thither, disposeth it self. Therefore the belly must be covered all over with Barly
meal, and the white of an Egg, mixed together, with juyce of Elder; also drinking of hot Wine wherein Cummin hath been boyled, is very convenient and usefull Also Suffumigations of Styrax calamita, Frankincense, and Smallage seed, of each one drachm, will very much availe. CHAP. XX. Against the Rupture of the Cods and perinaeum, and the part be∣tween the rising of the Yeard and the Fundament, which proceedeth from difficulty of bringing forth. TO help the Rupture of the naturall parts, which ariseth from hardnesse in bringing forth, the powder of the great Comfery root dryed, with Cummin and Cinnamon, are very good, put up into the womb. In some the wrinkled skin of the Cods is broken from the birth, so that there is but one hole between the womb and the fundament, and the same course, whereby oftentimes the womb goeth forth and is hardened; therefore the diseased parts must be cherished with hot Wine, in which Butter hath been resolved, untill the Matrix be softned, and then it must be gently put up: after the Cod skin is broken in three or four places, it must be sowed up with a silken thred; presently let a linnen cloth be put upon the belly, according to the large∣nesse of it; lastly, let it be annointed with Tar, for the womb, by reason of the evill scent, is drawn in again. At last we heal the Rupture with powder of both Comferies, and Cummin, sprinkled upon them. But a child-bed woman is to be put to bed, so that she may have her feet lie the higher; let her lie there eight or nine dayes continually, and let her take her meat, ease her self, and make water there. She must abstain from bathing so long as possibly she may, also from all those things which may provoke coughing, and from meats which cannot easily be digested: And for preven∣ting this danger in bringing forth, let a long ball of linnen cloth be made, and put up into her Fundament, and as often
as the child-bearing woman striveth to bring forth the Infant, let her strongly compresse and keep in her belly, that no dis∣ruption or rupture be made in these parts. CHAP. XXI. For windinesse or Collick of the belly. IF the secret or naturall parts receive wind in, which being kept in brings forth pain, a Fomentation made with the de∣coction of Mustard or Onions, is very good. Also sometimes in others so great plenty and abundance of wind oppresseth them, that they seem broken, or as those trou∣bled with the Iliack passion, for whose ease, a Bath made of Mallowes, Pellitory of the wall, and the like, must be used, and the belly often kept soluble. But she ought to stay the longer in the Bath, and when she cometh out of it, a plaister of the juyce of Mullein, or Turnup, and Barly meal, must be laid on hot, and then let her use her Bath again, CHAP. XXII. For the Itch. IF those parts itch, so that women by scratching take away the skin, whereupon blysters arise, which greatly molest and trouble them, they ought to be annointed with the Ointment prescribed for burnings. Take an Apple, Bole armoniack, Mastick, Frankincense, Oyle, hot Wine, Wax, and Tallow, and thus you may pre∣pare it. Purge the Apple from the outward rind, and the core, and put it in a pot to the fire, with the Oyle, Wax, and Tallow, and when it shall be hot, the Mastick and Frankincense, being reduced into powder, must be put in, and then being mingled strained through a cloth.
CHAP. XXIII. For the Flux of bloud. FOr those unto whom an immoderate Flux of bloud hap∣peneth, it shall be convenient to give the juyce of Mugwort, Sage, Pennyrovall, and of other hearbs of that kind, made up into the form of a Sirrup. Also Baths made for the same disease of the said hearbs, are good; or by a plaister made up with Clay and Vinegar, which must be applied to the right side. If the Flux of bloud come from the nostrils, it must be ap∣plied to the forehead and temples, having a respect to the con∣trary side: For bloud useth not to flow out of the nostrils, unlesse a male Child be begotten. CHAP. XXIV. For the falling down of the Matrix from the birth. A Bath made of Mugwort, Flea-bane, Juniper, Camphire, and Wormwood, boyled in water; let the child-bed wo∣man sit in this up to the breast, afterwards let her be gently put into her bed, and let her lie with her feet drawn backward, that the Matrix may return into its place. The Womb being put into its place again, put powder of Penniroyall, of Galingale, Spikenard, Nutmegs, Avence, with oyle of Nutmegs, and Penniroyall into a fine thinne cloth, and in manner of a Ball or Pessary bind it up, and put it into the Womb, and shut up the orifice of the Matrix, that it fall not down again: But have a care, that it may peirce backward toward the reins, and there it is to be bound up, but before that be performed, a plaister of Bay berries, of Mustard, Fran∣kincense, and of Cinnamon, of each as much as shall be suffici∣ent, being brought into powder, and being heated at the fire, mingled with Honey, and let it be laid to the back being yet hot, and bound up with a swath, wherewith the Pessary, put up into the Matrix, is tied.
But let the woman brought to bed lie in her bed upward for the space of nine dayes or more, if need require, so that she may not move her self up and down, unlesse great ne∣cessity urgeth her; and such meat shall be given her, which may not easily passe through her belly, or may not often provoke her to make water: But now going abroad after her delivery, we must put on an intire garment that may keep it in, least it goe out again, unlesse it be when she maketh water. The third day we must make ready a Bath, and then, least they should swell, powder of Ginger, Pellitory of the wall, and Cinnamon, of every one by equall parts mixed must be blown up. CHAP. XXV. For the Piles after the birth. WEe use to cure the Piles, arising from the fault of the bringing forth, with a Bath of Wormwood, Southern∣wood; Cinnamon rind, and the bark of Cassia fistula, boyled well in Wine; when the woman delivered goeth forth of the Bath, put Bombace, or Cotton, with powder of Alloes mixed with oyle of Penniroyall unto her lower parts. CHAP. XXVI. Against pain of the Breasts, contracted by too much Milk. CLay kneaded with Vinegar, after the manner of a plaister, is available to astringe and keep back the Milk, but the place is first to be suppled with hot water. CHAP. XXVII. For the Imposthume of the Breasts. A Plaister of marsh-Mallowes, Mallowes, Wormwood, Mugwort, and Swines greace, made up according to art is very profitable; when the swelling is come unto the height, lay Nut kernels bruised to peices; unto it: And if the
Imposthume break not, let it be launced with a Launcet or Pen-knife, and squeeze it a little, least by the suddain eva∣cuation a worse mischeevious Imposthume may come upon it; and when it is broken, put in a linnen cloth, twice or thrice a day, smeared with the yolk of an Egg and Turpentine, which strengtheneth exceedingly: And if the Imposthume chance to passe into a Fistula, put into it a root of black Hellebor dipped in Oyle or Honey; or sprinkle powder of the colt-Bur upon it, for with these is every Fistula purged and destroyed, so as it be not between the bones; wherefore these Medicines are so long to be administred, untill it dye, and be dried up, and afterward the Ulcer be cured.
Some few additionall Observations, concerning the passages in ths for∣mer Treatise. CHAP. XXVIII. What is to be administred unto the Child, after it is born, for the first thing it taketh. ARnoldus de villa nova, a most learned Phisitian, writeth, that if you give unto a Child half a scruple of Corrall finely powdered, with womans milk, first, before it taketh any o∣ther thing, after it is born, that it shall ne∣ver be troubled with the falling Sicknesse. Also, I know persons of good quality in this our Country of England (I presume, instructed by some able Phisitians) who give unto all their own children (and advise all other wo∣men, where they are desired to be assistant at the birth) to exhibite unto the children new born, the first thing they take, a little Salt well mingled in a spoonfull of Saxifrage, or Hysop water, to prevent the trouble of frets, and other diseases in children following their birth. Conceiving also, as they suppose, they have some ground for their action, from the fourth verse of the sixteenth Chapter of Ezekiel, where the Lord, reckoning up the Midwives du∣ties about children, at that time of their nativity, thus speaketh.
And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born, thy navill was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all. CHAP. XXIX. For Infants troubled with wind and flegm. MAny Midwives advise the Nurses, to give them a little pure Sugar-candie finely bruised in Saxifrage water, or Scabious water in a spoon, well mingled together. CHAP. XXX. A most excellent Medicine to cause children to teeth easily. TAke of pure Capons greace, very well clarified, the quan∣tity of a Nutmeg, and twice as much of pure Honey, min∣gle and incorporate them well together, and three or four times in a day annoint the Childs gummes when they are teething, and they will break flesh easily, and prevent tor∣ments, and Agues, and other greifs, which usually accompany their coming forth. CHAP. XXXI. For Agues in Children. TAke a spoonfull of good oyle of Populeon, and put thereunto two spoonfuls of good oyle of Roses, mingle and incorporate them well together, and then warm it before the fire, annoint the Childs bowing places, his armes, legs soles of his feet, and also his forehead, and temples twice a day, chafing the ointment well in. CHAP. XXXII. For Worms in Children. TAke of Mirrh, and Aloes, very finely powdered, of each a penny-worth, and with a few drops of Chymi∣call
oyle of Wormwood, or Savine, with a little Turpen∣tine, make these up into a plaister, and lay it to the Childes Navill. CHAP. XXXIII. For Heart-Wormes. HEberstreit, Skonkius, Hollerius, and other Phisitians af∣firme, they have seen them in persons dissected: One in a Prince, another in a Citizen of Florence; and our London Phisitians of late yeares have seen two in London (as appeares in Doctor Mayes book of Mr Pennant of Saint Giles in the Feilds) who dyed having a Worm like a Serpent in his heart. The Cure. Skonkius out of Stocherus affirmeth by certain experiment, that the juyce of Raddish, Garlick, and Mustard, killeth these Wormes, which breeding in the chest of the heart, cause swoun∣dings, Epilepsies, and many times death. CHAP. XXXIV. To cause a young Child to goe to stoole. CHafe the Childs navill with May Butter before the fire, then take some black Wooll, that groweth between a Sheeps legs, and dip it in the May Butter, and then dry it, and lay it unto the navill, and it will procure a stoole: This is also good for one in yeares, who can take no inward Medicine.
Another certain Experiment. Take a good big green Mallow strig, and strip off the outward skin, and annoint the strig well with fresh But∣ter, and put it up into the Childes Fundament, and let it stay a while there, and in very short space it will procure a stoole. Courteous Reader, I pray accept kindly of these few Additions.
THis Treatise might have been inlar∣ged farther out, by addition of other Experiments, but my Freind; being of the same opinion concerning Medicines, that Seneca the Philosopher was of Bookes: Non refert quanta, sed quam bona medicamina; hath confined them to their own limits, onely with a few necessary Observations inser∣ted. M. A. FINIS.
Choise and select Medicines, collected by a Phisitian for his own private use, and Alphabetically digested by him, and from him communicated for publick use. A For the Ach in the bones. REcipe. A pennyworth of good Aqua vitae, and as much of oyle of Bayes, and mix them well together warm in a Sawcer, and annoint the place grieved, and chafe it well in (but not by the fire) when it is well dryed in, wrap it up well. For all Aches and lame Members. ℞. Rye, and Rosemary, ana. M. ii. put them into common oyle, and Malmsie, ana. one quart, let these things seeth half an hour together, then let the same Member b bathed there∣with, being first chafed with a cloth very well, and after bathing
wrap it up in a Lambs skin the woll side inward; doe this to bedward for the space of three weeks together; this helped a man which could neither stand nor goe, Probatum. An Ointment for all Aches which come from cold causes, shrunken Sinewes, straines in man or beast, it is incomparable, and will keep fourty yeares, but it must be made onely in May. ℞. Mallowes, Groundsell, Strawberry leaves, Lavender-cotton, Birch leaves, Chickweed, Comfry, Parsly, Sage leaves, Bay leaves, Rue, Balm, Plantain, Sorrell, wild Briony, Betony, Wound wort, Carduus, Succory, Majoram, Lungwort, Cammo∣mill, Adders tongue, Oxe eye, ana. M. iii. Chop these hearbs very small, and beat them in a Morter, then take Rosin four pound, May Butter clarified in the Sun eight and thirty pound, Sallade oyle a gallon, Turpentine four pound, Frankincense two pound: Melt the Rosin and Frankincense together first, then put therein the May Butter, and the rest aforesaid, and twelve pound of Hogs grease, and half a pound of Verdigrease, and when all these are melted together, then put in the chopt and pounded hearbs, and let them boyle half a quarter of an hour, then carefully stirre it a quarter of an hour after, and when it is cold, put it into pots close covered, and set them in a horse dunghill a yard deep for one and twenty dayes, then take them out, and put all the ingredients into a Kettle, and set it over the fire again, and boyle them a walm or two, then strain it, and put thereto oyle of Spike two pound, and stir it well; and when you use it, warm it a little in a Sawcer, and rub it by the fire. To counterfeit beyond-Sea-Azure. ℞. Common Azure, and beat it very well with Vinegar, and annoint therewith a thinne plate of fine Silver, and put the same over a vessell full of Urine, set it over hot ashes and coales, and let it be stirred untill it be like beyond-Sea-Azure: This is the best way, Mizaldus saith, he had this out of an old written book.
To know good Azure and pure. Lay some of it upon a hot burning Iron, and if then it will not be burned, nor any little stone is found therein, then it is pure and perfect, and not sophisticate and adulterate: Mizaldus. For an Ague. When Jesus saw the Crosse whereon he should be crucified, the Jewes said unto Jesus, Art thou afraid, or hast thou an Ague? Jesus said, I am neither afraid, nor have an Ague: Whosoever shall wear these words, shall neither be afraid, nor have an Ague, Amen, sweet Jesus, Amen. For a Tertian, or double Tertian Ague. ℞. A good quantity of Celandine, one spoonfull of Salt, and the bignesse of an Egg of Leven, and as much Allicant, or Spanish Sope; stamp them well in a Morter, and make a plaister of them, and apply them to the Patients feet, one hour before the accesse of the fit, adde thereto four or five yolks of Eggs. ℞. Of Anniseed water the best you can get, half a pound of oyle of Vitriol, shake them well together, and drink one or two spoonfuls hereof one hour before the accesse of the fit: Probatum. This Medicine is excellent to cure all kinds of Agues that are. B For a short Breath. TAke the roots of Hollyhockes lb. i. dry them into fine powder, clarified Honey four pennyworth set these on the
fire, and stir them well together untill it come into the form of an Electuary, whereof let the Patient take often. ℞. Of choise Manna called Manna Granata two ounces, flower of Cassia newly drawn half an ounce, Penidios three ounces, oyle of sweet Almonds newly drawn half an ounce, the Lungs of a Fox finely beaten to powder two ounces: powder what is to be powdered, then mix them all together, and make an Electuary with Sirrup of Hysop. An Electuary for the shortnesse of Breath. Take a pint of the best Honey you can get, set it on the fire, and scum it very clean, then put into it a little Hysop bound in a bundle bruised a little, let it boyle till the oney taste well of the Hysop, then take it out, and wring out all the Honey, and put into it the weight of sixpence of Angelica root grated, or cut very small, as much of Elacampane root, of Ginger the weight of two pence, as much of grosse Pepper, of Licorice eight penny weight cut very small, of Anniseeds eighteen penny weight, put these altogether after the Hysop is taken out, and let it boyle a walm or two on the fire, stirring it a little; then take it off, and put it into a glasse or pot, and put thereto three spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, and stir it well to∣gether, and take it on a tufted Licorice stick, at morning about ten, and at four in the afternoon, and when you goe to bed, letting it melt down out of your mouths. For a Bruise or Squat. ℞. White Dasie roots, leaves, floures and all, pownd them, and strain the juyce of them into strong March Beer, or Sack, and give the Patient a good draught thereof: Or seeth them in Ale, and make a Posset thereof, and let the Patient drink thereof as of the former, and let him eat the leaves if he can, and let him sweat after. ℞. Of Comfry M. i. when it sprouteth forth the youngest leaves, wring them with your hands, and put them into fresh
Butter out of the Churne unwasht into a Frying-pan, and hold it a good way off the fire, and so let it boyle together till it be green, then strain it, and keep it for your use: Probatum. A Restorative for the Backe. Take of stale Ale two pound, of Germander half a handfull, of unset Hysop, and of unset Thyme, and of Clary, ana. M. i. a branch of Rosemary, and a good quantity of English Saffron, a dish of sweet Butter, and a good peice of Sugar, then boyle all together till half be consumed, then strain it, and let the Patient drink it morning and evening. For Aches in the Backe. ℞. Bores grease, and Nerve oyle, ana. p. ae, and as much Turpentine, boyle them a little together, and annoint the greived place downward therewith. For Bleeding at the Nose. Take a Toad and kill him, and take three Bricks, put them in∣to fire, and then take out one of them, and put the Toad upon it, then take out another, and put him again on that, and when he is almost cold, take off the Toad and put the Brick into the fire; then take the third Brick, and doe so till the Toad be consumed to ashes, then take the ashes and put them into a Taffata bag, and when any one bleedeth, apply the bag upon the heart, and it will instantly stay the bleeding, either of the Nose, or any Wound, For Burning, or Scalding. ℞. A spoonfull of Sallade oyle, and the white of an Egg, beat them well together, and annoint the burnt place with it often, then take a linnen rag, and wet it in the oyle, and lay it over the sore, and keep it still wet, till you find the fire be
drawn out of the Wound, then take away the rag, and annoint the place with a feather, and put Harts-tongue leaves to it, and so bind it up, and dresse it thrice a day for two or three dayes, and after that but once a day, and this will cool it without any scarre. 2. ℞. The reddest Onyon you can get, and take off the rinde, and beat the Onyon with Bay Salt in a wooden dish, till it be made very small: then put it very thick upon the burned place, and renew it three or four times, and this will take out the fire, and then you may apply any healing Medi∣cine to it to skin it. C For a Cough of the Lungs. REcipe. Of clear running water three pound, of good Su∣gar half a pound, with nine Figs sliced, half a spoonfull of Anniseeds bruised, a spoonfull of Licorice bruised, of great Raisins, having their stones taken out, one handfull, of Maiden∣hair one penniworth, boyle these together till one half be consumed away, then strain it thorough a fine linnen cloth, and every morning take two spoonfuls of it luke-warm, and you shall finde present remedy: Probatum. For purging of Colds, Coughs, and comforting the Lungs. ℞. Rubarb two drachms, Sena half an ounce, Anniseeds one ounce, steep them in a pint of white Wine, and put to it one ounce of brown Sugar-candy: set it over the fire to be kept stewing all night, stop the pot very close that no water come out, and in the morning, when it is blood-warm, strain it, and take a pretty quantity of it, and put two drops of oyle of Sul∣phur into it, and drink it fasting, and fast two or three houres after, then take a little broth and keep you warm.
A Julep for a Cough. ℞. A pottle of Spring water, and put into it ten branches of Hysop, and two of Rosemary, Licorice clean scraped and thinne sliced two ounces, of Anniseeds bruised two ounces, French Barly which hath been cleansed in one water, boyle these till half the water be consumed, then strain it, and put to it three drops of oyle of Sulphur: take two spoonfuls of this when you begin to Cough, this will loosen the flegm, and cause you to bring it up easily. Another. Boyle three sprigs of Rosemary, and as much Maiden Hy∣sop in two pound of white Wine, of Mace two flakes, of Nut-Neg two or three slices, Saffron six or eight blades, burn the Wine, and after sweeten it with brown Sugar-candy, and drink a good draught warm, mane & vesperi, and two or three spoon∣fuls in the afternoon. For Canker in the mouth. Mingle the juyce of Agrimony with raw Honey, and an∣noint the lips with it, and it will heal it: Probatum. Richard Jones cured a young man which had the Canker both in his tongue and lips, onely with good Romane Vitrioll dissolved in spring water, and making it as milk warm from the Cow, with a stick and a linnen cloth fastened to the end of it, he washed his tongue, mouth, and lips herewith every morn∣ing and evening, and cured him in short time. But if it be in an old man let run too long, that it eat still, and Vitrioll, Salves, nor other waters will cure it, there is no other way to save this man, but to wash carefully his lips, or mouth, with a very little oyle of Vitrioll, to cauterize the veins, and stop the malignant humours that comes from the brain and feeds it. But this course must not be taken unlesse the
Patient be in intoleable pain, and in a desperate case, for doe it herewith never so little, yet this oyle of Vitrioll will gnaw, and bite, and put the Patient to great pain, that was opprest with great pain before, unlesse you mitigate the pain by often & continual dipping of a linnen cloth kept wet in spring water; after a very little time that you have annointed the cankered veines and places, with very little oyle of Vitrioll upon a fea∣ther as may be, and so let him indure the pain as long as he well can, that this may cauterize and sear up the veines the better, that so he may be cured, which otherwise will corrode and eat continually, although he may purge and vomit also, and so this at last will kill him. For a Consumption, and Cough of the Lungs. ℞. Coltsfoot, Betony, Burnet, and red Rose leaves, ana. M. i. of Comfry roots scraped and sliced; M. ii boyle all these in a gallon of Spring water till it be consumed to a pottle, then strain it, and set it over the fire again, then take a pound of double refined Sugar, and put it into it, and let it boyle over a soft fire about a quarter of an hour, then take it off, and put it up, and drink of it six spoonfuls, morning, and evening, and at four in the afternoon. 2. ℞. Of Saccharum Saturni one scruple in a quarter of a pint of Goats milk, and give the Patient mane & vesperi two or three weeks together, and this will help them, but first give the Patient some gentle diet-drink to purge them, before you give the Saccharum and Milk: Probatum. For Collick, and paines in the backe. ℞. The tender tops of a Bucks horn which is Velvet headed, and cut it in peices, and put it into a new pot well co∣vered, and set it in an Oven where it may be dryed and made into powder, of which give to the Patient with a little Pepper in good Wine a pretty draught, and this will presently release the pain and give ease: Probatum.
2. ℞. The decoction of Hollyhockes, mix it with Honey and Butter, and drink thereof bloud warm: Probatum. For the Cramp. ℞. The leaves or little sprigs of Rosemary, and put them between every toe, and if you are much troubled with the Cramp, use it continually, and this will cure it. 2. Annoint the part cramped with Ʋnguentum Brioniae, and this will help it: Probatum. For a Canker. ℞. Burnt Salt, burnt Eggshels, burnt Copperas, burnt Bones, burnt Verdigrease, Wormwood, and Rue, burnt, ana. p. ae. make powder thereof, and mingle them well together, and strow the powder into the Canker, and let no water come to it. Another. Take Hog-lice, stamp them till they come to an oyle, and annoint the place therewith. For a Canker in the lips. ℞. The juyce of Agrimony, and mingle it with raw Honey, and annoint the lips with it, and it will heal them: Probat. A Water for a Consumption. R. Rose-water three pound, of Muscadine three pound, of new Milk a pottle, of grosse Pepper one ounce, of Cinnamon two ounces, of sliced bread a penny loafe, the yolks of three new laid Eggs, of Sugar one pound: Distill all these as long as any water will come; take of this water with a little Pep∣per a draught fasting, and you will find much good.
For the Cough. ℞. Of the best Flores Sulphuris, one ounce and half, as much white Sugar Candie finely poudered, mix them together, and take as much hereof as will lye upon sixpence, mix them well in the yolk of an egg, and swallow it down; then walk upon it untill you sweat, and keep your self warm; and use it four or five mornings together, to take it, and walk after it. For a Cough, or shortness of Breath. ℞. Of Aqua vitae or Annise-seed water four ounces, mix it with white Sugar Candie finely poudered two ounces, boyl it in a peuter dish, over a chafing-dish, till it be dissolved, and indifferent thick like an oyle, and take a spoonful of this when you goe to bed for three or four nights together. ℞ Elacampane roots cut into small peeces, of Hysop, Pen∣niroyal, and Liquorice, ana M. ii. seeth them in a gallon of pure spring water, till it come to a pottle, then strain it well, and keep it in a clean pot or glasse close stopt, and use this every day thrice; First and last, and one hour after dinner, for seven or eight dayes. For a Consumption. ℞. Three sheeps hearts, slit them, and take out the strings and bloud, and lay them in water to soke a night and a day, then wash them clean, and put them into a Pipkin, lay in the bottome of the Pipkin, stalks of Rosemary in the manner of a Gridiron; then lay the hearts on them, every heart being stuck with three cloves, and half a quarter of Sugar being put into every heart: Then stop up the Pipkin very close with paste, and put it in an Oven with houshold bread, and when you thinke it is sufficiently stewed, take out the Pipkin again, then every morning and evening take a spoonful of this Sirrup.
D For the Dropsie. REcipe, Half an eggshel full of the juyce of Ireos, of Mellicratum four ounces, with ponder of the best Ru∣barb, half a drachm: Take this hot in a morning once a week. This is held for an excellent help. Another. ℞. A lap-full of green Juniper tops, chop them small, and take a great bathing tub, and put them therein, and set the Patient in the tub, so that he may not touch the water, where∣in these tops were sodden, but put a cricket under his feet, and cover him well up to the throat; let him sweat so long as he is able, and when he cometh forth of the bath, take care he taketh no cold, but carefully put him into a warm bed. E For pains in the Eyes. REcipe, brown Fennel, white Rose-leaves, or other Rose-leaves, Rue, Vervain, Celandine, and Eyebright, ana p. ae. distill it, and keep the water in a Violl. For sore Eyes by salt Rheum. Pound Housleek M i. in a morter, and take the juyce strai∣ned through a linnen cloth, put it in a new laid eggshel, and put a quantity of white Sugar-candie to sweeten it: Set the Egg over some Embers, and let it stand, and as the scum ari∣seth take it off with a feather; and being clear take it off the
fire, and when it is cold, wash your eyes herewith ever and anon. Mr. Nepier commendeth Rulandi aqua opthalmica, to bee the best for sore eyes, Pin and Web, of all waters. To clear the Eye-sight. ℞ Rain water of the clearest you can get one gallon, let it settle and clear by it self at least one day and night, and after put it into a fair bason of earth glased, or of silver, then put thereto of Roch Allom, the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, and and a quarter of as much white Coperas, and let them stand 24 houres well covered, then scum it clean with a feather, and drein it into another bason; then take away the scum, and the grounds, and so doe it every 24 hours, till it be clear without scum or grounds, and when it is perfectly purified, put it into a full pint of the best Rosewater which is white, and put it into a good big glasse, then set it in the Sun thirty dayes or more. Afterwards take it in, and wash your eyes with it three or four times in a week, when you are in bed, or oftner till you bee eased; when you wash your eyes, lye upon your back, that it may the better soke into them, and if it be too sharp, then abate it, by mingling some spring water with it. The best time to make it is in Aprill or May; but if need be at any time in the Summer. If you take the rain-water in glasses, or glased earthen pans as it falleth from heaven, free from durt, sand, or other filth, that will be much better. F For the Flux. REcipe, A Bason, and set it forth in the rain, and save the rain that falleth therein, then take a few Violet leaves, and boyl them in the water, then boyl some Almonds, but blanch them not, and make Almond milk of the same water; If the
Flux be very sore, boyle the Almond Milk, and put thereto a little Cinnamon, and Sugar, and drink it. For the Flux. ℞. The nether jaw of a Pike, and make it into fine powder, and put it into drink or broth, and it will stop the Flux. For the bloudy Flux. ℞. An old Cock, and dresse him, put into his belly of Sow-thistles M. i. and put him into a fair earthen pot, and put to it five peices of Gold, four Dates, ten Prunes, and a quart of Malmsey; then close up the mouth of the pot as close as you may; then put it into a brasse Pot with fair water, let it boyle the space of twelve houres, but take care that none of the water come into the earthen Pot; and when the flesh is consumed from the bones take it up, and let it run thorough a clean peice of lochram; then put it up into a clean Gallypot, and when it is cold it will be like jelly; put two spoonfuls hereof into broth or other meat which the Patient useth to eat. For the bloody Flux. Seeth a good proportion of Plantain in fair water, till it wax yellow, and all the strength be boyled out of it, then strain the water, and heat a clean peice of Iron red hot, and quench it in the said water, doe so nine times, and give it the Patient. 2. Seeth a pint of Milk, and when it is boyled, put into it as much Allum as will make a Posset, of which mane & vesperi drink a good draught. 3. ℞. That which is shorn from Scarlet, make it to a pow∣der, and give the Patient half a spoonfull thereof in a pretty draught of Tent, and use this five or six times. 4. Dry the powder of an Hare, and give it the Patient, in red Wine, and it will help him.
For the bloody Flux. Cut Hollihock roots in small peices, and boyle them in red Wine, strain it well and give the Patient; and if he have a Fever, or Ague, seeth the roots in water with some Plantain leaves, and let the Patient drink it. 2. ℞. Yarrow, and Plantain, ana. p. ae. strain them together, and put thereto old red Wine, called Hollock, or Tent, strain it well, and let the Patient drink a good draught of it first and last, for three or four dayes together. 3. ℞. Plantain, Ribwort, and Sheapherds purse, ana. M. ss. stamp them small in a Morter, then put thereto Bole armoniack, and Terra sigillata, and stamp them again, and lay it plaister∣wise to the forehead cold. 4. Mingle Mint water with sirrup of Mint, drink it cold fa∣sting; this will stop both flux and vomit. For the bloudy Flux. 1. ℞. Hay well boyled, and keep it over the fire, and every time the Patient goeth to stool, let a wispe thereof be put into the stoole. 2. ℞. Two quarts of Milk, and boyle in it of Sage four handfuls washed; boyle these to a quart, then put to it a little beaten Cinnamon, and let the Patient take this bloud warm, instead of other drink when he is thirsty. 3. ℞. A Nutmeg, pare a great hole in it, and rost it in em∣bers full of Sanguis draconis, and eat it all up: This was Colo∣nell Hambletons Secret. 4. ℞. red Bryer leaves, and boyle them well in Milk, and sweeten it with Sugar. 5. Give Dates stones beaten to powder in warm Wine fasting. ℞. Of the best Treacle one drachm, in four ounces of Car∣duus benedictus water, give the Patient hereof three mornings or nights to drink bloud warm, and it will take away the
fumes of the head in the disease of the Flux. If the fumes of the head be not asswaged, let the Patient take four ounces of Carduus water, and the yolk of a new laid Egg, and a little Salt, mix these, and drink it; this is also good for an Ague. An Ointment for the Flux. ℞, Two pound of May Butter, or a gallon of Cream; if of May Butter, take Lunaria sanicle, Salomons Seal, Mouseare, Plantain, Adders-tongue, ana. one handfull, stamp these small, and put them into the May Butter, and boyle them half an hour with a soft fire, scumming it with a feather: If you use Cream, boyle it till it come to an oyle, which oyle as it riseth take off with a spoon, and put your Hearbs into it, as into the May Butter; when it hath boyled, strain your Hearbs thorough a thinne cloth, and let it stand till it be cold, after which, set it over the fire again till it begin to boil, then put it up in pots. This is also good for burning, scalding, or Aches, but espe∣cially for the Flux, for which, when you use it, observe this di∣rection: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Ointments, and melt it by the fire, and stroke down the reines of the back till it be dryed in, use this for seven dayes and nights together if your Flux continue. For all Fluxes of bloud, and other Fluxes, pains in the Back or Liver, and for inward effects. ℞. Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Opium, ana. two drachms, Mirrh, Pepper, and Galbanum, ana. one drachm, stamp them, and mix them with a little clarified Honey, and make it into a lump or masse, give thereof at night two round pills about the bignesse of a Pea in the pap of a roasted Apple, and let not the party drink for two houres after; and if his pain and greif be never so great it will ease him within one hour or two, and perhaps cause him to sleep soundly: you may give it two or three nights together, if the Patient be strong, but if they
be very weak, give it every other night three or four times; but if he be in extream pain give it when you list: If the stomack be full of meat or flegm, it will work lesse effectu∣ally. Probatum. A powder for the Flux. ℞. Half ripe Blackberries, dry them, and make them into powder, give the Patient a draught thereof in a little Tent, or old red Wine, in the morning and evening for five dayes if the Flux continue. A Glister. ℞. A quart of new Milk from the Cow, and put three or four gads of Steel into the fire red hot, and quench them in the Milk till half the Milk be consumed; then take the weight of eight pence of Deeres suet, and stamp it into the Milk, and mix it well together, and put it in a boulter bag warm; this you may use four or five times if need require. For Morphew, or Scurf of face or Skin. ℞. Of Brimstone beaten into powder two ounces, mix it well with as much black Sope that stinketh, and tie the same in a linnen cloth, and let the same hang in a pin of strong wine Vinegar, or red Rose Vinegar, for the space of nine dayes; then wash any kind of Scurfe or Morphew, either in face, or body, dipping a cloth in the same Vinegar, and rubbing the face or body therewith, and let it dry by it self: also drink the water of Strawberries distilled, or tincture of Strawberries, it certainly killeth Morphew or Scurfe: Probat. To blanch the Face. ℞. The meat of Lemons having taken away the kernels, and a quantity of fine pure Sugar, still these, and keep the water to wash your face with every night.
To smooth the Skin. Mixe Capons grease with a quantitie of Sugar, let it stand for a few dayes close covered, and it will turn to a cleer oyle, with which annoint your face. Morphew and Freckles. Annoint the face with the bloud of a Hare, or Bull, this will take away Morphew, and Freckles, and smooth the skin. G. For the Gout, or Ache in the joynts, knobs, or knots in the flesh. Probat. REcipe, Of May Butter four ounces, of Cummin seed beaten into fine pouder, half a pound, of black sope, four ounces, of Rue, M. i▪ of clarified Mutton, M. ss stamp these in a morter together, and put to it an Oxe gall, and a spoonfull of Bay salt, and fry them together till it be thick, then lay it on a woollen cloth, and apply it hot to the ach as may be suffered, and let it lye a whole week unremoved: Then lay on another as long a time, and so lay on a third plaister as long, which will be three weeks in the whole time; and this will give ease. For Gout or Bone-ach. Take of the best Aqua vitae one penniworth, and another of oyle of Bayes, mix them well together, and annoint the place grieved therewith by the fire, warm the ointment by the fire, and then chafe the place till it be dryed in, then cloth it up warm. Probat.
For the Gout, or Joynt-ach. ℞ The juyce of Sage, of Aqua vitae, of oyle of Bayes, of Vinegar and Mustard, and of Oxe gall, ana p. ae. put altogether ino  bladder, and chase it up and down with your hand for te space of an hour and half▪ and keep it for your use, and annoint the grieved place with it morning and evening. Fr the Gout. Stamp well lb iii. of Wallwort, then melt ten pound of May Butter, and put it thereto, and let it stand nine dayes toge∣ther, then boyle them half and hour over a soft fire, then strein it, and annoint the grieved place. For Gout or Bone-ach. Annoint the place grieved with very good Aqua composita by the fire, and let the same drinke in; doe this three or four times, and whilst it is wet, cast upon it pouder of Olibanum, and sow a cloth thereon, and let it lye on for four dayes. Probat. H Hermes Tree. FIrst grinde to an Amalgame one ounce of Mercurie, with one ounce of clear Spring-water, then put a round viall glasse, half full of Rose water, or cleer spring water; then put therein your aforesaid Amalgame, then drop therein one drop of the best Aqua fortis that can be gotten, and after a quarter of an hour another drop, and so every quarter of an hour one drop, till you have dropt therein ten or twelve drops; then with a very gentle heat, on sand or hot embers, vapour
the water away softly, and a brave tree of silver, shall grow in the galsse to your admiration. I A Plaister to help any Stitch, or Imposthume wheresoever. REcipe, The roots of Hollihocks washed clean, and cut in peeces, M. i. seeth them in fair water, untill the roots bee tender, then take out the roots, and put into the water, of Fe∣nugreek, and Linseed, ana M i. being first stamped or bruised, and seeth them together in the water, untill the water rope like birdlime, then stamp the Hollihock roots before boyled, and put them to the Fenugreek, and Linseed, with a handfull of Barlie meal, and fry them together, and if need be, put to some Sheeps suet, and lay a plaister thereof to the sore, as hot as may be suffered; Let it lye twelve hours at least, and then lay another to it, and within nine plaisters it will work the full effect: It dissolveth the Plurisie also in applying of three Plaister. For an Imposthume of the Stomack. Whosoever shall dayly take in a draught of Ale or Beer, a spoonful of the pouder of Matselon, or Scabios, it will destroy any Imposthume within him. Probat. A good Oyle to bring in joynts which have been out seven years, to give strength to veins and sinnews, and to keep them brought in, in their places. You must first bathe the place throughly that is out for three or four dayes, with Oyle of Cammomil, then against the Patient goeth to bed, you must have two Neats feet, or so many of them as may cover the dislocation, with the peelings round about: then lay the insides of the feet in thick and
broad flakes to the place, as hot as the party can indure it, and in the morning remove them, and after with it annoint the place and the flakes aforesaid with Oyle of Cammomil, and then apply fresh peelings. This for certain hath brought in joynt, that which hath been out of joynt six years, and giveth strength to the veins and sinnews, and will keep the joynts i their first place; and the effect will appear in three or four dressings. For the Black Jaundies. Spread Wheat-straw abroad upon a clean floor in a close house, and put in Geese, and watch them when they dung: take their dung up with a knife, and scrape away the white about the dung, untill you have a good quantity of it, then dry this in an Oven, make pouder thereof, and drinke of it morning and evening warmed in Ale, and it will cure both the black and yellow Jaundies. 2. Dry the gall of a Raven, and grate it into powder, and take a quantity of it in a spoon, temper it with Beer or Ale, and drinke this fasting three mornings together: Or take nine or ten seeds of Hemp, doe away the husks, and bruise them, and put them in Ale, and drinke this fasting, for eight or nine dayes. For the black Jaundies, ℞. Of Hearb Ambrose, Betony, Mugwort, ana. M. i. three or four Dock roots clean pickt, washt, and scraped, stamp all these together in a Morter, till they be beaten indifferent small; then take Spicknard, Turmerick, and Gallingal, ana. p. ae. stamp them in a Morter likewise, then put the Hearbs into a clean cloth by themselves, and tie them fast with strings, and hang them in a gallon or two of good Ale newly ready to be tunned up, and after three or four dayes, drink a good draught thereof every morning next to your heart, and fast after it three houres, and doe so the like when you goe to bed.
To make Hartshorn Jelly. ℞. Two ounces of Hartshorn being small rasped, and a pint of fair water, one Nutmeg sliced, one race of Ginger, a branch of Rosemary, boyle all these together in an earthen Pipkin over a soft fire, till it be very clammy, then strain it into a Bason, and put to it Rosewater and Sugar. For  yellow Jaundies. ℞. Celandine, English Saffron, and powder of Ivory, seeth them in white Wine, and drink thereof eight or nine dayes mane & vesperi. 2. ℞. The Urine of the Patient, and drink it with the juyce of Horehound. 3. Seeth the juyce of Cammomill, Morrell, and Mouseare, in white Wine twice, and drink of it fasting. For the yellow Jaundies. ℞. The pap of a roasted Pippin, and put as much powder of Saffron as will lye on a penny, and twice as much Harts-horn finely scraped, mingle them well together, and give the Patient three mornings together the quantity of a Nutmeg, and as much at going to bed. 2. ℞. Of the inner rind of Barberry bark, and Goose dung that feeds on grasse, and wash the white of it, and a little Saffron, steep these in Ale, and let the Patient drink it in the morning fasting. 3. ℞. Of red Nettle-tops M. i. seeth them in a pint of Ale, and drink the same four or five mornings together. 4. ℞. Alicant, or hard Spanish Sope, and a little stale Ale in a Cup; rub the Sope against the bottome of the Cup till the Ale be white, then shave a little Ivory, and let the Patient drink of this first and last till he be recovered: Also take Celandine leaves, and put them into your Stockings next to your feet.
5. Put a good handfull of Celandine leaves into a quart of white Wine, boyle them to a pint: in the winter use the roots, and drink thereof morning and evening. 6. Cut out the core of a good big Apple, put into the place some sweet Butter, a little Turmerick, and English Saffron, cover it with the top you cut off, rost it tender, and let the sick eat of this three or four mornings together. 7. ℞. One pennyworth of Turmerick, of the middle rind of the Barberry bark M. ii. of Celandine M. i. seeth the Ce∣landine, and the bark, in Ale-wor putting to it a gallon of new Ale at the tunning, and when it hath stood two nights, draw it at the spicket, and warm it with a gad of fine Steel, and put to it the powder of the Turmerick, and drink of it first and last. 8. ℞. The juyce of Liverwort, and the scrapings of Ivory, and of Saffron, as much as you shall think fit, of French Sope as much as a Chestnut, bind them all in the corner of a linnen cloth, and swinge them up and down in fair water, till all the vertue be gone into the water, and give the Patient to drink of it. L. For a lame Leg. REcipe. Aqua composita, and oyle of Roses, anae. p. ae. mix them together well, and annoint the greived place with it morning and evening, but let the Patient first be well rub'd with a warm cloth. Probatum. For the same. ℞. Oyle of Exter, oyle Olive, and Aqua vitae, and Beast gall, ana. p. ae. Mix them all well together, and annoint the lame leg therewith twice every morning and evening, for the
space of a fortnight; but alwayes use to rub the place first ve∣ry well with warm clothes. For chopt Lips. Rub them with your sweat behind your eares, and this will make them smooth and well coloured. A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs, and Consumption. ℞. Of Earth-wormes two pound, in a May morning, those with black heads are best, you may gather enough; put these in white Wine for three or four houres then slit and wash them in the same Wine, and in another Wine, and lay them in an earthen pan on straw or sticks laid a crosse, and put them into an Oven after the bread is drawn, and so use them till they be so dry, that you may pownd them, then searce it, and beat it again till it be as fine as flower: then keep it for your use, which you must take twice a day, in the morning when you wake, and at four in the afternoon, as much as will lye on six∣pence, or eightpence; take it in a spoonfull of warm Broth, or mulled Sack, or Mace Ale, and drink a pretty draught of the Broth to wash it down: if you take it in mulled Sack, or Mace Ale, take not above four spoonfuls, use this for a moneth, but be carefull of taking cold. To make a Laxative Whey. ℞. One pound and a half of clarified Whey, Sena half an ounce, four penny weight of Annise seeds, of Hops half a hand∣full, of Borrage, and Buglosse, ana. half a handfull, Fumitory p. i. seeth all these in the clarified Whey untill half be consu∣med, drink of it two mornings together. A good Laxative for a Child. ℞. Of Violets three handfuls (if you cannot get them, as
much of the leaves,) seeth them in running water, from a pottle to a quart, then take of Almonds one pound, stamp them small, and temper them with the water, and make an Almond Milk of it, and let the child eat and drink of the Milk, and also if need require, of the water by it self with a little Sugar. To cause Loosenesse. ℞. Coloquintida and mix it with Honey, and Bulls Gall, then apply this plaister-wise to the belly, and this will doe it: Also take Wool, or Silk, and dip it in the juyce of Sowbread roots, and Wine, and use it as you use a Suppository. For a costive by burnt Choller. ℞. Of Mallowes, Mints, Wormwood, and Violet leaves, ana. half a handfull, seeth these in the water of the sick, and when they are well sodden, presse out the water from the Hearbs, and stamp the Hearbs in a Morter, and fry them in May Butter, or fresh Grease, and make a plaister of it, and apply it warm unto the belly, and change it once a day, For Rheume procuring a Cough of the Lungs ℞. A quarter of a pint of good Sack, of Elacampane roots half an ounce, as much Licorice, powder them very finely, of the best refined Sugar half a pound, boyle them together, till they rope in nature of a Sirrup, then take hereof the quantity of a big Filbert mane & vesperi, and after as often as the Cough tickles you. 2. Take Virgin Honey, and old Conserve of red Roses, ana. p. ae. mingle them well together, and take at morning and night three Pills as big as a Nutmeg, and keep warm after it.
A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs. ℞. A pottle of spring water, put into it of Oak leaves, M. ss. of Colts foot, of Butter burr, roots and leaves, ana M. i. of S. Johns wort, Mousear, Maiden hair, ana p. i. 3 or 4 Harts tongue leaves, a little Liverwort, 6 branches of Maiden Hysop, 3 or 4 branches of Rosemary, pick and wash all these clean, 16 Figs slit in two: Set this over the fire, and let it boyl softly, till half be consumed, then take it off the fire, and strein it, and put into it of loaf Sugar lb ss. and when it is melted, put unto it six of seven drops of oyle of Sulphur, and put it into a glasse, and shake it well, and drinke every morning eight spoonfulls, which you must drink leasurably, that it may the better fall on the Lungs; about four of the clock in the afternoon you must take as much: this will both cleanse, and heal the Lungs▪ and stop the coughing. M A cooling Almond Milk. TAke Lettice, Spinage, Succory, Violets, langde Beefe, En∣dive, and red Fennel, ana. half a handful, three spoonful of Anniseseeds, five whole Maces, and one Nutmeg cut into peices, seeth all these in a pottle of running water to a quart, then blanch your skins, and beat them with the cold seeds, and so draw it with this decoction, and put into it Sugar, and Ma∣nus Christi, to sweeten it. N A Water to restore Nature. TAke of good new Milk three pound, of red Wine-one pound, the yolkes of four and twenty new laid Eggs,
having their whites taken out, beat the Eggs well with the Wine and Milk, and put thereto as much fine Manchet as will almost suck up the liquour, distil this with a soft fire, take two or three spoonfuls of this usually in your broth two or three times a day: this is rather to be used in Hectick Fevers then in other diseases, because they are alwayes hot in the palmes of their hands, and in the soles of their feet, both after sleep, and after meat, which shew the consumption of the solid, and fleshy parts of the body. To restore Nature consumed. Steep the yolkes of two new laid Eggs in six ounces of Vinegar six houres, then take them out, and with four Dates, and a pint of Muskadine, or Alicant, make a Cawdle therewith as followeth: Take of Rosewater one pound, a pint of Muska∣dine, boyle therein a dishful of the Pithes of an Oxe back clean pickt, a large sawcer full of good Currans clean washt, four yolkes of Eggs, six Dates, a stick of Cinnamon, and a good Nutmeg; make a Cawdle of this with Sugar, and having so done, strain it, and drink thereof at morning fasting, and at four in the afternoon: it is singular good for a weak back, and decaying of nature. P For the French Pox. REcipe, Of Lignum vitae,lb i. of Sarsaparilla, ℥ v. of Sena Alex∣andrina, ℥ iv. of Sassafras ℥ iv. of Bole Armon. ℥ i. of Chalk, ℥ i. of Hermodactilis, ℥ ii. of French Barlie ℥ ii. bruised, of long Pepper a half penniworth, of Saffron one penniworth, of Lon∣don Triacle ℥ i. Boil all these in four gallons of spring wa∣ter till half be consumed, when it is to be boyled put in the long Pepper, Saffron, London Triacle, Bole Armoniack, and the Hermodactilis: What is to be pounded, pound; and what to be
bruised, bruise; let it boil a good while after those Ingredi∣ents are put into the pot, close stopped: Then strain it, and with the dregs you may make a smaller drinke for the Patient to drinke at meat, or when he is dry; but of the fomer drinke he must drinke ℥ iiii thrice a day: Viz. at eight of the clock in the morning, at noon, and at 10 at night: He must eat dry∣ed Bisket, and great Raisins, and his meat must be mutton, dry roasted without Salt. The party must also take this ensuing Purge twice, before he drinke the drinke: viz. six penniworth of Pulvis Sanctus, with ℥ i. of Sirrup of Roses solutive, well mixed in lb ss of white Wine, drinke it blood warm, fasting two houres, and then take some warm broth. Another. Two or three doses of Doctor Vanhocks Rosa vitae, given at severall times is very good in this disease. Another. ℞. Of Diaphaenicon, ℥ ii. as much è succo rosarum, drink this in the morning at six or seven a clock with ℥ iv. of white wine, bloodwarm, for three four or five dayes: It is an excellent purge, and will give you six or eight stools within two hours. Probat. A Posset good in all cold Agues, or Pestilentiall Diseases. Make a Posset with small Beer, with a quart of milk, as clear as you can, then take of Goats rye, M. i. when you have ta∣ken off the curd from the Posset, put the Goats rye into i, and let it boyl a good while; then put three or four branches of Scordium into it, then take it from the fire, and cover it a while; then strein it, and give the Patient neer a pint of it at a draught warm, an hour before his sit comes; then let h lye still one hour to sweat, or two, or longer if he can in∣dure it, use this for three times; but let the Patient be care∣full he take no cold.
The Plague Water. ℞. Harts horne rasped, ℥ i. one root of Saxifrage, the stems and seeds of red Sage, Rue, Elder leaves and berries, red Bramble leaves, one root of Angelica, or the leaves there∣of, Tormentill the roots and Leaves, ana M. i. two Oranges, English snake-weed the roots and leaves, Virginia snake-weed a small quantity, which is much better then ours, of Goats rue; ana, M. i. Butterburr leaves and roots, and Pimpernel, ana M. ss. Scordium six branches, Marigold Flours, and Borage flours, and Rosemary flours, ana M. i. White Ginger ʒ ii. dry∣ed Figs eight, old Ivie Berries black, two spoonfuls, Walnuts fortie, stamp them all in a morter, and steep them twelve hours in White wine, lb ii. and white Wine Vinegar, lb ss. then strein it through a fine strong linnen▪cloth; and adde unto it ℥ i. of Bole Armoniack finely poudered, and a little Pomecitrine rinds one penniworth, and distil it in a dry Still, and take morning and evening one spoonfull. This is good for any Fever, ague, small Poxe, Measels, or any Infection: If it purgeth, as it will if there be any infection, you must give the Patient two spoonfuls of this till it hath done his work∣ing. An Antidote against the Pestilence, by Dr. B. ℞. Three pints of good Muscadine, of Rue, M. i. of brown Sage as much, bruise and boyl the Hearbs in the Muscadine till a third part be consumed, then put to of Ginger ℥ ss. of Nutmegs thirty two, a penniworth of long Pepper grossely bruised into the Wine, and let it boil one walm, then take it off and strein it, then put into it a penniworth of Mithridate, two penniworth of London Triacle, and a quarter of a pint of Angelica water, drinke one spoonfull of this every morning fasting one hour after; but if the partie be infected, then let him drinke two spoonfuls, and sweat upon it.
For the shaking Palsie. Take of Cloves two or three ounces, as much of Nutmegs, pouder them small, and mixe them with oyle of Lavender, to make them sit for a plaister, spread it on Leather, and lay it to the nape of the neck, and wrists of the hands; Or as I have proved, Take three penniworth of London Triacle, a pen∣nie pot of Neat oyle, a pennie pot of Sherrie Sack, mix these three things together well, and eat a spoonfull or two every morning fasting, and at any time of the day; after this once or twice a day if you please take a spoonfull, or eat it upon new white bread. This will help the shaking Palsie, and trem∣bling of the heart, and make a man cheerful and merrie. Pro∣batum. I had the shaking Palsie by working in Mercurie, no man more, and this in fourteen dayes cured me; God be praised. Another. Steep Mugwort in Rosewater, wash the hands therewith, and it will cure their shaking and trembling. To restore lost Speech. Lay a thin peece of raw Beef to the forehead of them that have lost their voice, and let it lye one all night. To restore speech to an Apoplectick. Beat the Kernels of Peach stones together into pouder, and give the Patient a good draught thereof in Rennish Wine. A Restorative Electuary. Take of great Raisins cleansed from their stones, lb ii. of Licorice scraped, and bruised, ℥ i. put these in lb ii. ss. of cleer water, seeth them well, and strein them, and put into their
streining, of Mirabolans, Hebal, Citrine, and Indic, cleered from their stones, ana ℥ ii. of Emblick and Bellerick, ana ʒ ii. boyl them, presse and strain them, then put thereto of pure Sugar, lb i. and when they are boyled up to the thickness of a Sirrup; adde in the end of choice Cinnamon, ℥ ss. Cloves and Galingal, ana ʒ ii. of Nutmegs, num. ii. of Fennel, and An∣nise-seed, ana ʒ i. Make it into an Electuarie, and put it up into a clean Box, agreeable to the complexion of the Patient that shall use it; as for the spleen, in a Tamarisk, or Ash boxe, or Juniper for flegmatick persons, and so accordingly of others. In this Electuary are Medicines for principal Members, viz. the Heart, the Head, Stomack, Liver, Spleen, and Ge∣nerative parts. It is first hot, then moist, after cold, and last dry. This Medicine was invented by Arnoldus de villa nova for hindering old age, conservation of health, prolongation of life: it not onely comforteth, but purgeth superfluities re∣maining from the nourishment past, keepeth back gray hares strengthneth the stomack, and giveth a good colour to the whole body. A Restorative good in all diseases. Take Elder flours, the Ee of S. John Baptist at Midsum∣mer, according to the Planet which is Jupiter, or according to the Sun diall at twelve a clock: Dry these in the East, stamp and pouder them, then take Borage water, and put into it seven or nine grains of the Pissle of a Deer, dryed and grated to pouder, with a spoonfull of the pouder of the flouers afore∣said: Infuse them for 12 houres, in three or four ounces of the water for the Patient to drinke for 15. dayes together. It re∣storeth old age, and strengthneth the back. In fine, this is mi∣raculous for all diseases. For the Rickets. Take of cream two pound, and boil it to an oyle or take
of unsalted Butter, lb ii. take three or four good handfulls of Cammomil, mice it small, and put it into the oyle or But∣ter, and let it boil on a soft fire till the hearbs become crispe, and that it be very bitter; then strein it, and annoint the childs sides downwards, and the bottome of the belly and thighes morning and evening: Also to give the child▪thrice a day half a dosen spoonfuls of Harts-tongue water, in which you have steped seven or eight Cloves, and some bown Su∣gar Candie to sweeten it: If the child mend not with this; ℞ Of shoomakers shreds, two or three M. boil them in fair water, and take off the oyle, and annoint the child, as before prescribed: If the child be not weaned, you must wean it, otherwise no Medicine will recover it: Also you must carry it as little as you can in your armes, but when you doe, be stirring it, and make it try to use the legs, if it be of that big∣nesse. Doctor Vanhecks Rosa Vitae. ℞. Mercurie sublimate sublimed with ℥ iv. of Roman or Danisk Vittriol, Antimonie crude, ℥ ii. grinde them well to∣gether an hour and half; retort these with sand half way up the body of the glasse, with a gentle fire five houres, and then increase the fire by degrees, till with a good fire red begins to come (into an Urinal half full of water) which precipitates that which is distilled out into a snow white pouder, which pouder wash three or four times with fair water till the sharp∣ness be gone. Then make an extract of Zedoarie, Cinnamon, and Galingale, ana, ʒ i. and red Sanders ʒ ii. with spirit of Wine ℥ vi. mingle this Extract with ℥ i. of the foresaid white pouder, and grinde them together well, and it will dry it self into a red pouder. It is given for the French Pox about four grains in the pap of an Apple with butter, this will give some five or six vo∣mits; It also helpeth Agues and Fevers, Dropsie and divers other diseases, and is constantly sold for three shillings four pence the dose, Probat per me T. S.
S A Sear-cloth for divers causes. REcipe, Of Oyle olive, lb i. ss. red Lead, lb i ss. of white Lead, lb i. Castile Sope ℥ iiii. Oyle of Bayes ℥ ii. Put your Oyle olive in a Pipkin, and put thereto your Oyle of Bayes, and the Castile Sope. Seeth these over a gentle fire of Embers till it be well mingled and melted together, then strew a little red lead and white, being mingled together in pouder, still stirring it with a great spatter of wood, and so strew in more of your Lead by little and little, till all be in, stirring it still by the bot∣tome to keep it from burning, for an hour and half toge∣ther; them make the fire somewhat bigger, till the redness be turned into a gray colour. But you must not leave stir∣ring it, till the matter be turned into a perfect black colour as Pitch; then drop a little upon a wooden trencher, and if it cleave not to the trencher, nor your singer, it is enough: Then take long linnen clothes, and dip them therein, and make your Sear-cloths thereof, they will keep 20 yeares; let your pouder of your Lead be searsed very fine, and shred the Sope small. The Vertues of this Sear-cloth are; Being laid to the Sto∣mack, it doth provoke appetite, and taketh away any pain in the stomack; being laid to the Belly, it is a present reme∣die for the Collick: Being laid to the back, it is a present remedie for the Flux, and running of the Reins, heat of the Kidnies, and weakness of the Back: It helpeth all swellings and bruises, and taketh away Aches. It breaketh Felons, and other Imposthumes, and healeth them. It draweth out any running humour, and helpeth him without breaking of the skin, and being applyed to the Fundament, helpeth any disease there: It helpeth all old Sores, and will be made in six houres.
For the Stone. ℞. The Clawes of a brown Pionie root, and the root, and Jet Beads, ana p. ae. dry the clawes and roots, and pouder them, and the jet also very finely, then mingle them, and in Ale or White wine drinke a little of the pouder. 2. Peel a red Onyon, slice him and put him into a pint of good white Wine, let him lye six houres, then strein it, and drinke of it twice in a sit, and it will expell the stone. For Stone, Strangurie, and Collick. Take the inner rinde of the young branches of a Hasell tree, boyle them in small Ale till half be consumed, and let him that hath the Strangurie, drink half of it at a draught, let the Pa∣tient drink a draught of it first and last, for nine dayes toge∣ther, for it never fails. For the Stone in the Bladder. ℞. Of Turpentine ℥ iiii. and burn it to pouder, then mix two drachms thereof with four ounces of Saxifrage water, and give it twice a week, in the morning to the Patient, and this will not onely preserve him from the stone, but drive it out, if any use this but two moneths. Probat. 2. Stamp two Bees in Beer and drinke it, and it will cause Urine to come. To break and drive out the Stone. ℞. The juyce or water strained out of Raddish roots, mixe it with White wine, and the pouder of Turpentine, dryed in the Sun, and so drinke: This is an excellent Medicine to drive out the stone. To cause Ʋrine and break the Stone. Take Parsely, and stamp it in White wine, then strain it well, and drinke a good draught thereof, and this will cause
you to make water, and break the stone; but you must use this five or six times. Probat. ℞. Pouder of Brionie berries, and drink it in water, where∣in Water-cresses have been boyled, and it will both help you, and give you ease. For the Stone. ℞. The bloud of two Hares, as much Sheeps or Goats milk, mingle them well together, and boil them in a new pot to a coal, beat it to pouder, and searce it finely, and give the Pa∣tient hereof a good quantity in a little fountain water, luke∣warm, this will break the stone to dust, and make it come a∣way. To try this, put the stone into it, with a little water bloud-warm, and in half an hour it will dissolve it into pee∣ces. 2. Take five Cloves of Garlick, and stamp, and strain them in a draught of Rhennish wine, and so drink it. This being ta∣ken three times together is a sure Remedie. For the Stone in Reins and Bladder. 1. Scrape Sea-horse pissle to pouder, and drinke thereof e∣very morning with white wine, and a little oyle of Almonds, and this will cure the stone of the Kidnies and Bladder, being given four ounces at a draught. 2. Pouder of Manati, which is a stone growing in a Sea-cows head, being exhibited in the aforesaid manner, will doe the like. The white for the man, and the yellow for the woman. 3. ℞ Spikenard, Carraway, Fennel, Annise, and Cummin∣seeds, Cinnamon, and Galingale, ana, ℥ ss. Gromwell seed, and Liquorice, ana ℥ i. beat them all into pouder, and take half a spoonful of this pouder in Ale or Beer warmed, and after walk an hour before you eat or drinke, doe this four or five times, and you shall finde a notable operation.
A Posset for the Stone. Make a Posset very thinne and clear with a quart of Milk, and put into it eight or ten roots of Althea, and two Parsly roots, having their pithes taken out, and two Asparagus roots picked and washed clean, so that no durt be on it, and let them boyle well in the Milk-Posset; then strain it clean, and let the Patient drink a good draught, put into it as much Sal prunellae as will make it somewhat Brackish; this is a safe and admirable Medicine. 2. ℞. The braines of a Magpy newly killed, and put it into a wine Glasse of white Wine, and stir it well till it be throughly mixed, and then drink it, and this will presently cause Urine, and ease the pain. For the Spleen. Seeth the rindes, and keyes, of an Ash tree very tender and well in white Wine, and drink a good draught thereof for six or seven mornings together, it doth much ease the Patient: when you drink this, annoint the Spleen with Dialthea every morning and evening, applying Emplastrum de Meliloto pro Splene to the place. Probat. Another. Put of oyle of Gold one drachm, into half a pound of An∣niseseed-water, shake it well together every time you take of it, and take a spoonful at a time, and it will help you. Probat. Heat a pair of Tongs six times red hot, and quench them in white Wine; drink this nine mornings together, and this will help the Spleen. For Swelling of Armes, Legs, and Feet. ℞. Linseed, Wheat, Bran, Brooklime, Chickweed, and Groundsel, ana. one handful, seeth them in a pottle of white Wine altogether till it be thick, then lay a plaister thereof to
the swollen place as hot as you can suffer it, and it will help it with three or four plaister. For Sinewes, and Nerves, cut asunder. ℞. Of Earth-wormes one handful, put them in a cloth, and cleanse them well from the earth, that done, take Sack half a pound, and of Sallade oyle half a pound, mix them together, and infuse the Wormes in this untill they be suffocated, then stop the pot very close, and lute it well, and set the pot in hot horse dung for eight and forty houres, till the Wormes be rot∣ten, then take them out and presse them, and adde thereto of common Oyle half an ounce, of Venice Turpentine two drachms, then relute your pot, and set it on a soft fire for three or four houres. For Bruises, or streined Sinewes. 1. Annoint the place greived with Aqua composita, and Neat-foot oyle luke-warm, laying hot clothes thereon. 2. Stamp live Earth-wormes, and apply them to Sinewes cut. For shrinking of Sinewes. ℞. Two Swallowes nests that are ready to fly, of Lavender Cotton, the tops of young Thyme, the strings that run out of Strawberries, Cammomil, and Hollihock leaves, ana. one hand∣ful; stamp the Swallowes quick and the Hearbs together, till no feathers be seen, then put thereto of May Butter one pound or two, and stamp it again to a salve, and let it stand again close for seven dayes; then seeth it the space of two houres with a quick fire, stirring it still; then strain it thorough a course cloth, and annoint the joynts therewith, or any other place where the Sinewes are shrunk, and use often to stretch out the joynts and splint.
For Sinewes shrunk, and to supple impotent Limbs. ℞. Rosemary, Thyme, Parsly, Hysop, Bayes, Sage, Lavender Spike, Lavender Cotton, Balm, Cammomil, Roman Worm∣wood, Brooklime, Smallage, Yarrow, red Nettles, Lovage, Hearb Robert, Plantain, Rag-wort, Vervain, Adders-tongue, Daises, Nightshade, Comfry, Orpine, Strawberry strings, Violet leaves, Walwort, Amber leaves, Southernwood, Knot-grasse, Vine tops, Valerian, Honisuckle leaves, Polipodium of the Oak, Dill, Mallowes, Perwinckle, Rue, of these one handful, slice them a little, and stamp them very small in a Morter, with powder of Cloves bruised small, put thereto oyle Olive, and Neats-foot oyle, so much that they may swim, mixing them together, set it on the fire till all the strength of the Hearbs be boyled out, and take heed it doe not burn; then strain out the Hearbs, and clarifie it over the fire, then put to it a little Wax to harden it withall: this Ointment should be made between May and Bartholomewtide. Probat. To cure an old Sore. ℞. Of fresh Butter one pound, put it into a pot in the moneth of Aprill, then take of Violets, of Rosemary, red Sage, Buglosse, Wormwood, Broom, Hysop, Pennygrasse, Vervain, Selfeheal, Hypericon, and Speedwell, ana. one handful; gather them as they be ready, and put them into the pot with the But∣ter, and set them into the Sun until Michaelmas, then take it out of the pot, and beat it in a Morter, then make it up plaister-wise, and reserve it for your use. For the Scurvy. Chop small the knotted place of a Pine Tree, and boyle it well in Ae or eer, that the steem may come out; and drink of it, and it will cure the Scurvy: This was Colonel Hamiltons Secret.
To cool the Skin, and heal a Sore. ℞. Of oyle Olive one pound and a half, Wax six ounces, of Minium two ounces, Litharge of Gold two ounces, Ceruse one ounce and a half, Camphire one ounce and a half; first boyle your Oyle and Wax till it be melted, then take it from the fire, and put in all the aforesaid things, being beaten very small and searced, and stir them together till they be cold, and as occasion serveth annoint the sore place. To help paines in the Stomack. ℞. Four graines of Mastick, Swallow them every night to bedwards; this preserveth the Stomack from all paines, and cureth the same. An Ointment for the Stomack. ℞. Capons Grease five pound, Origanum, Wormwood, the tops of Rosemary, Stomack Mints, ana. M. i. and a few Buds of red Roses pickt; chop the earbs very small, and pownd them in a stone Morter, afterward boyle them in the Capons Grease, till you see the goodness of the Hearbs boyled out, then strain them, and put so many more Hearbs as afore∣said, and let them lye all night, then boyle them all again, till the vertue of the Hearbs be boyled out; then strain them, and take of Cloves, and Mace, ana. ℥. i. beaten very small, and let it boyle a walm or two, keeping it still stirring that it may not grow black, then take it from the fire, and put it into a pan, or broad dish, and stirre it till it be almost cold, and put into it a pint of Aqua vitae, and a quart of the distillation of Vine leaves; this is good for any thing that lieth heavy upon the stomack, being annointed therewith.
T For the pricking of a Thorn. REcipe. Of Violet leaves one handful, of Mallow leaves one handful, stamp them together, and take a quantity of Bores Grease, and of Wheat Bran one handful, set it on the fire in clean water, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the greif. To draw a Thorn or Splinter out of the flesh. Moisten the tongue of a Fox, and make it soft with Vine∣gar if it be dry, put this on the thorn, or any place where you would have any thing drawn out, and it will doe it. 2. Black Sope laid to it, will also doe it. For the Tooth-ach. Take of Opium ʒ i. distill it in ℥ ii. of the best Aqua vitae, and hold a spoonful of this in your mouth, and it will ease you Probatum. To keep Teeth White, and kill the Worms Take a little Salt in the morning fasting, and hold it under your tongue till it be melted, and rub your teeth with it. Pro∣batum. W To take away a Wen. Take the pouder of unslak'd Lime, and mix it well with black Sope, and annoint the Wen therewith, and this will waste it, and when the root is come out, annoint it well with Oyle of Balsome, and this will heal it. FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader. THis Treatise hath pass'd the view and pprobation, both of judi∣tious Phisitians and Chirurgi∣ans and hath been judged wor∣thy to have a new vesture put upon him, and to be vindicated from the obscurity and darknesse it hath lain invol∣ved and eclipsed in this many yeares; being collected out of the Authorities of the most excellent, both former and later Writers, and confirmed, strengthened, and approved, by the late experiences of many well practi∣tioned Chirurgians; being formerly com∣mended to publick view, by the approbation of a late famous Servant, and Chirurgian to King James deceased; who seriously consi∣dering the sacilenesse of providing the Me∣dicines, with their approvednesse in a neces∣sitous time, and in places remote, both from
able Phisitians and Chirurgians, the danger of the present Infection requiring speedy help, to such as might have occasion to make use of these Medicines; not doubting, but the charitable intentions of the carefull Au∣thour, publishing it on purpose for the pub∣lick good, shall find the acceptance of so ne∣cessitous a work, as is wished by A. M.
The Author to the Reader. Whereas there are divers Receits set down in this Book, which are written in Latine, in Characters used by Phi∣sitians and Apothecaries, which cannot so fitly be brought into our English phrase; and because their quantities are set down according to the Latine order observed in the making up their Receits pre∣scribed, I have, for the better ease and understanding of the Reader, set down the signification of their weights and measures, according to their Characters. A Handfull is written thus M. 1. Half a Handfull thus M. ss. A little small Handfull thus P. 1. A Scruple thus ℈. 1. Half a Scruple, x. Graines, or thus ℈. ss. A Drachm thus ʒ. 1. An Ounce thus. ℥. 1. Half an Ounce, or half a Drachm ℥. ss. ʒ. ss. A Grain thus Gra. 1. A Drop thus Gut. 1.
The number of any thing thus Nu. 1. &c. Half of any thing thus ss. A Pound, or Pint, thus lib. 1. Twenty Graines make a Scruple. Three Scruples make a Drachm. Eight Drachms make an Ounce Twelve Ounces a Physick Pound. Ana. is, of either of them so much. P. ae. is, equall parts, or parts alike. S. a. Secundum Artem, according to Art. So much as shall suffice is marked thus q. s
A defensative against the Plague. The first Treatise CHAP. I. What the Plague is. THe antient Phisitians in times past have greatly doubted, what the essentiall cause of this dis∣ease, which we commonly call the Plague or Pestilence, should be; yet all doe agree, that it is a pernitious and contagious Fever, and reckoned to be one of the number of those which are called Epidemia, chiefly proceeding of adusted and melancholy bloud, which may be easily perceived, by the extream heat and inflammation, which inwardly they doe feel, that are infected therewith; first assaulting the heart, and astonishing the vitall spirits, as also by the exteriour Carbunkles and botches which it produceth; whose malignity is such, both in young and old, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, that using all the meanes, which by Art can, or may be devised, yet in some it will in no sort give place, untill it hath by death con∣quered the party infected therewith. CHAP. II. Cause of the Plague. THere are divers causes whereof this disease may pro∣ceed, as sundry Writers doe alledge, as by over great and unnaturall heat and drought, by great rain and inundations of waters, or by great store of rotten and stinking bodies,
both of men and beasts, lying upon the face of the earth un∣buried▪ as in the time of warres hath been seen, which doth so corrupt the air, as that thereby our Corn, Fruits, Hearbs, and Waters, which we daily use for our food and sustenance, are infected: also it may come by some stinking dunghils, fil∣thy and standing pooles of water, and unsavory smels, which are near the places where we dwell, or by thrusting a great company of people into a close, narrow, or streight room, as most commonly we see in Ships, common Gaoles, and in narrow and close lanes and streets, where many people doe dwell together, and the places not orderly kept clean and sweet. But most commonly, in this our time, it is dispersed amongst us, by accompanying our selves with such as either have, or lately have had the disease themselves, or at least have been conversant with such as have been infected there∣with: But for the most part it doth come by receiving into our custody some clothes, or such like things, that have been used about some infected body, wherein the infection may lie hidden a long time, as hath been too too often experi∣mented, with repentance too late in many places, It may also come by Dogs, Cats, Pigs, and Weasels, which are prone and apt to receive and carry the infection from place to place. But howsoever it doth come, let us assure our selves, that it is a just punishment of God, laid upon us for our manifold sins and transgressions against his divine Majesty: for as Seneca saith, Quicquid patimur ab alto venit, What crosses or afflicti∣ons soever we suffer, it cometh from the Lord, either for a triall of our faith, or a punishment for our sins. Wherefore to distinguish any farther thereof I think it needlesse, for my intent is in breif sort, so exactly as I can, to shew the meanes how to prevent the same, as also how to cure it when we are infected. But before I enter to treat thereof, I think it not amisse, to shew what forewarnings and tokens are given us before hand of the coming thereof, thereby the better to pre∣vent the same by prayer and repentance.
CHAP. III. Warnings of the Plague to come. AVicen, a noble Physitian saith, that when wee see the natu∣rall course of the ayre, and seasons of the year to be alte∣red, as when the spring time is cold, clowdy, and dry, the har∣vest time stormy, and tempestuous, the mornings and evenings to be very cold, and at noon extream hot, these do foreshew the Plague to come. Also when we see fiery impressions in the firmament, especially in the end of summer, as comets and such like, and that in the beginning of harvest we see great store of little frogs, red toades, and myse on the earth aboun∣ding extraordinarily: or when in summer we see great store of toades creeping on the earth having long tailes, of an ashy color on their backs, and their bellies spotted and of divers co∣lours, and when we see great store of gnats swiming on the wa∣ters, or flying in great companies together, or when our trees and hearbs do abound with Caterpillars, Spiders, Moaths &c. which devoure the leaves on the trees and hearbs on the earth, it sheweth the ayre to be corrupt, and the Plague shortly after to follow. Also by the beasts of the field we may perceive it (especially sheep) which will go mourning with their heads hanging down towards the ground, and divers of them dying without any manifest cause known unto us. Also when we see young Children flock themselves together in companies, and then will faine some one of their company to be dead amongs them, and so will solemnize the buriall in a mournfull sort, this is a token which hath been well observed in our age to foreshew great mortality at hand. Also when we see rivers of water to overflow without any manifest cause, or suddenly vanish away and become dry: And when clear well-springs do suddenly become foule and troubled. Also when the small-Pox doth generally abound both in young and old people, all these do foreshew the Plague to come.
CHAP. IIII. Sheweth how to prevent the Plague. THere are three principall meanes how to prevent this con∣tagious disease: The first and chiefest is to acknowledge our manifold sins and wickedness unto almighty God our hea∣venly Father, with a hearty repentance and amendment of our former sins committed against his divine majestie. The second means is to fly far off from the place infected, and as Rondoletius saith, not over hastily to return thither again for fear of an after-clap: which saying is confirmed by Vale∣tius in these words, Non enim morietur in bello, qui non est in illo: and the farther from it, the safer shall we be, yet were it a very uncharitable course that all which are of ability should do so, for then how should the poor be relieved, and good orders observed: but for Children it were best to send them far off from the place, because their bodies are most apt to receive the in∣fection, as also for that they cannot so continually use antidots and preservatives, which by their great heat may indanger them almost so much as the disease it self. The third meanes consisteth chiefly in three points, which are these: Order, Diet, and Physicall helps. For the first you shall have a care that your houses be kept clean and sweet, not suffering any foule and filthy clothes or stinking things to remain in or about the same: and in summer season to deck your windowes, and strow your floors with sweet and wholsom hearbs, floures, and leaves, of Mints, Balme, Penniroyall, La∣vender, Thime, Majoram, red-Roses, Carnations, Gelliflow∣ers and such like for your windowes, your floors to be strow∣ed with green Rushes, and Mints, Oaken and Willow leaves, Vine leaves and such like: your windowes which stand to∣wards the North and East, do you alwaies keep open in the day time, if the ayre be clear, and that no infected and unsa∣vory smell be near the same, as Fogs, dunghils, &c. and every morning before you open either your doors, or windowes, as also in the evening when you go to bed, cause a good fire to be made in your Chamber, and burn some odoriferous or
sweet perfumes in the middest thereof, as hereafter I will shew you, or in stead thereof some Juniper, Frankincense, Bay leaves, Rosemary, Lavender, Majoram, or such like, which you must alwaies have dried in a readinesse, and so in the fume or smoke thereof to breath and perfume the clothes which you are to weare. A good perfume in summer season. ℞. Rose water and Vinegar, of either six spoonfulls: Rinds of sower Citrons and Lemons, Bay-leaves, of either the weight of two pence which is ℈. i. Camphire, the weight of three pence, which is ʒ. ss. The hearbs and rinds must be dried and put all together in a perfuming pan, or instead thereof a peuter dish, set on a chafer of coles, will serve the turn. Another good perfume in winter. ℞. Red-Roses Majoram and Myrtles, of either a little handfull: Callamint, Juniper berries, Laudanum, Benjamin, Frankincense, of either ʒ. i. which is weight of seven pence. The hearbs, berries, and Roses being dried, must be made in grosse powder, as also the gumms, and so mixed together, and when yee list, cast some part thereof on a chafer of coales, and receive the fume thereof. CHAP. V. NOw having received the fume as aforesaid, before you go forth of your chamber, eat some Cordial electuary or pre∣servative, as hereafter you shall find choise, which I have alwais used with good and happy success, after taking of the Cordial wash your face and hands with clean water, wherein you must put a little Vinegar, and then if you list, you may break your fast wirh some good bread and butter, and in winter season a potch'd Egg is good eaten with some Vinegar, and for pletho∣rick
and melanchole bodies, it were good to drink a draught of wormewood wine, in the morning fasting, because it resist∣eth putrefaction in the plethorick, and purgeth bilous matter in the melancholie. An excellent good preservative which I have alwaies used with good successe. ℞. Conserve of Roses and Borrage floures, of either two ounces: Minardus Mithridate, Andromachus triacle, of either half an ounce: Dioscordium, two drachms, Dialkermes one drachme, Powder of the seed of Citrons pilled, one drachme, Sirrup of Lemons and sower Citrons, of either halfe an ounce. Compound all these together in the form of an opiat, you may eat hereof every morning the quantity of three beanes, and drink a draught of Rennish wine, Beer, or Ale after it: but for Children and such as are of tender years, so much as a bean thereof is sufficient, and give them onely Beer or Ale af∣ter it: the taking hereof every second or third day will suffice, if you go not into any suspected company. Another excellent good preservative. ℞. Kernils of Wallnuts and Figs, of either four ounces: Leaves of Rue, one ounce and half, Tormentill roots, four drachms, Rind of sowr Citrons, one drachme, right Bolar∣moniak, six drachms, fine Myrrh, two scruples, Saffron, one scruple, Salt, half a drachm: Sirrup of Citrons and Lemons, four ounces. The hearbs, roots, and rinds must be dried, the nuts must be blanched, and the bolarmoniack must be made in fine powder, and then wash'd in the water of Scabios, and dried againe, you must pound the figgs and wallnuts in a stone morter severally by themselves very small, and the rest must be made in fine pow∣der, and so mix them altogether in the morter, and then add thereto sirrup by little and little, and so incorporate them al∣together: you may give this in the same quantity, and in like sort as the other before.
Another very good. ℞. Of the confection aforesaid made with Nutts ℥. iiii. Minardus mithridate, four drachms, Andromachus Triacle, ʒ ii. fine terra Sigillata, four scruples, Sirrup of Limons, ℥. i. Compound all these together in the morter, as the other be∣fore, you may give hereof the weight of a groat or six pence, every second or third day, and drink a draught of Rennish or white wine after it in Winter season, but in the heat of the yeer, Sorrel water is best, and in the Spring Scabios or Car∣duus Benedictus water. Also, so much Triacle of Andromachus description eaten every morning as a bean, with a little conserve of Roses, is a very excellent good preservative. Valetius doth greatly commend the taking of three or four grains of the Bezar stone every morning, in a spoonfull of Sca∣bios water. I cannot here sufficiently commend the Electuarie called Dioscordium, which is not onely good to resist the infection, but doth also expell the venemous matter of those which are infected, being taken every morning and evening the quan∣tity of a bean, and drinke a draught of Rennish or White wine after it in winter season, but in Summer a draught of Beer or Ale is best. In strong and rusticall bodies, and such as are dayly labou∣rers, Garlick onely eaten in the morning with some Butter and Salt at breakfast, drinking a cup of beer or ale after it, hath been found to be very good, which is greatly commen∣ded by Galen, who calleth it the poor mans Triacle, but in the sanguine, daintie, and idle bodies it may not be used, because it over-heateth the bloud, causeth head-ach, and uni∣versally inflameth the whole body. CHAP. VI. NOw when you have taken any of the foresaid Preserva∣tives, it were good and necessary to wear upon the Regi∣on of the heart, some sweet Bag or quilt that hath power to
resist venome, and also to carry in your hand some sweet Po∣mander, Nodule, or Nosegay, that will comfort the heart, re∣sist venom, and recreate the vitall spirits, as here following is specified and set down. An excellent quilt or Bag. ℞. Arsenike cristaline, ℥. i. Diamargaritum frigidum, ℈ ii. Diambrae, ℈ i. You must grinde the Arsenike in small powder, and then with some of the infusion of Gum Dragagant in Rose water, you must make a paste, then spread it on a cloth which must be six inches long, and five inches broad, and spread it thick: then cover it with another cloth, and so quilt it together, which being done, fasten it in another bag of crimson taffetie or Sarsenet, and so wear it against the heart all the day time, but at night leave it off: and here you must take heed, that when you sweat, you doe take it away, for otherwise it will cause the skin to amper a little. There are some writers which doe utterly forbid the wearing of Arsenike, but thus much I can say, that I have given this bag unto divers to wear, with most happie and good successe, for never did I yet know any one that hath worn this bag, and used any of the Electuaries a∣foresaid, that hath been infected with the plague, but for any inconvenience or accident that hath happened thereby, I ne∣ver found any hitherto, other then the ampring of the skin as aforesaid. Another Bag. ℞. Ireos, ℥ ss. Calamus aromat. Ciperus, ana. ʒ. i. ss. Storax Calam. root of Angelica, ana. ʒ. iii, Cloves, Mace, ana ʒ. i. Red roses dried, ʒ. iii. Pellemountain, Penniroyall, Cala∣mint, Elder floures, ana. ʒ. i ss. Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Yellow Sanders, ana ʒ. i. Nardi Italicae, ʒ. i. Amber greece and Musk, ana. six grains. You must pound all these in powder, and then quilt them in a bag of Crimson Taffatie as aforesaid.
A Pomander good in the Summer time. ℞. The rind of Citrons, Red Roses, Nenuphare Roses, Yel∣low sanders, ana ʒ. ss. Storax liquid, Benjamin, ana. ʒ. i. Myrrh, ℈. ii. Ladanum, ʒ. i. ss. Musk and Amber, ana. six grains. Powder all that is to be powdered, and then work them to∣gether in a hot morter with a hot pestell, adding unto it in the working some of the Musselage of dragagant dissolved in sweet Rosewater, or Rosevinegar, and so make your Pomander. Another good one for the winter time. ℞. Storax liquid, Benjamin, Storax calamint, Ladanum, and Myrrh, ana, half a drachm, Cloves one scruple, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each half a scruple. Red Roses, Yellow San∣ders, Ligum aloes, and Ireos, of each half a dram. Calamus aromaticus, rind of a Citron, ana. four grains, Amber greece, Musk and Civet, of each six grains. You may make up this as the other before with some Mus∣selage of the infusion of Gum dragagant, infused in Rose∣water. A good Nodule for the Summer season. ℞. Floures of Violets, red Roses, and Nenuphare, of each one drachm, Red, White, and Yellow sanders, of each half a drachm. Camphire, xii graines. Cause all these to be beaten in grosse powder, then knit them all together in a peece of Taffetie, and when you will use it, then wet it in Rosewater and a little Vinegar, and so smell to it. Another Nodule for the Winter season. ℞. The dried leaves of Mints, Majoram, Thime, Penniroyall, Lavender, Pellemountain and Balm, of each a little handfull. Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Angelica roots, Lignum aloes, of each one drachm. Saffron, two scruples.
Cause all these to be infused in Rose-water and Vinegar one whole night, then wet a spunge in the liquor thereof, and knit it in a peece of Taffaty, or your handkerchief, whereunto you must smell oftentimes. A Nosegay for the same purpose. ℞. Hearb grace, three branches: Rosemary, Majoram, Mints, and Thime, of either one branch: Red-Rose buds and Carnations, of either three or four. Make your nosegay herewith, then sprinkle him over with Rose-water, and some rose-Vinegar, and smell often unto it. Also when you suspect to go into any dangerous or infected company, do you alwaies carry in your mouth a peice of the root of Angelica, the rind of a Citron dried, or a great Clove, which must be first infused or steeped one whole night in rose-water and Vinegar. CHAP. VII. FOr that there is not a greater enemy to the health of our bodies then costiveness, both in the time of the Plague and otherwise, I have here set down how and by what meanes you may keep your self soluble, which you must use once four and twenty hours, if otherwise you have not the benefit of nature by custome. A Suppository. Take two spoonfulls of Honey, and one spoonfull of Bay-Salt small pounded, boyle them together untill it grow thick, alwaies stirring it in the boyling, then take it from the fire, and if you list you may add one drachm of Ihera picra simplex unto it, and so stirre them well together, and when it is almost cold, make up your suppositories of what length and bignesse you list: and when you minister any, you must first annoint it with Butter or Sallet oyle: you may keep these a whole year if you put them in Barrowes mort or grease, and so cover them up close therein.
A good Glister. ℞. Mallowes, Mercury, Beets, Violets, Red-Fennell, of either one handfull: Seeds of Fennell, Annis, Coriander, of either one drachm. Boyle all these in a sufficient quantity of Water, untill half the water be consumed, them straine it, and keep it in a glasse close stopt untill you need, for it will keep a whole week. Take of the same decoction, a pint. ℞. Mel Rosarum, or common Honey, one spoonfull: Oyle of Violets or oyle of Olives, three ounces, Salt, one drachm, They yolk of an Egg or two. Mixe all these together in a morter and so give it warm in the morning, or two hours before supper: and if you add unto this one ounce of Diacatholicon it will be the better. Raisins laxative how to make them. ℞. White-Wine, three pints and a half, Senuae, half a pound, Fine white sugar, one pound, Currants, two pound. You must infuse the Senuae in the wine in a pot close stopt, and let if stand in a warm place four and twenty hours, then strein it and add to the straining the Currants, being clean pickt and washt, and lastly the Sugar, boyle all together on an easie fire, untill the wine be consumed, having care that you do alwaies stirr it about in the boyling for feare of burning, then take them from the fire, and put them up into a clean galley pot, you may eat one spoonfull or two of them a little before dinner, at any time. A good Oyntment to kep one Sollible. The gaule of an Oxe, Oyle of Violets, of either one ounce: Sheeps tallow, six drachms. Boyle them together on a soft fire untill they be incorpo∣rated, then take it from the fire and adde thereto Alloes cica∣trine, one ounce. Bay-Salt half an ounce.
The Alloes and Salt must be both made into fine powder be∣fore you put them into the oyle, then stirr them together untill it be cold, and when you are disposed to have a stoole, then annoint your fundament therewith, both within side and with∣out, and if you annoint your navell therewith, it will work the better. Good pills to kep one soluble, and they do also resist the Pestilence. ℞. Alloes Cicatrine, one ounce, Chosen Myrrh; three drachms, Saffon, one drachm and half, Amber Greece, six graines: Sirrup of Lemons or Citrons, so much as shall be suf∣ficient to make the masse. You must grinde the Aloes, Myrrhe, and Saffron into small powder severally by themselves, then incorporate them to∣gether with the sirrup: you may give half a drachme or two scruples thereof in the evening half an hour before supper twse or thrise in a week: Rases would have you to take half a drachme or two scruples of these Pills every day, without using any othe preservative at all, and he hath great reason so to esteem of them, for Galen, Avicen, and all ancient Writers in Physick do hold opinion, that Aloes doth not onely com∣fort, but purge the stomack from all raw and chollerick humors, and doth also purge and open the venes called Miserayick, and resisteth putrefacton: Myrrh doth altogether resist, neither will it suffer putrefaction in the stomack: Saffron doth com∣fort the heart, and hath also a proriety in it to carry any me∣dicine that is given therewith unto the heart, but to conclude, these Pills will purge all superfluous humors in the stomack, and principall members, and preserveth the bloud form cor∣ruption. CHAP. VIII. I Must here give you to understand▪ that the infection doth oftentimes lie hidden within us, without any manifest sign or knowledge thereof at the first, and therefore were it good for sanguine bodies, and such as do abound with bloud, in the
summer season to draw six or eight ounces of bloud out of the Basilica vein in the right arme, which is a good meanes to prevent a further danger, (as Avicen witnesseth) but for full and plethorick bodies, it were best to purge themselves once in seven or eight daies with some easie and gentle purgation, as hereafter I will shew you: but for leane and spare bodies, once in fourteen dayes will be enough at most: for wisely saith Ron∣doletius, that it is not onely the venemous and contagious ayre which we receive that doth kill us, but it is the present commu∣nicating of that contagion with some superfluous humours in our bodies, as in his treatise De Pste appeareth: therfore now will I shew you how to purge the body. Pills good to purge. ℞. Alloes Cicatrine, ten drachms, Agarick of the whitest, ℥. iiii. Myrrh, Mastick, of either two drachms: Saffron two scruples. Make these into fine powder, then compound them together in a morter, with so much Oximell simplex, Sirrup of Lemons, or of Staecados, as shall be sufficient, you may give one drachm, or a drachm and half of these Pills, half an hour before supper: but for a cholerick body, you must leave out two drachms of the Agarick in making of the receipt, and in place thereof add two drachms of Rubarb, and for the melan∣cholie, two drachms of Epithimum, and give the same quan∣tity in weight. A good purging potion. ℞ Raisins, the stones being pickt out and washt, of either one ounce: Polipode of the Oak, Elecampane root dried, roots of wild small Sorrel, Succory roots cleansed, of either half an ounce: Leaves of Burrage, Bugloss, Burnet, Scabios, Morsus diaboli, of either a little handfull: Floures of Burrage, Bugloss, Rosemary, Violets, Broom, of either a little handfull: Seeds of Fennell, sowr Citrons, of either two scruples: Sha∣ving of Harts horn, half a drachm. Boyle all these in a sufficient quantity of faire water untill
half be consumed, then strain it. Take of the decoction a∣foresaid, three ounces. Rubarb, two drachms and half, Cinnamon, half a drachm. Slice them both, and put them with the liquor in a close cup, and so let it stand to infuse in a warm place twelve hours, then strain it out strongly, and add thereto one ounce of the Sirrup of Maiden-haire, and so drink it warm in the morning about six of the clock, and refrain from meat, drink, or sleep two hours after it, this is good in lean and spare bodies: you may for the phlegmatick body, add in the infusion, one drachm of Aggarick Trosciscated. A purging powder for such as cannot take Pills. ℞. Alloes Ciccatrine, one ounce, Myrrh, Cinnamon, of either two drachms, Saffron, one scruple. Make them all in fine powder, and give one drachm in a draught of White-wine. Floures stopt, how to provok them. For that women which have not their naturall course on them, are most prone to receive and take the infection, I have here set down good Pills, which I have alwaies found excellent not onely for that purpose, but will also resist the danger of infection. ℞. Alloes Ciccatirne, one ounce, Roots of Gentian, Aristo∣lochia rotunda, Dittander, Saffron, of either half a drachm: Roots of garden Madder, Methridate, of either one drachm. Cause them all to be ground in small powder, then mix it with the Methridate and some sirrup of Artemesia, or Mugwort, give one drachm of these Pills every morning twelve dayes together, or untill her tearms break. Issues commended against the Plague. IN plethorick and full bodies, I have found nothing more safer in the time of the Plague, then to make them an artifi∣ciall
Issue, either in the leg or arm, for never hitherto have I knwn any one which hath had an Issue, or Ulcer running on him that hath been infected with the plague. Palmarius and Forestus, doe both affirm it to be true and certain, but here some ignorant people doe hold opinion that having once an Issue, he must be constrained to keep it alwaies, which is most erronious, for then those which have had Ulcers running upon them, some six, ten, yea sixteen yeers, may not be cured with∣out some Issue to be made in some other place, but therein they deceive themselves, for my self by good proof have of∣ten found the contrary in divers people which I have cured, some six, some ten, yea sixteen yeers past, and yet to this day doe remain in perfect good health without any Issues. CHAP. IX. What Diet we ought to keep. FOr our diet as Hippocrates teacheth us, we must have a care not to exceed in eating and drinking but to keep a mean therein, and in any case to beware of surfeting and drunkenness, which are enemies both to the body and soule, but as we may not exceed in eating and drinking, so to en∣dure great hunger and thirst is most dangerous, our meat ought to be of a facile and easie digestion, partly tending to a drying qualitie; as Cocks, Capons, Hens, Pullets, Par∣tridge, Pheasants, Quailes, Pigeons, Rabbets, Kid, Veal, Mut∣ton, Birds of the Mountains, and such like; but Beef, Pork, Venison, Hare and Goats flesh is to be refused, and so are all water fowls, as Duck, Swan, Goose, Widgen, Teal, and such like, because they are hard to digest, and do increase ill blood, and naughtie juyce in the bodie: Lambs flesh, because of his exceeding moisture is also to be refused, Eggs in the Summer not good, but in Winter tolerable: All Fishes which are of a hard flesh, whether they be of the Sea, or fresh Ri∣vers are to be allowed. In fresh Rivers the Perch, Barble, Gudgeon, Loch, Cool, Trout, and Pike are good; and for Sea fish, the Gilthed, Turbet, Sole, Rochet, Gurnard, Lobster, Crab, Praunes, Shrimps, Whiting, and such like eaten with vi∣negar.
There are some Authors which hold opinion, that Fish is better to be eaten then flesh in the great fervent heat of the year, because they doe make a more cold bloud in the body then flesh; another reason is, because they doe live under the water, they are not infected with any contagi∣on of the aire, as Beasts and birds may be, and therefore more wholsome, but in my judgement flesh is more wholsome, be∣cause it doth breed a more pure, and fine Juyce in the body then any ish whatsoever; your bread ought to be made of pure wheat, not too new, nor too old, but of one dayes ba∣king, or two at most is best: Rie bread is to be eschewed, be∣cause of his great moisture: year drink is best beer or ale, not too strong or new, but the staler and clearer it is the better, at your meals a draught or two of Claret wine is to∣lerable, but in hot weather it were good to allay it with a lit∣tle water, for wine doth warm the stomack, help digestion, and comfort the heart. For your Portage you may take in the Summer. Parsly, Lettice, Sorrell, Endive, Succorie, Sperage, Hop∣buds, Burnet, Burrage, Buglosse, Thime, Mints, Hysop, but in Winter, Balm, Bittanie, Thime, Marigold, Hysop, Majoram, Mints and Rue are good. For your Sallets take Pimpernell, Purslane, Mints, Sorrell, Hore-hound, Yong cole, Hop-buds, Sperage, Thme, Tops of Fennell, Tarregon, Lettice, and Wa∣ter-cresses are good. Capers are greatly commended being preserved in Vinegar, and eaten with a little oyle and vinegar, and so are Olives very good also. For your sauce, the juyce of a Limon, Citron, or Orange is best, the juyce of Sorrell and Vinegar is also good. All raw fruits are to be refused, except those which tend to four tast, as Pomgranates, damask Prunes, Pippins, red and sour Cherries, and Wallnuts, Quinces, and Peares preserved are very good eaten after meals. All kind of Pulse is to be refused, as Beans, Pease, and such like, because they increase winde, and make raw humours and ill juyce in the bodie.
Refrain from Garlick, Onyons, Leeks, Pepper, Mustard, and Rocket, because they doe over-heat the body, make adustion of the bloud, and cause fumes to ascend into the head. Cheese is not good, because it doth ingender grosse and thick humors. Milk is also to be refused, because it doth quick∣ly corrupt in the stomack. CHAP. X. Sheweth what Exercise and Order is to be kept. YOu must beware of all vehement and immoderate exer∣cise, which doth provoke sweat, as is Tennis, dancing, leaping, running, foot-ball, hurling, and such like, because they doe over-much heat the body, and open the Pores of re∣spiration, whereby the infected aire hath the more scope to enter our bodies, but moderate exercise is very convenient, the use of hot houses at this time I thinke very dangerous, because it doth too much open the pores. Walk not into the open ayre in the morning before the Sun hath had some power to cleanse and clear the same, and in any case goe not abroad when great fogs and mists are upon the earth, for it is dangerous: but if urgent occasions move you, then before you goe forth of your doors be sure to eat some preservative first, and then take some good and odoriferous Pomander, Nodule, or Nosegay in your hand, as before is shewed you. The extream heat of the day is like∣wise to be refused to walk in, because it chafeth the bloud; as also in the evening after the Sun is set, for then unsavory and unwholsome Fogs arise out of the earth, and in any case if you can avoid it come not neer any any place infect∣ed, but use to walk in the open aire and dry ground. Use Venus combates moderately, but none at all were bet∣ter, the best time to use them is three or four hours after sup∣per, before you sleep, and then rest upon them. Beware of anger, fear, and pensiveness of the minde, for by their means the body is made more apt to receive the in∣fection. Use pleasant and merry recreations, either with musick,
pleasant company to talke withall, or reading some good books. Bewar of sleeping at noon, but specially in the Winter sea∣son, but in Summer to take after dinner a nap of half an hour or an hour is tollerable in elderly bodies. Watch not long in the evenings but two or three hours after supper is a good time to take your rest. CHAP. XI. Teacheth what orders Magistrates, and Rulers of Cities and Townes, should cause to be observed, FIrst, To command that no stinking dunghills be suffered near the City. Secondly, Every evening and morning in hot weather to cause cold water to be cast in the streets, especially where the infection is, and every day to cause the streets to be kept clean and sweet, and cleansed from all filthy things which lye in the same. Thirdly, And whereas the infection is entered, there to cause fires to be made in the streets every morning and evening, and if some Frankincense, Pitch, or some other sweet thing be burnt therein, it will be much the better. Fourthly, Suffer not any Doggs, Catts, or Pigs to run about the streets, for they are very dangerous, and apt to carry the infection from place to place. Fifthly, Command that the excrement and filthy things which are voided from the infected places be not cast into the streets or rivers which are daily in use to make drink, or dresse meat. Sixtly, That no Chirurgians, or Barbars which use to let blond, do cast the same into the streets or rivers. Seventhly, That no Vauts or Privies be then emptied, for it is a most dangerous thing. Eighthly, That all Inholders do every day make clean their stables, and cause the dung and filth therein to be carried away out of the City: for by suffering it in their houses, as some do use to do, a whole week or a fortuight, it doth so putrifie that
when it is removed, there is such a stinking and unwholsome smell, as is able to infect the whole street where it is. Ninthly, To command that no Hemp or Flax be kept in wa∣ter near the City or Town, for that will cause a very dange∣rous and infectious savour. Tenthly to have a speciall care, that good and wholsome Victuals and Corn be sold in the markets, and so to provide, that no want thereof be in the City, and for such as have not wherewithall to buy necessary food, that there to extend their charitable and godly devotion: for there is nothing that will more increase the Plague, the want and scarsity of neces∣sary food. Eleventhly, To command that all those which do visite and attend the sick, as also all those which have the sicknesse on them, and do walk abroad, that they do carry something in their hands, thereby to be known from other people. And here I must advertise you of one thing more which I had almost for∣gotten (which is) that when the infections is but in few places, there to keep the people in their houses, not suffering any one of them to go abroad, and so to provide, that all such necessaries as they shall need may be brought unto them during the time of their visitation: and when it is staied, then to cause all the clothes, bedding, and other such things as were used about the sick, to be all burnt, although at the charge of the rest of the Inhabitants you buy them all new, for fear least the danger which may ensue thereby, do put you to a far greater charge and grief: all these aforesaid things are most dangerous, and may cause a generall infection, to the destroying of a whole City, and therefore I do wish that great care be had thereof. CHAP. XII. Doth shew what you must do when you go to visit the sick. FIrst before you enter into the house, command that a great fire be made in the chamber where the sick lieth, and that some odoriferous perfume  burnt in the midest of the cham∣ber, and before you go to him, eat some cordiall preservative, and smother your clothes with some sweet perfume, then wet
your temples, eares, nose, and mouth, with Rose-water and Vi∣negar mixt together, then take in your mouth a peice of the root of Angelica, the rind of a sower Citron, or a Clove pre∣pared as before is shewed, and have some Nosegay, Nodule, or Pomander, appropriate in your hand, which you must al∣waies smell unto, so may you the more bouldlier perform your intent: but herewithall you must have a speciall care, that du∣ring the time you are with the sick, you stand not betwixt the sick body and the fire, for that is dangerous; because that the fire of his nature draweth all vapors unto it self; but keep you alwaies on the contrary side, so that the sick may be betwixt you and the fire: and for such as are to let any sick infected bo∣dy to bleed, it were good they did cause the keeper of the sick body to lay open that arme or legg which is to be let bloud be∣fore he approach near: the reason is, for that most commonly all that are sick in this contagious disease, are for the most part in a sweat, and therefore suddenly to receive the breath there∣of, would be very dangerous. Now when you have been with any one so infected, before you go into the company of any whole and sound people, it were necessary you do stand by a good fire, having all the clothes about you which you did wear when you were with the sick, and then turn and aire your selfe well thereby, so shall you be sure the lesse to endanger others by your company. Thus have I as breefly as I can devise set down all the ordinary meanes which my self have used, and by others known to be used for preserving you from this contagious and dangerous disease, which in the most part of people will suffice, but for such as dwell whereas they may have the counsell of a learned Physitian, I do wish them to take his advice, especially for purging and letting bloud, because none can so exactly set down in writing the perfect course thereof (which may be un∣derstood rightly of the common sort) so well as he which hath the sight of the body: for that many bodies are oftentimes troubled with some one humour abounding more then another, which here to treat of would be oo tedious, neither can it profit the common people, for whose sakes I have taken this paines: and now will I shew the signes to know when one is
infected therewith, as also which are the laudable signes, and which are the contrary, and lastly the meanes (by God his as∣sistance) how for to cure the same. CHAP. XIII. Sheweth the signes of infection. THe signes and tokens hereof are divers, as first, it is percei∣ved by the suddain weaknesse, loosing and overthrowing of our naturall strength, without any manifest cause thereof going before, and sometimes it doth begin with a gnawing and biting in the mouth of the stomack, the pulse will grow weak, feeble, and unequall, with a great streightnesse and heavinesse about the heart, as if some heavie burthen or weight were layd thereon, withshortness of breathing, vomiting, or at least a great desire to vomit, great pain in the head: insatiable thirst proceed∣ing of their great interior heat: sluggishnes, and universal faint∣ness of all the body, with a great desire to sleep, and an astonish∣ment of the mind and vitall spirits: and for the most part they complain of a great paine which is felt in some one place or places of their bodies, where the botch or blain is by nature in∣tended to be thrust forth, yet some at the first have them ap∣pearing: and for the most part, they are taken at the first with a sharp and rigorous feaver. Good signes. When the botch or Carbunkle cometh out in the beginning of the sicknesse with a red colour, and yellowish round about it, and that it doth quicklycome to maturation, the feaver to cease, and the party findeth himself eased of his grief, and quickned in his spirits, these are good and laudable signes of recovery. Evill signes. When the botch at the first commeth out blackish, or black in colour, also when the botch is opened, the flesh within doth look blew, and that then there appear not any matter or quit∣ture
in the wound, but as it were a spume or froth issuing out thereof, are ill and deadly signes, When the botch waxeth so hard that by no means it will come to suppuration, but resisteth whatsoever is done unto it for the furthering thereof; and so returneth in againe into the inward parts suddenly, is a token of sudden death at hand, and so it is, if either before or after it is broken it look of a blewish colour, or of divers colours, like the Rainbow, round about it. When the Carbunckle or Blain doth suddenly dry up, as if it were scorcht with the fire, and that the place round about it doth shew to be of a wannish blew colour, is a deadly sign: if in the skin appear green or black spots; the excrements of divers colours with worms in it either dead or living, having a vile stinking savour, and spitteth stinking and bloudy matter, doth betoken death. When the sick complaines of great and extream heat in the inward parts, and yet cold outwardly, the eyes staring or weep∣ing, the face terrible, the said excrements or urin passing away, and the party not knowing thereof, are evill signes. When in the fourth or seventh day they are taken with a fren∣sie, or do fall into an extream bleeding at nose, or have a great flux with a continuall vomiting, or a desire to vomit and do it not, extream pain at the heart, watchfullness, and the strength clean gone, are deadly signes. When the party being very sick, yet saith he feeleth himself well, his eyes sunk deep in his head, and full of tears, when he thinks all things do stink, his nailes looking blew, the nose sharp, and as it were crooked, the breath thick and short with a cold sweat in the brest and face, and turning and playing with the clothes, the pulse creeping or scarcely to be felt, and greivous unto him to speak, these are infallible signes of death at hand. Some, before any of these signes are perceived, do dy, and some likewise which have di∣vers of them appearing, and yet do escape, such is the uncer∣tainty of this disease: there are many other symptoms which do happen in this contagious disease, which would be too tedi∣ous to declare, but these as the chiefest may suffice. The end of the first Treatise.
The Second Treatise, shewing the meanes how to cure the Plague. CHAP. I. VVHen we perceive any to be infected with this contagi∣ous disease, we must with all possible speed seek all the meanes we can how to prevent the malignity thereof, whose property is at the first to assault the principall part, which is the heart, and therefore requires present help; for unlesse some∣thing be done within eight or four and twenty houres, little will it then prevail to attempt it, for by that time nature is either subdued, and clean overthrown, or else hath thrust the same to the exterior parts, or otherwise digested it: yet may we not neglect at any time, to use all the meanes we can, in helping and furthering of nature to the uttermost of our in∣deavour, because we doe oftentimes see nature so wearied, and weakened in expelling of this venemous matter, that unlesse some help be added to assist and comfort her, the party, for lack thereof, dyeth, which otherwise might be saved: For I have oftentimes seen by diligent helping of nature, that to be effect∣ed and brought to good passe, which I have judged most despe∣rate. There are foure intentions required for the curing there∣of; that is, by bloud-letting, Cordials, sweat and purging: but the manner how to execute the same, hath bred great conten∣tion both amongst the old and later Writers, which here to treat of were too tedious, for unto the learned it were need∣lesse, and for the commonalty little would it availe them, therefore in breif will I shew you what I have observed touching the cure. First, if it be in a Plethorick, sanguine, and strong body, and hath pain in the head, great heat at the heart, thirstnesse, the pulse strong, and labouring, or beating strongly, and hath great and large veines appearing; these ought presently to be let bloud in that side where yee perceive the greif doth prof∣fer
it selfe to come forth, and not visibly appearing, tending to maturation: For then we may not draw bloud, but use all other meanes we can devise, in helping nature to expell it, neither may you draw bloud, if the party have a flix or lask (which is an evill sign) in the beginning of the disease, for by that meanes you shall hinder nature greatly, but onely give the party Cordials; neither may you stop the flix in the be∣ginning, but if it be extream, and that it stay not the second day, then must you give some purgation, which may leave an astringency behind it, as hereafter in the cure of the flix shall be shewed. For as Hyppocrates, in his first book and one and twentieth Aphorisme, doth admonish us, we must consider and mark, how nature doth incline her self, for that will teach us what we are to doe. Now if you perceive the botch or carbunkle to appear un∣derneath the chin about the throat, then presently draw bloud in both veines under the tongue, and immediately after that apply a cupping glasse, with scarification in one side of the neck next unto the sore, thereby to draw it from the throat, for fear least suddenly it choke him up, and then apply Chickens rumps, or Hens rumps to the botch, the feathers being first pluckt away from the rump, and a grain of Salt put into the tewell, and so hold the bare place to the greif untill the Chicken die, which will be within half an hour, and then apply another, and so continue in changing them so long as they doe die, and lastly apply a mollificative Cataplasme or plaister to the same place, as in the fift Chapter following is shewed, which is made with Ʋnguentum basillicon, and to the botch ap∣ply the Epithemation and Cataplasme in the seventh Chapter following. But if it be in the neck, he doth complain, then let him bloud in the Cephallica vein in the arm, of the same side where he complaineth. If in the groin or flanke he doth complain, then let him bloud in the foot on the same side, and open the vein called Maleola, or Saphena, the quantity must be according as the age and strength of the party requireth, but at most draw not above six or eight ounces: For Avicen willeth us, to preserve bloud as the treasure of nature.
But in a weak, spare, and cachochimious body (as Galen teacheth us) we may not draw bloud at all, for thereby should you greatly indanger the Patient, but help such by Cordials and sweat. And here you shall understand, that unlesse Phlebotomy be done at the first, that is, within six or eight houres at most, it will be too late to attempt it, neither may you doe it if the sore doe appear up in height tending to suppuration, for then should you hinder nature, which like a diligent workman, hath discharged and thrust forth that venomous matter, which o∣therwise would have killed us. And here touching Phlebotomy or bloud-letting, you must have this speciall care, that you draw not bloud on the opposite side, as if it be on the left side the sore appear, then draw not bloud on the right side; if it appear in the flanke, then draw not bloud in the arme, but in the foot, for other∣wise you shall draw that venomous matter from the ignoble unto the noble parts, and so kill the body. And although the party complain not more in the one side then the other, yet by the pulse shall you perceive on which side the venome lieth hidden, for on that side where nature is opprest, there shall you find the pulse more weak, feeble, and uneven, greatly differing from the other side. And here you shall understand, that in some it hath been seen, that nature of it self at the first, hath thrust out that ve∣nomous matter in some place of the body, with a botch ap∣pearing high, and tending to suppuration, or a carbunckle, or spots called purples. Now here if you draw bloud, you doe then greatly indanger the body; but in this case you must one∣ly give Cordials, and use all the meanes you can to bring it outward, either by maturation, or evaporation, as hereafter shall be shewed you. And here you shall further understand, that where the age, constitution, nor strength of the party will permit that Phle∣botomy be done, yet for the better help of nature you must apply Ventoses, with reasonable deep scarification, unto the next place adjoyning, where the party complaineth, thereby the more speedily to draw the venomous matter unto the su∣perficiall
parts, and there to apply the rumps of Chickens, as before is taught you, and so apply to the place some strong maturative, and atrractive plaister, or Cataplasme, as hereafter shall be shewed you. If the greif be in the head or throte, then apply Ventoses to the neck: If it be in the emunctuaries of the heart, then apply them to the shoulders: If in the e∣munctuaries of the liver, then apply them to the buttocks or thighs, now when this is done, either by Phlebetomy, or Ven∣toses, then within an hour or two at the most after it, you must give the sick some good Cordiall Medicine, which hath power to comfort the heart, resist the venomous matter, and also procure sweat, whereof out of the following you may make choice as you list. An excellent good Powder to expell the Plague, which also pro∣voketh sweat. ℞. Roots of Gentian, Bittanie, Petasitis, ana, ʒ. i. Roots of Tormentill, Dittander, ana, ʒ iii. Red Sanders ʒ ss. Fine Pearle of both sorts, ana, ℈. i. Fine Bolarmoniack prepared, fine Terra sigillata, ana, ʒ vi. Rindes of Citrons, red Corrall, Roots of Zedoiar, shaving of Ebony, bone of a Stags heart, ana, six∣teen graines: Fragments of the five pretious stones, ana, ℈. ss. Shaving of a Unicorns horn, Succini, ana, ℈. ss. Leaves of Gold and Silver, ana, one and half in number, Make all these in fine powder, every one severall by himself, and then mix them all together, and give thereof ʒ. i. or ℈. iiii. more or lesse as occasion requireth, either in Sorrell, Scabios, or Carduus benedictus water two or three ounces, whereunto you must adde a little Sirrup of Lemons, or sour Citrons, and give it warm, the Bolarmoniack must be pounded small, then washed in Scabios water, and so dryed. Another good Powder. ℞. Leaves of Dittander, called Dictami cretici, Roots of Tormentil, Bittanie, Pimpernell, Gentian, Zedoiar, ana, ʒ. i. Terra lemnia, Alloes Cicatrina, fine Myrrh, Rinds of sour Citrons,
ana ʒ i. Mastick, Saffron, ana, half a drachm. Bolarmoniack prepared as beforesaid, ʒ ii. All these must be made in fine pouder, and so mixt together, you may give two scruples, or one drachm thereof with any of the aforesaid waters. A good Opiat to expell venome, and provoke sweat. Conserve of the floures of Burrage, Bugloss, Violets, Bit∣tanie, ana, ℥. ii. Venus Triacle ℥. ii. Red Terra sigillata, Terra lemnia, Mithridate, ana ℥. i. Shaving of Ebonie, And Harts-horn, Orient Pearls, Roots of Tormentill, ana ʒ i. Shaving of Unicorns horn, Root of Angelica, ana half a drachm. Sirrup of the Juice of small Sorrell and Bugloss, ana, so much as shall suffice. Mix all these together in the form of an Opiat, then take of the same Opiat, one drachm and half. Scabios water, Balm water, ana ℥ ii. Dissolve the Opiat in the waters, and drink it warm, then walk a little upon it, and then goe to bed and sweat. Another excellent good means to expell the venom, and procure sweat. Take a great white Onyon, and pick out the coar or mid∣dle of him, then fill the hole with good Venus Triacle, or Andromachus Triacle, and Aqua vitae, then stop or cover the hole of the Onyon again, and rost him in the hot ashes un∣till he be soft, then strein it strongly through a cloth, and give it the sick to drinke, and the rest that remains, pound it small, and apply it to the sore, and sweat upon it. Now when he hath taken any of the aforesaid Cordials, if he chance to vomit it up again, then wash his mouth with Rosewater and Vinegar, and then give him more of the same again, which must be proportioned according to the quantitie vomited, for if all were vomited, then give so much more: (if lesse) then according to the quantity vomited, and if he vomit that also, then give him more, and so continue it
to the third or fourth time, if cause so require, but if at no time he doe retan it, then is there small hope of recovery; I have known divers, which have vomited their Cordials three or four times, and at last, giving the juyce of the O∣nyon as aforesaid, hath kept that, and sweat upon it, and so recover their health. Also Minardus Triacle, or Andomchus Triacle being ta∣ken two Scruples with one Scruple of Dioscodium, and dissol∣ved in two o three ounces of this water lloing, or Car∣duus benedictus, Sorell, and Scabios water, hath been found excellent good and available, both to procure sweat, and ex∣pell the venomous matter. An excellent good water against the Plague, and divers other diseases, which is to be made in May or June. Take Angelica, Dragons, Scabios, ana three handfuls. Worm∣wood, Sage, Salendine, Mugwort, Rue, Rosemary, Varvein, Endive, Mints, ana one handfull. Tormentill, Pimpernell, Agrimonie, Bittanie, ana two handfulls. St. Johns wort, Fetherfew, and Pionie, ana a little handfull. You must mix all these hearbs together, then bruise them in a stone morter grosly, then put them into a clean vessell of glasse or earth, and add thereto a pottle of White wine, or three quarts, a pint of Rose-water, and a pint of Vinegar: then mixe them well together, and presse down the Hearbs close together with your hands, then stop the pot close, and so let it stand to infuse two dayes and two nights, then distill it in a stillatorie, this water hath been found excellent good, both to preserve one from the Plague, being drunk three or four spoonfuls of it in the morning fasting, as also to expell the disease, being drunk with any of the Cordials aforesaid. CHAP. II. Sheweth what is to be done after taking of the Cordiall. NOw so soon as the partie hath taken his Cordiall, (if he be able) cause him to walke upon it in his chamber a
prettie while, then lay him into his naked bed, being first war∣med if it be in cold weather, and so procure him to sweat, but in any case have a speciall care to keep him from sleep all that day, because thereby the bloud and vitall spirits are drawn to the inward parts, and there doth hold in the venomous mat∣ter about the heart; but if the sore appear, or be perceived to present it self in any place neer the heart, then to defend the malignity thereof before he sweat, it were good to annoint the place betwixt the region of the heart and the sore with Triacle, or with this Unguent following. A good defensative Ʋnguent. Take Triacle, ℥. ss. Terra, lemnia, Red sanders, ara ʒ. i Mix them together with a little Rose-water and Vinegar in a morter, to the form of an Unguent, and so use it as aforesaid. And unto the sore place apyly chickens rumps, as before hath been told you, and then annoint the place grieved with Oyle of Lillies; and then Epithemate the heart with any one of these Epithemations following. Epithemation. Take the Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum, ℈ i. Triasan∣dalum, ʒ. vi. Ebeni, ʒ ii. Saffron, ℈. ss. Lettice seed, ʒ i. Wa∣ters of Roses, Bugloss, and Sorrel, ana ℥ vi. Vinegar ℥. ii. boil them altogether a little. Another. Take the waters of Roses, Balm, Bugloss, Carduus benedictus and white wine, ana ℥ iiii. Vinegar of Roses ℥ ii. Powder of red Roses, Cinnamon, Triasandalum, Diamargaritum, Frigidum, ana ʒ ss. Mithridatum, ℥ i. Triacle, ℥. ss. Boil them together a little, and being bloud warm, Epithemate the heart there∣with, which being done, then procure him to sweat, and after sweat, and the body dryed, then apply this quickly to the heart.
A Quilt for the Heart. Take the floures of Nenuphare, Burrage, Bugloss, ana, a little handfull: Floures of Balm, Rosemary, ana ʒ iii. Red sanders, Red corall, Lignum aloes, Rinde of a citron, ana, ʒ i. Seeds of Basil, Citrons, ana ʒ i. Leaves of Dittander, Ber∣ries of Juniper, ana ℈ i. Bone of a Stags heart, half a scru∣ple, Saffron, four grains. Mixe all these in grosse powder, and put them in a bag of crimson Taffetie, or Lincloth, and lay it to the heart, and there let it remain. All these things being done, then procure him to sweat, having a good fire in the chamber, and windowes close shut, and so let him sweat three or four houres more or lesse, or according as the strength of the sick body can endure, and then dry the body well with warm clothes, ta∣king great care that the sick catch not cold in the doing thereof, and then give him some of this Julep following, and apply the aforesaid quilt or bag to the heart. A cordiall Julep. Take Waters of Endive, Purslane, and Roses, ana, ℥. ii. Sorrell water, half a pint, Juyce of Pomgranats, and for lack thereof Vinegar, ℥ iiii. Camphire ʒ. iii, Sugar, one pound. Boil all these together in the form of a Julep, and give three or four spoonfuls thereof at a time. Another Julep. Take Sirrup of Ribes, Sorrell, Nenuphare, ana ℥. i. Juice of Limons, ℥ i. Sorrell water, ℥ viii. Mix all these together, and take two or three spoonfulls thereof oftentimes, which will both comfort the heart, and quench thirst. And if in the time of his sweat he be very thirstie, then may you give him to drink a Tysane made with water, clean Bar∣ly, and Licorice scrapt clean and bruised, boil them together, then strein it, and unto a quart of the liquor add three ounces of Sirrup of Limons, and give thereof at any time; small
beer or ale is also tolerable, or you may give a spoonfull of this Julep following at any time. A Julep to quench thirst. ℞. Sorrell-water, four ounces, Burrage-water, Scabios wa∣ter, of either one ounce, Sirrup of Lemons and sowre Citrons, of either one ounce. Mix all these together and so use it as occasion requireth at any time: and give oftentimes a cake of Manus Christi, made with Perls for him to eat. But if in the time of his sweat you see the sick to faint or swoun, then apply to his temples, and the region of the heart, this mixture following. ℞. Conserve of Roses, Burrage, Bugloss, Broom floures, of either one ounce: Mithridate, four ounces, Triacle, one ounce, Floures of Violets, Pellamountaine, Red Roses, of either one drachme, Roots of Ireos, one drachm, Musk, Sivet, of either eight graines. Mix all these together with a quantity of Rose-Vinegar in the form of an Opiat, this must be spread on Plaisters, and ap∣plied to the heart and temples, and to the soales of the feet ap∣ply this plaister following. Take of the aforesaid Opiat, ℥ ii. unto the which you must put so much more of an Onyon, which must have the middle part thereof taken out, and the hole filled with Mithridate, and Aqua vitae, and so rosted in the ashes, and then mix it with the Opiat, and apply it to both soales of the feet. Now when all this is done, and that one hour is past after his sweat and body dried as aforesaid: it were good you did give the sick some good comfortable broth, although he vomit it up againe, then let him rest two houres, and then offer him more, which you must do oftentimes, and but little at a time. And if after all this done he continue still weak and faint without any amendment, then give him another Cordiall, as ye did at the first, and so cause him to sweat again so long as his strength can well endure it, and after sweat give more of the Julep aforesaid, for by this meanes you shall oftentimes see
the sore, which did offer it self to come forth, will be clean dis∣cussed and consumed away: but if it do not by this means go away, ther use all the means you cn to bring it to suppuration, and then open it with some caustick or incision, as hereafter shall be shewed you at large. The next day after his sweat, you may tollerate him to sleep one hour or two in the forenoon, whereby to prevent pain of lightnesse of the head, which may chance through want there∣of: and if after his sleep the party be sick and faint, then im∣mediately give him some good Cordiall, according as the state of his body requireth, either in temperate or extream heat, as before is shewed: and in one hour after that give him some comfortable broth made with Veale, Mutton, Chicken, or such like, wherein some urrage, Bugloss, Pimpernell, and a little Hysop, with some Parsley roots, the inner pith being taken out, must be bolled, whereof he must take a little at a time, three or four times a day, and betwixt times in taking of his broth, give him three or four spoonfulls of this Julep following, which doth resist venenosity from the heart, and also quench thirst. A Julip to quench thirst and resist Venenosity. ℞. Water of Scabios, Burrage, Sorrell, ana ℥. ii. Sirrup of Lemons, sowre Citrons, and the juice of Sorrell, of either one ounce. Mix all these together, and give thereof as cause requireth. Then at night he may sleep three or four houres more, and the next day, being the third or fourth day of his accubet, you may purge him with one of the purgations here following, but in any case you must take heed that you do not purge with any strong or Scammoniate medicine, because it may cause an extream flux, which will be most dangerous, because it will o∣vermuch weaken the body, and hinder concoction, for most commonly in this disease the body of it self is subject to fluxes.
A good Purgation in a strong body. ℞. Rad. Cichoriae, ʒ. iiii. Rad. Petasitis, ʒ. ss. Fol. Scabiosae, Card. Benedicus Pimpinllae, Acetosae, ana M. i. Florm Cord. P. i. Prunorm dumma no. x. Sem Coriandri, ʒ ss. Aquae font. ℥. ix. Boyle them untill a third part be consumed, then strain it. ℞. Decoct. col. ℥. iiii. Fol. Senna, ʒ. iii. Rhab. elect. ʒ. iiii. Spica. G. iii. Infuse them together twelve hours, then strain it strongly, and add thereto these things. Sir. de Cichoriae, cum Rhab. ʒ vi. Oxisacchari, Simp. ʒ. ii. Mix them altogether, and drink it in the morning refraing from meat, drink, and sleep three houres after, and then eat some good broth. Another in a plethorick and full body. ℞. Fol. Scabiosae, Buglosae, Card. B. ana M. i. Florum Cord. P. i. Rad. Tormentillae. ʒ. iii. Rad. Fenic. licho. ana ʒ. iiii. Pas∣sularum enucleat, ℥. i. Pruncrum dammas. no. vi. Sem anis. Cori∣andri, Oxialidis, ana ℥. i. Sennae, Polipod. q. ana ℥. i. Boyle all these in a sufficient quantity of water untill half the water be consumed, then strain it, and keep it. ℞. Rhab. elect. ʒ. ii. Agarici, tros. ʒ. i. Croci. ℥. ss. Aquarum scabiosae, Borraginis, Card. B. ana ʒ. iiii. Infuse these together twelve hours in a warm place, then strain them strongly, and add thereto Sir. ros. lax. Mannae. Calabriae ana ℥. i. Decoct. col. ℥. ii. vel ℥. iii. Mix all these together, and take it as the other before. A good purgation for a weak body. ℞. Fol. sennae, ʒ. iii. Rhab. elect, ʒ. i. Sem. anis. ʒ ss. Sche∣nanthi, ℥. ss. Aquae Acetosae, ℥. v. Boyle them a little, then take it from the fire, and let them stand infused together twelve houres, then strain it out strong∣ly,
and add thereto Sir. ros. lax. ℥. i. and then drink it as the other before. Another gentle purgation. ℞. Aquarum scabiosae, Card. B. Aquae ad pestem, ana ℥. i. Rhab elect, ʒ. ii. ss. Cinamomi, ʒ. ss. Infuse them together twelve hours, and strain them strongly; then add to the straining Sir. ros. lax. ℥. i. Sir. de limonibus, four ounces. Mix them together, and so drink it as the other before, you may either add or diminish of the Rubarb unto any of these potions as you list. Now when you see the purgation hath done working, then give the sick some Cordiall thing, as heareafter followeth, which he must also take the next morning following. A good Cordiall to be taken after Purging. ℞. Conserva Burrag, Bugloss, Mali-Citri, ana ʒ. iiii. Con∣fect. Alkermis ʒ. i. Boli Veri, ʒ. ss. Specierum diarhod abb. ℈. ii. Diamarga. frigid. ʒ. i. Manus Christi perlati, ℥. i. Sir. de Le∣mon, ʒ iiii. Mix all these together, and give the sick thereof so much as a chestnut at a time, you must oftentimes eat thereof if the sick be in no great heat. Another good Cordiall to be given where great heat is. ℞. Conservae Borag, ʒ iiii. Conservae fol. acetosae, ℥ i. Bolarm. veri, ʒ. i. Manus Christi cum perlis, ℥. i. Sir. de Lemonibus, q. v. misce. You must oftentimes give of this where great heat is, so much as three beanes at a time. A good Cordiall potion. ℞. Aquarum buglossae, Acetosae, ana ℥. i. Pul. diamarga. frig.
ʒ. ss. Confctio alkrmis, G. ii. Sir. de accto, Citri, vel de Lemon. ℥. i. misce. All this you may take after purging as aforesaid, at any time. And here you must understand, that if it be in a plethorick body full of ill humors, it were good that you purge him again the next day. CHAP. III. Sheweth what symptoms ften chance, and how to help them. FOr that in this contagious disease there are divers dange∣rous symptoms which do oftentimes chance, I will here shew you good meanes how to help the same. For lightnesse of the head through want of sleep. ℞. Hordei mndi. P. i. Amigd. dul. depilatum ℥. i. ss. Sem. iiii. Frigid. ma. mund. ana ℈. i. Aqua font. q. 5. fiat decoctio. Decoct. col. l. i. Sir. de Lemonibus, de Papa, ana ℥. i. ss. Sacchari per∣lati, ℥. i. Boyl them together a little, and then keep it to your use, you must often times give two or three spoonfulls thereof to drink, and anniont his temples with this ointment. Oyntment to provoke sleep. ℞. Vnguent popillieris, ʒ. iiii. Ʋnguent. Alabastrini, Ol. Ne∣nuphariae misce, ana. ʒ ii. This oyntment is not onely good to provoke sleep but will also ease the pain of the head, if the place grieved be annoint∣ed therewith. For raveing and raging. If the party rave, then give him one scruple of the powder of Harts-horn burnt, with half an ounce of the sirrup of Vio∣lets and Lemons, and apply this sacculus following to the head.
A good Sacculus for raving and raging. ℞. Florum Nenupharis, P i. Cort. Pap. ʒ. ii. Santali albi, Rub. Citri, ana. ʒ. i. Florum ros. rub, P. i. Florum Viol. P. ss. Florum camomil. Betonicae, ana ʒ. i. Shread them all small, then pound them grossy, and quilt them in a bagg, and apply it to the head, and it will help you Aphtham, to help it. In this contagious disease, there doth chance an ulceration of the mouth, which is called Aphtham, it cometh by means of the great interior heat which the sick is oppressed with in the time of his sicknesse, which if it be not well looked un∣to in time, it will greatly endanger the body, for Remedy whereof use this Gargarism. A good Gargarism for the mouth. ℞. Clean barley, one handfull, wilde Daysie leaves, Plan∣aine leaves, Strawberry leaves, Violet leaves, of either one handfull: Purslane seed, one scruple, Quinse seed, one scruple and half. Licorice bruised, four drachms. Boyle all these in a sufficient quantity of water untill the wa∣ter be half consumed, then strain it, and take one pint and half thereof, and add thereto Sirrup of Roses by infusion, and sir∣rup of dried roses of either four drachms: Diamoron two ounces. Mix these together, and gargarize and wash the mouth therewith oftentimes being warm, and it helpeth. Vomiting extreamly, how to help it. If it come in the beginning of the disease, as most common∣ly it doth, there is no better means to stay it, then by giving of Cordials and by sweating, by which meanes that venomous
matter which is the cause thereof is expelled, and breathed out, but if after Cordials given, and sweat, it doth not stay, it is a very ill and dangerous signe: yet what means I have used to stay the same, I will here shew you. A good bag for the stomack. ℞. Dried leaves of Mints, Elder, Origanie, Wormwood, Calamint, Mugwort, Thime, Balme, Pellemountaine, tops of Dill, of either a little handfull: Seeds of Cardus Bendictus, Fennell, Annis, of either four drachms: Roots of Ciperus, Calamus aromaticus, of either four drachms: Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, of either half a drachm. Make all these in gross powder, then put it into a linnen bag, which must be made so broad and long, as will cover the stomack: then take Rose-water and strong Vinegar, of either ten spoonfulls, wherein do you dissolve one ounce of Mithri∣date, then must you first wet the said bag in two parts of clean water and a third part of White or Claret-wine, and let him soak therein a little while, the liquor being first warmed on a Chafer and coales, and then wet him in the Rose-water and and Vinegar being warm, and so apply it to the stomack, and when he waxeth cold, warm him therein againe, and let him remain half an hour in all, and then take him away, and dry the stomack with a warm cloth, and then annoint it with this ointment following. ℞. Chymicall oyles of Rosemary, Sage, of either one drachm: Vinegar, Mithridate, of either one drachm. Mix all these together, and so use it, and if the party be costive, then were it good to give him a glister, wherein dis∣solve two drachms of Mithridate, it is also good to apply Ventoses unto the buttocks and thighes. Yoxe, or yexing, to stay it. ℞. Dill seed, two scruples and half: White Poppy seed, Purslane seed, of either one scruple and a half. Bruise them a little, then knit them in a fine linnen cloth, and
let it soak in the drink which he useth, and when you give him drink, wring out the bag therein, and let him drink it, and that will stay it, also the order aforesaid to help vomiting, is good to stay the yoxe, or yexing, but if neither of them prevaile, then will the ex hardly escape death. Flix, how to stop it. You must first give the patient this purpation following, which doth not onely purge away those sline humors which is the cause thereof, but doth also leave an astingencie behind it. ℞. Rhab. elect. ʒ iii. Cinamoni, ℈ ii. Aquarum Endiviae, Bor∣raginis, ana ℥. ii. Infuse them together twelve houres, then strain it out strong∣ly, and add thereto one ounce of Sirrup of roses laxative, and so drink it warm, refraining from meat, and drink, and sleep three houres after it: and at night when it hath done working, give this confection following. ℞. Conserve ros. ʒ. iiii. Dioscordit, ℈. i. ss. Pul. Diatragag. frigid. ℈. i, Dialkerms, G. x. Sir. de Lemon. ʒ. ii. misce. When you have given this confection, then doe you Epi∣themate the region of the heart with this Epithemative fol∣lowing, Epithemation for the heart. ℞. Aquatrum Buglossae, Burrag, Rosarum, Oxialidis, ana ℥. iiii. Throchiscorum de camphera, ℈. i. Pul. diamargarit. frigid. ʒ. i. Aceti alb. ℥. i. Offa de corde cervi, ℈. ss. Santal. Rub. Coral. Rub. misce. ana ℈. i. With this you must Epithemate the Region of the heart warm a quarter of an hour, and if by this meanes it stay not, then the next day give some of this confection following, which I have found excellent good for the stopping of any flix whatsoever. ℞. Conserve ros. siccae. ℥. i. Pul. Rhab. troschiscat ℥. i. Terrae lemniae ʒ. ss. Lap. Hemattitis, Sang. Draco. Bolarmoni. ana ʒ. ii. Mithridatii, misce, ʒ. i.
You must every morning and evening give two drachms hereof, and drink some Plantaine water after it. Now here you must understand, that if the flix come in the beginning of the sicknesse, and that no botch, Carbunkle, not spots appear in the body, then in any case you may not goe about to stop it, but suffer nature to discharge it selfe, and onely help nature with Cordials, and Epithemations applyed to the heart, but if by the continuance thereof, the Patient grow very weak and faint therewith, then is it to be repressed, as before is shewed, but it must be the third day before you attempt to doe it. But if this flix come when the botch or Carbunkle doth appear, and tending to maturation, then is it very dangerous, for by that meanes the venomous matter is drawn back again into the principall parts, and so killeth the Patient. CHAP. IIII. Sheweth the generall cure of a botch when he appeares outwardly. FIrst, give Cordials, and use the defensive before taught you in the second Chapter, thereby to keep it from the heart, and then bring it to maturation as followeth. A good Maturative. Take a great Onyon and roast him in the ashes, then pound him with some powder of white Mustard-seed, and for lack thereof some Triacle, and pound them together, and so apply it to the greif warm, and renue it twice a day, which within three or four dayes at most will bring it to suppuration. Another. Take white Lilly roots, Enulacompane roots, Scabios, and Onyons, of either two ounces. Roast all these together in a Cole leafe, or a wet paper, then pound them with some sweet Butter, and a little Venice Triacle, whereunto doe you adde some Galbanum, and Ammo∣niacum
dissolved in Vinegar, and strained from the fesses and dregs, and so mix them altogether, and apply it, renewing it twice a day. Another, where no inflammation is. Take Ʋnguentum basilicon ℥. iiii. soure Leaven ℥. ii. Oil of Liies, sweet butter, ana. ʒ. iiii. Triacle ʒ. i. ss. yolks of two Eggs. Mix them together, and so apply it, and when it is come to suppuration, then open it in the lowest part, either with a po∣tentiall Caustick, or by inscition, but the Caustick is best, and when you have opened it, if no matter flow out, then apply the rumps of Chickens to the sore, as before hath been shewed: af∣ter that put into the wound a digestive as followeth. A Digestive, Take the yolk of an Egge, clear Turpentine ʒ. iiii. clarified Honey ʒ. ii. Mithridate, or Triacle ʒ. ss. Mix all these together, and use it in the wound untill it be well digested, which you may perceive by the great quantity of white and thick matter that will flow out of it, and upon the fore lay this Cataplasme untill it be digested. A digestive Cataplasme. ℞. Fat Figs, and Raisins the stones pickt out, ana. ℥ ii. Sal nitrum ʒ. iv. four Leaven ℥. iii. Honey ℥. i. oil of Cammomill ℥. i. ss. You must shread and pound the Figs and Raisins very small, then commix it with the rest in a morter, in form of a pultis, and use it. And when it is digested, then you must mundifie it with a mundificative, to which purpose Ʋnguentum virid, or else Apo∣stolorum mixt with Ʋngnentum hasilicon will serve, and when it is clean mundified, then to mearnate and heal it up, doe you onely annoint or strike it over with a feather wet in Arceus linament, which must be molten in a saucer, and over all lay a plaister of Diaculum, or a plaister of Kellebackeron, which is excellent
good in all Imposthumes and tumouts, and in this order doe you proceed, untill the greif be whole. CHAP. V. Sheweth how to bring the botch out, that lieth deep within the body or flesh. FIrst you must consider, that oftentimes the botch, or carbun∣kle doth offer it selfe to come forth in some place of the body, and yet no apparant sign thereof, but lieth deep hidden within, because nature is not of sufficient strength to thrust it forth; which is easily perceived by the great and almost intolerable pain, that by some is felt in the place where nature intends to expell it, which in the most part of people, by blond-letting, Cordials, and sweat, is clean taken away and evacuated; but if after all this is done it goe not away, then unto these you must use all the meanes you can to bring it to the outward parts. First, by giving to the sick oftentimes some Cordiall Electuary to keep it from the heart, then (if no great pain be in the outward part) you must apply a cupping-glasse with scarification, directly against the place where the greif is felt, and let it remain thereon a quar∣ter or halfe an hour, then take it away, and presently apply the rumps of Chickens, Hens, or Pigeons to the place (as before hath been shewed) that being done, then lay some attractive and maturative plaister or Cataplasme to the place, which here fol∣lowing is shewed, and every sixth hour you must apply the cup∣ping-glass, as also the rest, untill such time as you have brought the venomous matter to the outward parts, there to be visibly seen, or at least, by feeling to be perceived, which commonly is effected at the second time, then use no more cupping, but onely apply a maturative to the place. A good Maturative Cataplasme. ℞. Rad. simphyti, ma. Liliorum, Ceparum, Allium, ana, ℥. i. Fol. Oxialidis M. i. You must pound all these together a little, then wrap them in a cole leafe, and so roast them in the hot embers, then pound them
in a morter, whereunto adde Ol. liliorum, Auxungiaeporc. ana. ℥. i. Fermentiacris ʒ. vi. Mithridatii ʒ. i. Mix them altogether in form of a Pultus, and so apply it warm, and renue it twise a day. Another ℞. Galbani, Apopanacis, Ammoniaci, ana. ʒ. iiii. Dissolve these in Vinegar if the botch be hot and inflamed (but if it be not) then dissolve them in Aqua vitae, and being dissolved, then strain it from the dregs, and adde thereto Ʋnguent. basillici, Mithridat. Fomenti acris, ana, ℥ iiii. Mix all these together, and apply it. Another which is sooner made. Take a great Onyon, make a hole in the middle of him, then fill the place with Mithridate or Triacle, and some leaves of Rue, then roast him in the hot embers, and when it is soft, then pound it with some Barrowes greace, and apply it to the sore, and that will ripen it in short time, then open and cure it as in the Chapter before, But if the pain and inflammation in the place be so great, that the party cannot indure cupping glasses to be used, then must you apply a Vesicatory to the place, in the lowest part of the greife. A Vesicatory. Take Cantharides bruised in grosse powder ʒ. ss. soure Leaven ʒ. ii. mix them together in a morter with a little Vinegar, and apply it, which within twelve houres will raise a blister, which you must open, and then lay an svie or Cole leafe to the place, and upon all apply any of the Cataplasmes aforesaid, and dresse it twice a day, and once a day at least, give the Patient some Cor∣diall, and when it is come to a softnesse, and that you perceive it is imposthumated, then open it, and so proceed to the cure, as be∣fore is shewed.
When the botch will not come to Maturation, but continneth al∣wayes hard. Sometime it is seen that the botch, although it appear out∣wardly, yet will it not come to maturation, which commonly is accomplished within three or four dayes, but will resist whatso∣ever you apply to it, and remain and continue alwayes hard; now here you must presently open it, either with a Caustick or by insci∣tion, for fear least it strike in again or at least grow to gangrena, but before you open it, you must Epithmate the greif with this Epi∣themation following, and every morning and evening give the sick some Cordiall, and betwixt the sore and the heart annoint it with the defensive before in the second Chapter. An Epithemation. Take leaves of Mallowes, Violets, Cammomill, ana, M. i. Floures of Dill, Mellilot, ana. ℥. i. Holle hock roots ℥. iiii. Lin∣seed ℥. ii. Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water untill halfe the water be consumed, and then wet some Wooll or Flax therein, being first well beaten and pickt clean, and lay it upon the sore warm, and as it cooleth, doe you take it away, and lay on another warm stewse, and so continue it half an hour together, and then open it as beforesaid, and immediately apply to the wound Chickens or Hens, as before in the first Chapter hath been shwed you: and if you cannot get Chickens nor Hens, then a Whelpe or a Pigeon cloven asunder by the back, and so applyed warm will suffice, which must be renued so oftentimes as cause requi∣rech, and when that is done, then apply unto the wound a dige∣stive, made as followeth. A Digestive. Take Turpentine ℥. ss. Honey ʒ. ii. Mithridate, or Triacle ʒ. ss. the yolk of a new laid Egge. Mix all these together and use it in the wound, and upon all lay
the digestive Cataplasme beforesaid, which is made of Figs, or a plaister of Kellebackeron, or of Diaculum magnum, and dresse it twice a day, and every dressing Epithemate the greif as before∣said, when it is digested, then mundifie, incarnate, and sigillate it, as in the Chapter before is shewed you. CHAP. VI. Sheweth what is to be done when the botch strikes in again. SOmetimes you shall see the sore will appear outwardly, and suddenly vanish away again, which is a very dangerous and deadly sign; now when this doth chance, then presently give som good Cordiall that hath power to expell the venome, as in the first Chapter of this Treatise you may find choyce of, and immediately apply this Pultus to both the soales of his feet, which must be made with Culver-dung, and Vinegar mixt together, and spread on a Cole leafe, and so applyed; you must give the Cor∣diall every third hour, and immediately after the first giving of the Cordiall, you must Epithemate the heart with the Epithema∣tion before expressed, in the second Chapter of this Treatise; and when that is done, then cause the sick to sweat, if you may, and after his sweat, and the body well dried, then give him an easie Glister, the next day purge him with some gentle purgation, as before is shewed you. And if by these meanes you prevail not, then small hope of life is to be expected; yet Petrus Forestus willeth you, first to give a Glister, and then within two houres after it, to draw some bloud in the same side where the greif is, and to annoint the place greived with Ʋnguentum resumptivum, mixt with some Oil of Cammomill, and then two houres after it to give a Cordiall, and procure sweat upon it, and so following the rest of the orders aforesaid, did recover divers. CHAP. VII. Sheweth how to draw a botch from one place to another, and so to discusse him without breaking. FIrst you must apply a cupping glasse next adjoyning to the lower part of the sore, on that side where you would have him to be
brought, and next unto that glasse apply another, so neer the first as you can, and if that be not so farre as you would have the sore to be brought, then apply the third glasse, and let them all remain a quarter of an hour, then take away the last glasse, but suffer the first to remain, then presently apply him again, and let it remain a quarter of an hour more, and doe so three or four times toge∣ther, but alwayes suffer the first glasse next the sore for to remain; now when you have thus done, then take all the glasses away, and presently apply a Vesicatory to the place where the last and utter∣most glasse did stand, suffering it to remain there twelve houres, then open the blister, and lay an Ivy or Cole leafe to the place, and upon all lay a plaister of Kellebackeron, or Diaculum magnum, and dresse it twice a day, the longer you keep it run∣ning the better it will be, and at length heal it up as other Ulcers are cured. Now so soon as you have applyed the Vesicatory, you must presently epithemate the botch with this Epithemation. Epithemation. Take Mallowes, Violets, Cammomill, Dill, and Mellilot, ana, M. i. Hollehock roots three ounces, Lin-seed one ounce and a half. Boile all these in a sufficient quantity of water untill halfe the water be consumed, in this decoction you must wet some un∣washed Wooll or Flax made clean and well beaten, then being wrung out a little, apply it warm to the place, and renue it every hour, during the time that the Vesicatory is in working, and when you have opened the blister that is made thereby, then onely ap∣ply this Cataplasme to the botch it self. Take Mallowes, Violets and Cammomill floures, of either one handfull. Boil them in water untill they be tender, then cut them very small with a shreading knife, and add thereto Oil of Cammomill and Lillies, of either two ounces: Barrowes mort two ounces, Wax one ounce. Moll the Wax in the Oiles, and then put it to the Heabs, and boile them together a little, then take it from the fire, and adde thereto Barly and Bean flower, a handfull of either of them, and so
mix them altogether, and apply it to the greif, renuing it twice a day, which within three or four dayes will resolve and discusse the botch; but if it doe it not by that time, then use all the meanes you can to bring it to suppuration, as before is sufficiently shewed you. CHAP. VIII. Sheweth how to know a Carbunkle or blain, as also the cure of the same. THe Carbunkle or blain doth first begin with a little Pustula or wheal, and sometime with divers Pustulaes or wheales to∣gether, with a great burning and pricking pain in the place, which Pustulaes are like a scalding bladder, seeming to be full of water or matter, yet when you open it, little or nothing will come out of it, and when they are broken, will grow to a hard crust or scarre, as if it had been burnt with a hot Iron or Caustick, with a great ponderosity or heavinesse in the place. In some it comes in the beginning, without any Pustula at all to be perceived, but with a hard black crust or a scarre; sometimes it lyeth hidden in the inward parts without any outward appearance at all, as if it be in the lungs, then there is a difficulty of breathing, with a Cough and foul spitting. If it be in the Liver or Spleen, then the party feeleth a great pain and pricking in the same side; if in the Kidneyes or Bladder it doth chance, then is there suppression or stopping of the Urine, or great pain in the making of water; if it be in the Brain, then a delirium followeth, but howsoever it chance to come, the party infected there with hath a Fever, with other accidents, as before in the 13. Chapter of the first Treatise is declared; if it begin with a green, black, or blew colour, or of divers colours like the Rain∣bow, then is it a deadly signe, and so is it, if once it appear and then suddenly vanish away; but if it be red or yellowish, so it be not in any of the principall parts, or emunctuaries of the body, as the heart, stomack, armpit, flanke, jawes, or throat, then it is laudable, otherwise in any of these places very desperate and dangerous to be cured, but wheresoever it doth chance, unlesse it may be brought to suppuration, it is deadly.
The cure of the Carbunkle. First, the Universall means must not be neglected, as bloud∣letting, cordials, epithemations, sweet and gentle evacuation by purging, as the time and cause requireth, which before in the beginning of this Treatise hath been shewed at large, and the same order which is used for the cure of a Botch, is also to be kept in the cure of a Carbunkle, and to rectifie the ayre of the house by strewing it with vine and willow leaves, red Roses and such like, as also to sprinkle the floor with Rose water and Vinegar, and cause the sick oftentimes to smell unto a cloth wet in Rosewater and Vinegar is ve∣ry good: these things being done, then use all the means you can to bring it to Suppuration, for which purpose this Cata∣plasm following is very good. A Maturative Cataplasm. Take Fat Figs ℥ iiii. Mustard seed, ℥ i. ss. Pound the seed small by it self, the Figs must first be cut very small, and then pounded likewise, and then adde thereto so much Oyle of Lillies as will suffice to make it in the form of a stifie Pultis, and apply it warm, renuing it twice a day, this must be con∣tinued untill the scar begin to grow loose and moveable, and then apply this following to remove the scar. Take unsalted butter, the yolk of an Egg, and wheat flour mix them together, and apply it untill the scar doe fall away, then doe you mundifie it with this mundificative. Mundificative annodine. Take clear Turpentine, ℥ iiii. Sirrup of red Roses, ℥ i. Honie of Roses, ʒ iiii. Boil them altogether a little, then take it from the fire, and add thereto Barlie and wheat flr of each ʒ. vi. the yolk of a new laid Egg, and mi them al∣together, and apply it three dayes, and then use this follow∣ing. Another Mundificative. Take clear Turpentine, ℥ iii. Honie of Roses, ℥ ii. Juice
of Smallege, ℥ ii. Barlie flowre, ℥ i. ss. Boil them altogether saving the Barlie, untill the Juice be consumed, then take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold, adde the Barlie thereto, and mixe them together, and use thereof to the grief untill it be clean mundified, and then incarnate it with Ʋnguentum Basilicon, and lastly sigillate it with Ʋnguentum de cerusa decocted. Sometime you shall find a little pustule to appear, without any elevation of the parts adjoyning, or outward hardnesse. Now here to bring it outwardly you must apply this Cata∣plasm. Take Lillie roots, Onyons, and sour Leaven, of either one ounce. Boil them in water untill the water be consumed, then bruise them in a morter, and add thereto Mustard seed, Culver-dung, White Sope, ana ʒ. i. ss. Snails without shels, vi. in number. Mithridate, Triacle, ana, half a drachm, Yolks of four Eggs. Mix all these together, and apply it warm to the grief, re∣nuing it thrice a day, this order must be continued untill you see the place elevated tending to suppuration, then apply a Maturative, and so proceed as next before this is shewed you, and during the whole time of the cure, I hold it better to use rather Poultises then plaisters, because they do not so much stop the Pores, but give more scope for the venemous matter to breath out. When the Carbuncle doth come with great pain and inflamma∣tion, how to help it. You must first bath and soke the place well with this bag following, and then presently apply the Cataplasm ensuing, for by this means you shall not onely ease the pain and abate the Inflammation and Fever, but also prevent the danger of Gangrena which may chance thereby. The Bag. Take Mallowes, Violets, Plantain, Liblong, ana one hand∣full. Fat Figs, ℥ i. Hollihock roots, Lillie roots, ana ℥. i. Lin-seed, ℥ i.
You must shred the hearbs grosly, and cut the Figgs and roots small, then bruise them in a morter, and mingle them al∣together, then put them into two little bags of linnen cloth, and boil them in a sufficient quantitie of clean water, untill the water be half consumed, then take out one of the baggs, and wring out the water a little, and apply it to the grief warm, and when it is cold, take it away, and lay on the o∣ther, and doe so half an hour together every dressing, which must be twice a day at least. The Cataplasm. Take Mallows, Violets, Sorrell, Liblong, ana two handfuls, Henbane, a little handfull. Wrap them all in a ball together, and roast them in the ashes, then bruise them in a morter, and adde thereto, Mel rosarum, ℥ iiii. Triacle, ʒ i.ss. Saffron in pouder, half a drachm, Yolks of five Eggs. Mix them together with the rest, adding some Barly flower thereto to thicken it, and apply it warm, renuing it alwaies before it grow dry and stiffe, and every dressing you must Epithemate the grief first with the baggs aforesaid, and this order must be continued untill the pain and Inflammation be gone, then to bring it unto Suppuration, if you adde to the foresaid Cataplasm some oyle of Lillies, and sweet Butter unsalted, it will be very good, or you may make this Cata∣plasm following. Take Soot of the chimney, ℥. iii. Bay salt, ℥ i. ss. Yolks of two or three Eggs. Mix all these together in a morter, and apply it to the grief warm, which must be alwaies renewed and changed before it grow dry and stiffe, this order must be continued untill the sore come to suppuration, then to remove the scar, and finish the cure, doe you follow the order prescribed in the beginning of this Chapter. There are other dangerous accidents which doe sometimes chance in the botch or Carbuncle, which here to treat of would little avail the unexpert people, because they know not the means how to execute the same, but if any such
thing chance, then doe I wish you to seek the help of some learned Physitian, or expert Chirurgion, whose counsell I doe wish you to follow. The End of the Second Treatise. A Short Treatise of the Small Pox, shewing the Means how for to govern and cure those which are infected therewith. CHAP. I. Sheweth what the Small Pox and Measels are, and whereof it proceedeth. FOr that oftentimes those that are infected with the Plague, are in the end of the disease sometime troubled with the small Pox or Measels, as also by good observation it hath been seen, that they are fore-runners or warnings of the plague to come, as Salius and divers other writers doe testifie: I have thought it good and as a matter pertinent to my for∣mer Treatise, to shew the aids and helps which are required for the same. I need not greatly to stand upon the description of this disease, because it is a thing well known unto most people, pro∣ceeding of adusted bloud mixt with flegm, as Avicen witnes∣seth, which according to both ancient and latter Writers doth alwaies begin with a Fever, then shortly after there ariseth small Pustulaes upon the skin throughout all the body, which doe not suddenly come forth, but by intermission, in some more or lesse, according to the state and qualitie of the bodie in∣fected therewith: for in some there ariseth many little Pustulaes with elevation of the skin, which in one day doe increase and grow bigger, and after have a thick matter growing in them, which the Greeks call Exanthemata or Exthymata: and after the Latines Variola, in our English tongue the small Pox,
and here some Writers doe make a difference betwixt vari∣ola and exanthemata; for say they, that is called variola when many of those Pustules doe suddenly run into a clear bladder, as if it had been scalled, but the other doth not so, yet they are both one in the cure, they doe most commonly appear the fourth day, or before the eight day, as Avicen witnesseth. What the Measels or Males are. Avicen saith, That the Measels or Males is that which first cometh with a great swelling in the flesh, with many little Pim∣ples which are not to be seen, but onely by feeling with the hand are to be perceived, they have little elevation of the skin, neither doe they grow to maturation, or end with ul∣ceration as the Pox doth, neither doe they assault the eyes, or leave any deformity behind them as the Pox doth, neither are they so swift in coming forth, but doe grow more slowly, they require the same cure which the Pox have, they proceed of cholerick and melancholie bloud. The cause of the Pox and Measels. The primitive cause as Valetius saith, is by alteration of the aire, in drawing some putrified and corrupt quality unto it, which doth cause an ebullition of our bloud. The cause antecedent is repletion of meats, which do easily corrupt in the stomack, as when we eat milk and fish toge∣ther at one time, or by neglecting to draw bloud, in such as have accustomed to doe it every year, whereby the bloud doth abound. The conjunct cause is the menstruall bloud, which from the beginning in our mothers wombs wee received, the which mixing it self with the rest of our bloud, doth cause an Ebul∣lition of the whole. The efficient cause is, nature or naturall heat, which by that menstruall matter mixing it self with the rest of our bloud, doth cause a continuall vexing and disquieting thereof, where∣by an unnaturall heat is increased in all the body, causing an Ebullition of bloud, by the which this filthy menstrual mat∣ter
is seperated from our natural bloud, and the nature being of∣fended and overwhelmed therewith, doth thrust it to the out∣ward pores of the skin as the excrements of bloud, which mat∣ter if it be hot and slimie, then it produceth the Pox, but if dry and subtil, then the Measels or Males. But Mercurialis an excellent writer in Physick, in his first Book, de morbis puero∣rum, cap. 2. agreeing with Fernelius in his Book De abdit is rerum causis, c. 12. doth hold opinion, that the immediate cause of this disease doth not proceed of menstrual bloud, but of some secret and unknown corruption, or defiled quality of the aire, causing an Ebullition of bloud, which is also verified by Valetius, and now doth reckon it to be one of the hereditable diseases, be∣cause few or none doe escape it, but that either in their youth, ripe age, or old age, they are infected therewith. The contention hereabout is great, and mighty reasons are op∣pugned on both sides, therefore I will leave the judgement thereof unto the better learned to define; but mine opinion is, That now it proceedeth of the Excrements of all the four humours in our bodies, which striving with the purest, doth cause a supernatural heat and ebullition of our bloud, al∣waies beginning with a Fever in the most part, and may well be reckoned in the number of those diseases which are cal∣led Epidemia: as Fracastorius in his first Book, De morbis contag. cap. 13. witnesseth this disease is very contagious and infectious, as experience teacheth us: There are two speciall causes why this disease is infectious: The first is, be cause it pro∣ceedeth by ebullition of bloud, whose vapour being entred into another bodie, doth soon defile and infect the same, the second reason is, because it is a disease hereditable; for we see when one is infected therewith, that so many as come neer him, (especially those which are allyed in the same bloud) doe assuredly for the most part, receive the infection also. CHAP. II. Sheweth to know the signs when one is infected, as also the good and ill signs in the disease. THe signs when one is infected are these, first he is taken with a hot Fever, and sometime with a Delirium, great
pain in the back, furring and stopping of the nose, beating of the heart, hoarsnesse, redness of the eyes, and full of tears with heavinesse and pain in the head, great beating in the fore∣head and temples, heaviness and pricking in all the body, dry∣ness in the mouth, the face very red, pain in the throat and breast, difficulty in breathing, and shaking of the hands and feet with spitting thick matter. When they doe soon or in short time appear, and that in their coming out they doe look red, and that after they are come forth they doe look white, and speedily grow to matu∣ration, that he draweth his breath easily, and doth find him∣self eased of his pain, and that his Fever doth leave him, these are good and laudable signes of recovery. When the Pox lye hidden within and not appearing out∣wardly, or if after they are come forth they doe suddenly strike in again and vanish away, or that they doe look of a black, blewish, and green colour, with a difficultie and strait∣nesse of drawing breath, and that he doe often swoun, if the sick have a flix or lask, when the Pox were found double, that is, one growing within another, or when they run together in blisters like scalding bladders, and then on the sudden do sink down and grow dry with a hard black sear or crust, as if it had been burnt with a hot iron, all these are ill signs. Avicen saith, there are two speciall causes which produce death unto those that have this disease: either for that they are choaked with great Inflammation and swelling in the throat called Angina, or having a flix or lask which doth so weaken and overthrow the vitall spirits, that thereby the disease is increased, and so death followeth. How to know of what humours this disease cometh. If it come of bloud, then they appear red, with generall pain, and great heat in all the body. If they come of choler, then will they appear of a yellowish red and clear colour, with a pricking pain in all the bodie. If they come of flegm, then will they appear of a whitish colour and scaly, or with scales.
If they come of melancholie, then will they appear black∣ish with a pricking pain. CHAP. III. Sheweth the meanes to cure the Pox or Measels. THere are two speciall meanes required for curing this dis∣ease, the first is to help nature to expell the same from the interior and principall parts unto the exterior: the second is to preserve both the interior and exterior parts, that they may not be hurt thereby. For the first intention, if the age and strength of the sick will permit, and that the Pox or Measels appear not, it were then good in the first, second, or third day to draw bloud out of the Basilica veine in the right arme, if he be not under the age of fourteen years, but the quantity must be at the discreti∣on of him that draweth it, either more or lesse as occasion is offered: but for children and such as are of tender years, and weak bodies, it were not good to draw bloud out of the arme, but out of the inferior parts, as the thighes, hams buttocks, and the Emeroidall veines, especially if the party be melan∣cholie, or else to apply ventose to the loynes, buttocks, or hams, which may boldly be used both before and after they do appear, either with scarification, or without, as cause requi∣reth, which is a speciall good meanes to draw that Ichorous matter from the interior to the exterior parts; but for sucking Children, it were best to apply bloud-suckers unto any of the foresaid places, which is a thing that may be used with more ease then ventoses, neither do I wish either of them to be used un∣lesse necessity require it, which is, when the matter lieth lurk∣ing in the interior parts, not offering it self to appear out∣wardly: otherwise I hold it better to leave the whole work un∣to nature, specially in sucking children: for when we see that nature is ready, or doth endeavour to expell the malignity which is in the interior parts to the exterior, which may be per∣ceived by reviving of the Spirits, and mitigating of the Fever: here we ought not to use any meanes at all, but leave the whole operation to nature, which we must onely help by keeping
the sick body in a reasonable heat, being wrapt in a scarlet, stammell, or red cloth, which may not touch the skin, but to have a soft linnen cloth betwixt them both, and then cover him with clothes in reasonable sort, and keep him from the open ayre and the light, except a little, and also from anger, using all the meanes you can to keep the sick in quietnesse, and if the body be very costive, then to give an easie Glister. A Glister. ℞. Barley, two handfuls, Violet leaves one handfull: Boyle these in three pints of water untill half be consumed, and strein it: then take of the same decoction twelve ounces. Oyle of Violets three ounces, red Sugar and Butter, of either one ounce, Mix them together and give it to the sick warm you may encrease or diminish the decoction or ingredients according as the age of the party requireth: but if the sick have great heat, then may you add one ounce or four drachms of Cssia newly drawn unto it, and when he hath expelled the Glster, then rub the armes, hands, legs, and feet, softly with a warm cloth, which is also a very good meanes to draw that chorous matter from the interior to the exterior parts, when all this is done, then if the body be inclined to sweat, you must fur∣ther the same by covering him with warm clothes, having a care that you lay not more on him then he can well endure, for otherwise you may cause faintnesse and swouning, which are ill in this case, yet must you alwaies keep the sick warm, and suffer him not to sleep, or permit very little untill the Pox or Measels do appear: and here you must have a speciall care to preserve the eyes, eares, nostrels, throat and lungs, that they be not hurt or offended therewith, as hereafter shall be shew∣ed you, which you must use before he sweat and also in the sweat if need be. Eyes, how to preserve them. ℞. Rose-water, Plantaine-water, of either two ounces, Sumack, two drachms.
Let them boyle together a little, or stand infused a night, then mixe therewith half a spoonfull of the oyle made of the white of an Egg, then wet two clothes five or six double there∣in, then lay them upon either eye, cold, which must bee al∣waies kept upon the eyes untill the Pox be all come forth, and as they grow dry, wet them in the same liquor againe, and ap∣ply them, but if there be great pain and burning within the eye, then must you also put a drop of this musselage following into the eye: take quinse-seed, half a drachm, bruise it a little, then let it stand infused in three ounces of Rose-water a whole night, then strein it, and put one drop thereof into the eye three or four times a day at least, or take of this water. ℞. Rose-water, ℥. ii. Womans milk, ℥. i. Myrrh finely powdered six graines. Mixe them together, and use it in the eye as before is shewed: this doth ease the paine, resisteth putrefication, and preserveth the sight. For the eares, you must put a drop of oyle of Roses warm into them before he sweat. For the nostrels, cause him oftentimes to smell to the vapour of Rose-vinegar, or else Vinegar, red-roses and Sanders boyl∣ed together. For the throate, let him alwaies hold a peice of white sugar∣candy in the mouth, and as it melteth swallow it down. For the Lunges give the sick oftenimes some sirrup of quin∣ses, or conserve of Roses, a little at a time. And for his drink, the decocted water of barley, boyled with a little licorice is best, being mixed with the juice of a Le∣mon, Citron, Pomegranate, or Rybes: which the sick best liketh, for either of them is very good. And for his diet, he must refrain from all salt, fat, thick and sharp meats: and from all sweet things either in meat or drink, his meat must be of a facile and easie digestion, and that hath a cooling property in it, as broth wherein burrage, bugloss, sorrell, and such like are boyled, and for ordinary drink, small beer or ale is best.
CHAP IIII. Teacheth what is to be done when the Pox or Measels are slow in coming forth. NOw when you perceive the Pox or Measels are slow and slack in comming forth, then must you help nature, with cordials, and by sweat to thrust it out from the interior and principall parts, unto which purpose I have alwaies found this drink to be excellent good here following. ℞. Hordei mund. M. i. Lentium. excort. P. i. Ficuum. No. x. Fol. capil. v. Lactucae. ana M. ss. Fol. acetosae. M. i. Florum cord. P. i. Semen fenic. ʒ. ii. Semen. 4. frigid. ma. ana ʒ. ss. Aqua font.lb. iiii. Boyle all these together untill a third part of the water be consumed, and then strein it. ℞. Decoct. col.lb. i. Succus granatorum vel ribes, ℥. iiii. Mix all these together, and give the sick four or six oun∣ces thereof to drink every morning and evening, which will provoke sweat, and expell the disease, and if you cannot get the juice of Pomegranats, nor Rybes, then you may take so much of the sirrup of either of them. Another good drink to expell the Pox or Measels. Take a quart of posset-ale, a handfull of Fennell seed, boyle them together till a third part be consumed, then strein it, and add thereto one drachm of Triacle, and one scruple of Saffron in powder: mix them together, and give two, three, or four ounces thereof to drink every morning and evening as cause requireth. But if it be for a strong and elderly body, you may give any of the expelling electuaries which are used to expell the Plague, as in the first Chapter for the curing of the Plague doth appear. But if the sick be so weak that he cannot expell the disease in convenient time, then it is good to epithemate the heart with this epithemation following.
Epithomation for the heart. ℞. Aquarum ros. Melissae, Card. b. Buglos. Morsus diaboli, vi∣ni alb. ana ℥. iiii. Aceti Ros. ℥ ii. ss. Pul. Ros. rub. Trium santal. Cinamoni, Elect, diamarg. frigid. ana ʒ. ss. Mithridati, ℥. i. Theriacae, ʒ. iiii. Mix all these together, and let them boyle a little, and so warm Epithemate the heart: and when you have done it, then give some expulsive drink or electuary as cause requireth, and then cause him to sweat upon it, for by this meanes you shall obtaine your desire by Gods permission. Thirst, how to quench it. Now if in the expelling of the pox, the sick be very thirsty and dry, then give this Julep to drink morning and evening, which I have found very good. ℞. Sirrup of Jujubes, Nenuphare, and Burrage, of either four drachms: Water of Burrage, Cichore, and Bugloss, of either two ounces. Mix them together and give the sick one half thereof in the morning, and the rest at night, and cause him oftentimes to lick of this mixture following. Take the conserves of Nenuphare, Violets, and Burrage, of either six drachms: Manus Christi made with Perles, four drachms: Sirrup of Nenuphare and Ribes of either one ounce and half. Mix them together: and with a Licorice stick clean scrap'd, and a little bruised in the end, let the sick lick thereof. CHAP. V. Sheweth what is to be done when the Pox are all come out in the skinne. FOr that oftentimes the face and hands, which is the beauty and delight of our bodies, are oftentimes disfigured thereby, I will shew you what meanes I have used with good and happy
successe for preventing thereof: which is, you may not do any thing unto them untill they grow white, and that they are come to maturation, which when you perceive, then with a golden pinne, or needle, or for lack thereof a copper pinne will serve, do you open every pustulae in the top, and so thrust out the matter therein very softly and gently with a soft linnen cloth, and if you perceive the places do fill againe, then open them againe as you did first, for if you do suffer the matter which is in them toremain over long, then will it fret and corrode the flesh, which is the cause of those pitts which remaine after the Pox are gone, as Avicen witnesseth: now when you have thus done, then annoint the places with this oyntment following. Take Elder leaves, one handfull, Marigolds, two handfulls, French Mallowes, one handfull, Barrowes morte or grease, six ounces. First bruise the hearb in a morter, and then boyle them with the grease in a pewter dish on a chafer and coales, untill the juice of the hearbs be consumed, then strein it, and keep it to your use, the best time to make it is in the middle or the latter end of May. You must with a feather annoint the places grieved, and as it drieth in, annoint it againe, and so continue it oftentimes, for this will soon dry them up, and keep the place from pitts and holes, which remain after the Pox are gone. Also if you annoint the Pox with the oyle of sweet Almonds newly drawn three or four times a day, which you must begin to do so soon as the Pox are grown white and come to matura∣tion, it will cure them without pitts or spotts, and easeth the pain and burning, and helpeth excoriation. Some do onely oftentimes wet the places with the juice of Marigolds in the summer season, and in winter the juice of the roots will serve: and by that onely have done well. Mercuriales doth greatly commend this decoction follow∣ing to be used after the Pustulaes are opened. Take Barley, one little handfull, red Roses, a handfull, red Sanders, white Sanders, of either one ounce: Saffron, two scruples, Salt, four drachms, Clean water, three pound. Boyle all together untill a third part be consumed, you must
oftentimes touch the sores therewith, with a fine cloth wet therein, and as it drieth in, wet it againe, this in a short time will dry them up. I have heard of some, which having not used any thing at all, but suffering them to dry up and fall off themselves with∣out any picking or scratching, have done very well, and not any pitts remained after it. When the Pox, after they come out, do not grow to maturation, how you shall help it. Sometimes you shall find that it will be a long time before those pustulaes will come to maturation, or grow white: now here you must help nature to bring it to passe, which you may well do with this decoction. Take Mallowes, one handfull, Figgs, twelve in number, Wa∣ter, a quart. Cut the Figgs small, and boyle altogether, untill half and more be consumed, and then wet a fine soft linnen cloth there∣in, and touch the place therewith oftentimes, which will soone bring them to maturation, and also ease the paine, if any be. Ʋlceration, to help it. If in the declining of the Pox they chance to grow unto Ul∣cerations, which is oftentimes seen: then for the curing there∣of use this order here following. Take Tamarinds, leaves of Lentils, Mirtils, budds of oaken leaves, red Roses dried, of either a little handfull. Boyle all these in a pottle of clean water untill half be con∣sumed, then strein it, and with a fine cloth wet therein do you wash and soak the place well, then wipe it dry with a soft and fine linnen cloth, and then cast into the place some of this powder following. Take Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocoll, and red Roses, of either two drachms. Make all these into fine powder severally by themselves, the i tem together, and so rese  thy .
A very good unguent for the same purpose. Take oyle of Roses, vi. ounces, white Wax, one ounce, Ceruse washt in Rose and Plantaine-water, one ounce and half, clear Turpentine, iii. drachms, Camphire, half a drachm. You must first melt the wax in the oyle, then put in the Ce∣ruse by little and little, alwaies stirring it with an iron spalter, and let it boyle on a gentle fire of charcoles untill it grow black, but stirr it continually in the boyling, for feare least it burn: then take it from the fire, and add thereto the camphire, and lastly the Turpentine: this unguent is good both to mun∣difie, incarnate, and sigillate. For extream heat and burning in the soales of the seet, and palms of the hands. Petrus Forestus willeth to hold the hands and feet in warm water, and that will ease the pain and burning, and may bold∣ly be used without any danger. For to help the sorenesse and ulceration of the mouth. Sometime it chanceth in this disease, that there is a great ul∣ceration or excoriation in the mouth and jawes, called Aptham, which if it be not well looked unto in time, will grow to be Cankers, now to cure and prevent the same, this gargarisme is excellent good. Take Barley-water, a quart, red Roses dried, a little hand∣full, Sumach, and Rybes, of either two ounces, juice of Pome∣granates, ℥. iii. Boyle them altogether, saving the juice of Pomegranates, untill a third part be consumed, then strein it, and add thereto the juice of Pomegranates, with this you must often wash and gargarise, as also hold some thereof in the mouth a pretty while. Also to prevent the same, the kernel of a Pomegranate held in the mouth is very good, and so it is excellent good
to lick oftentimes some Diamoron, or juice of a Pomegranate. For inflammation and paine in the tonsils and throate. Take Plantaine-water, a pint, Sirrup of Pomegranates, two ounces. Mix them together, and gargarise therewith oftentimes be∣ing warm. Another. Taste Nightshade-water, a pint, Seeds of Quinces, four scruples. Boyle them together a little, then strein it, and add thereto two ounces of the sirrup of Pomegranates, and gargarise therewith oftentimes. How to open the eye-lids that are fastened together with the Pox. Sometimes the eye-lids are so fastened together that you can∣not open them without great pain and danger: then to open them you must foment or bath them well with a decoction made of Quince seed, Mallowes and water boyled together, wherein wet some fine linnen clothes five or six double, and apply them warm, and continue it untill you may easily open them, and then if you perceive any web or filme to be grown over the sight, then thrice a day do you put some powder of white sugar-candy into the eye, or if you list, you may dissolve the sugar in Rose-water, and so use it in the eye, which will fret it away, and preserve the sight. A good Collery for a Web or Ʋngula in the eye. Take the juice of Rue, Fennell, Salendine, Mallowes, of either two ounces. Boyle them together in a vessell of glasse, or peuter, over a chafer with coales, and scumme away the froth that doth rise thereof, then add thereto the gaule of an Eel, one drachm, and let them boyle together a little, then put thereto four scru∣ples
of white copperas, and one scruple of verdigreace in fine powder, boil all together a little, then let it run through a fine linnen cloth, and keep it in a glasse, you must every morn∣ing and evening put one drop thereof into the eye, provided that first due evacuation be made so well by phlebotomie as purging. CHAP VI. Teacheth how to help divers accidents which chance after the Pox are cured and gone. For rednesse of the face and hands after the Pox are gone, how to help it. TAke Barley, Beanes, Lupins, of either one handfull: bruise them all in a morter grosely, and boyle them in three pints of water untill it grow thick like a jelly, then straine it, and annoint the face and hands therewith three or four times a day, for three or four daies together, and then you must wet the face and hands so oftentimes a day with this water following. Take Vine leaves, two handfuls: Beane-flower, Dra∣gons, wilde-tansey, of either one handfull: Camphire three drachms, two Calves feet, the pulpe of three Lemons, a pint of raw cream. You must shred the hearbs small, as also the Lemons, and break and cut the Calves-feet small, then mix them together, and distill it in a glasse still, also the water of May-dew is excellent good for any high colour, or rednesse of the face. For spots in the face remaining when the Pox are gone. Take the juice of Lemons and mix it with a little bay-salt,
and touch the spots therewith oftentimes in the day; for it is ex∣cellent good. A good ointment for the same purpose. Take oyle of sweet Almonds; oyle of white Lillies, of either one ounce: Capons-grease, Goats-tallow, of either four drachms: Sarcocoll, half a drachm: Flower of Rice, and of Lupins, of either one drachm: Litharge of gold, one drachm and half: Roots of Brionie, and of Ireos, of either one scruple: Sugar-candy white, one drachm. Make powder of all those that may be brought into powder, and searce them through a searce, then put them all in a morter together, and labour them with a pestle, and in the working do you put the water of Roses, Beane-flower, and of white Lillies ana a great spoonfull, which must be put in by little and little in the working of it, and so labour them altogether un∣till it come to an unguent. You must every evening annoint the face therewith, or hands, and in the morning wash it away in the water wherein Barley, Wheaten-bran, and the seed of Mallowes hath been boyled. For holes remaining when the small Pox are gone. For helping of this accident I have shewed many things, yet never could find any thing that did perfectly content me, but the best meanes that I have tried, is one day to wash the place with the distilled water of strong Vinegar, and the next day with the water wherein Bran and Mallowes have been boyled, and continue this order twenty daies, or a moneth together. Running of the eares, how to help it. Sometimes the eares do run very much in this disease, which in any wise you may not go about to stop in the beginning,
but suffer it so to run, and the eares to remaine open: but if there be great pain in them, then wet a spunge in warm water and oyle of Roses mixt together, and lay it upon the eares. For stopping of the nostrills, to help it. Sometimes the nostrills are greatly pestered by stopping them with the Pox growing in them, which doth oftentimes cause ulceration in them, therefore to prevent the same, take red-Rose, and Plantaine, of either one handfull: Mirrh in powder half an ounce. Boyle all these in a quart of water untill half be consumed, and so being warm, cause the sick to draw the sume thereof into his nostrills oftentimes. Also if the sick doth oftentimes smell unto Vinegar, it is good. For hoarsenesse remaining when the Pox are gone. Take Licorice, Sebesten, Jujubes, of either two ounces: Fat-Figgs, four ounces, clean water, four pints. Boyl all these together untill half be consumed, then strain it, and give one spoonfull thereof to the sick oftentimes, and it helpeth. For filthy and moist scabs after the Pox are gone. Take Lapis calaminaris, Litharge of gold, and of silver of either two drachms: Quick brmstone and eruse, ana ʒ ii. Bring all these into fine powder, and then labour them in a morter with so much Barrowes-mort or grease as shall be suffi∣cient to make up an unguent, and annoint the place there∣with every morning and evening. FINIS.
Some other few additionall observations concerning the passages in this latter Treatise. PAge the eighth of this precedent Book, a Quilt or Bag is commended to be very excellent; it is reported to be Pope Adrians Bag, which he used against infection, and in the great last Sicknesse in London, it was commended to many great Persons of worth by some Apothecaries, who kept it as a great secret, and affirmed, it would prevent infection, and pre∣serve them safe in that dangerous time; and thereupon sold it unto them at a very great rate: But that you may not be deluded in the prescription, I have set down the true receit thereof, as it was delivered unto me from the hands of a very noble friend. A Preservative against the infection of the air, and the Plague, often approved by Pope Adrian, and many others of great rank and credit. Take Arsenick two ounces, Auripigmentum one ounce, make little tablets thereof with the whites of Eggs, and Gum Dra∣gacanth, and hang them about the neck against the heart. I have also set down a red Cordiall water, very good against in∣fection, which I had also from that noble friend. Take a quart of good spirit of Wine, or very good Aqua vitae, infuse it in one ounce of good Mithridate, with as much good Venice Triacle: let it be close stopped some few dayes
in the infusion before you use it, then pour the spirit clear off, and reserve it for your use. But to discover what opinions other Phisitians have held of that and the like, I have annexed hereunto their severall judgements hereafter, that amongst so many choise Medi∣cines, they may select out the best and safest for their own preservations, when need shall require. And to give them the better satisfaction, I have annexed, out of some choise Manuscripts, some approved Experiments, of some of our London ablest Doctors, as also out of some other Authors. Severall opinions against wearing of Arsenick Amulets, as Preservatives against the Plague. THe poysonous vapours of Arsenick being sucked or drawn into the body, when they find no contrary poyson with whom to wrestle with, as with an enemy, (for in an infected body there cannot be health; but we suppose him to be well, whom we desire to preserve so) those vapours must needs imprint a malignant and venomous quality on the spirit and heart, most adverse and pernitious to nature. And by Galens own doctrine, all Alexiteries doe in a man∣ner, if they be used too liberally, greatly offend and weaken our bodies; how can we then think, that ranke Poysons and Dilaetories, (such us Arsenick is) being applied, as to pene∣trate into the noblest region of all other, will no whit violate and wast our naturall, vitall, and radicall heat? Galen libr. de simp. cap. 18. Nor did Galen, or any of the antient Fathers and Professors of Physick, use to preserve from the Plague, or any other poison, by administring some other poison inwardly, or
prescribing outwardly Applications, but proceeded by An∣tidotes, and Alexiteries, as will appear in libr. de Theriaca ad Pis. cap, 16. Wherefore, unlesse we will utterly disclaim or relinguish the method and prescripts of these worthy An∣tients, and prosecute new wayes and inventions, to oppose this man-yelling Monster, we must attempt it not with Poysons but Antidotes. And Galen defineth those to be Poysons, which agree not with nature, either well or ill affected at any time; for though there are some Poysons, which if they meet in the body with a contrary venome, so fight with it, and oppose it, that both doe perish in the conflict betwixt them; so that the party, by their colluctation and strugling together, escapes with his life: yet all of them agree in uniform opinion to∣gether, that where they meet with no opposition, they ruine the party: And therefore conclude, that Arsenick, worn by a healthy man, finding not onely no contrary Poyson to make conflict with, but no Poyson at all, must necessarily thwart, and oppose, and make an onset on nature her self. And to confirme their opinions, I have purposely intro∣duced the judgements of other learned Phisitians concurring with them. Gerardus Columbus, a learned Phisitian, reporteth, that it hath been observed, that the wearers of these Amulets, upon unusuall heating their bodies, have fallen into sudden Lipothi∣mies, and Swounings, with other fearfull accidents, which continued upon them till the Amulets or Placents were re∣moved from them; and that others, though not instantly, yet after some time, have by late and wofull experience disco∣vered their malignity, by falling into malignant and pestilent Fevers, some of them ending with death. Franc. Alphanus, a Phisitian of Salerne, relateth of one, who wearing Arsenick, and heating himself with playing earnestly at Tennise, fell down suddenly dead. Mattheus Hessus also thus writeth, As Cordiall Bags or Amulets ought not to be disavowed, so empoysoned Amulets can be no way commended; nor doe I remember, that ever
Antidotes: But this I certainly know, that divers persons, who cry about them Quick-silver in a Nutshell, by the vain perswasions of some Imposters, have died of the Plague, and the counsellours and advisers of such like Amulets, have been the first have betaken themselves to their heeles, confi∣ding more in their running than cunning: and yet these Quacks perswaded the ignorant people, with glorious pro∣mises and protestations, that whosoever carried Quick-silver or Arsenick about his neck, should be as safe, as if he had pur∣chased a protection from the King of Heaven Historians also report, that Caracalla, though he were a wicked Emperour, prohibited by publick Edict or Procla∣mation, that no man should wear about him superstitious Amulets. And Theophrastus the great (not without cause) esteemed Pericles to have a crazed brain, because he saw him wear an Amulet about his neck. And hereunto Doctor Francis Herring, an able Phisitian, as a Corollary to what hath before been written, addeth the experience of some London Phisitians, who report, they have seen foul holes made in the breasts of those that have worn those Amulets, and have observed divers to die, who have religiously worn them about their necks, as well as others. And whereas the venters and setters out of these deceitfull wares, make them as a scout, to discover the infection when it beginneth to seize on a man, by clapping close to the heart, to guard that principall part, as the cheif Tower: It is a meer deceit and collusion: for whensoever the body is heated, this event followeth necessarily, though no other infection be near, but the poysonous and venomous Arsenick it self, whose salu∣tation is rather Joabs imbracing, or Juda's kissing, than friendly preservatives. Causes of the Plague. There are two speciall causes of the Plague. First, An infected, corrupted, and putrified air,
Secondly, Evill and corrupt humours ingendered in the body. The air is infected, when the temperatenesse of the air is changed from his naturall state, to excessive heat and moisture, which is the worst temperament of the air, the vapours drawn up by the heat of the Sun being unconsumed, rot, putrifie, and corrupt, and so with the venome infect the air: Also dead Carkases lying unburied, as it often chanceth in Warres, evaporations of Pooles, Fens, Marishes, stinking and noysome sents and Kennels, and Astronomers say, Aspects, Conjuncti∣ons and Oppositions of ill Planets, and Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Also disordering ones self, either in diet or exercises bring∣eth one into the Pestilence; therefore in time of contagion, outrages and surfets are to be avoided, as also all excesse of eat∣ing, drinking, sweating, bathing, lechery, and all other things that open the pores of the body, and enter thereby ill aires, which invenome the lively spirits. Signes of the Plague. The signes which declare one infected already are many; but the secret token of all to know the infected of the Plague is, if there arise botches behind the eares, or under the arme∣holes, or about the share; or if Carbunkles suddenly arise in any member, for when they appear, they betoken strength of nature, which being strong, laboureth to drive the poyson out of the body; but if botches doe not appear, it is more dangerous, for it sheweth, that nature is weak and feeble, and not able to expell and thrust forth the venomous hu∣mours, and then you must have respect to the signes before rehearsed. The infection of the Plague entereth into a man after this sort. In a man are three principall parts (that is) the Heart, Liver, and Brains, and each of these hath his cleansing place:
If they appear in the neck, they shew the Brains to be cheifly vexed, if under the arme-holes the Heart, but if they appear in the share, the Liver is most infected, For when a man hath taken infection, it presently mingleth with the bloud, and runs to the heart, which is the cheif part of man, and the heart putteth the venome to his cleansing place, which is the arme-holes; and that being stopt, putteth it to the next principall part, which is the liver, and it passeth it to the next principall part, which is the liver, and it passeth it to his cleansing place, which is the share, and they being stopt, passe it to the next principall place, that is, the braines, and to their cleansing places, which are under the eares, or under the throat, and they being stopped, suffer it not to passe out, and then it is moved twelve hours before it rest in any place, and if it be not let out within the space of four and twen∣ty hours by bleeding, it brings a man into a pestilentiall Ague, and causeth a botch in one of those three places, or near un∣to them The Cure of the Plague. When thou feelest thy self infected, bleed in the first hour, or within six hours after, drink not, and tarry not above twelve hours from bleeding, for then when the bloud is flitting too and fro, the venome is then moving, and not yet setled, and after it will be too late; those that are fat may be let bloud, or else not. If the matter be gathered under the arme-holes, it comes from the heart by the Cardiacall vein, then bleed on the same side by the Basilica vein, the innermost vein of the arme, If the botch appear behind the eares, above the chin, or in any other part of the face or neck, bleed out of the Cephalica vein on the same side; you may bleed with cupping Glasses, and Scarification, or Horseleeches. If the botch appear in the share, bleed in the ankle on the same side, in any case not in the arme, for it will draw up the matter again.
But if no botch appear outwardly, draw bloud out of that side where you feel greatest pain and heavinesse, and out of that vein, the greif of the members affected shall point thee out. If you perceive the Plague invade you at meat, or on a full stomack, vomit speedily, and when your stomack is empty, take some Medicine that may resist Poyson, as Mithridate, or Triacle, or some of these following, which, as choise Me∣dicines, I have inserted, as being Doctor Edwards Experi∣ments. For the Plague. Infuse two peices of fine pure Gold in the juyce of Le∣mons four and twenty hours, and drink that juyce with a little Wine, with powder of the Angelica root: It is admi∣rable, and hath helped divers past all hope of cure. Another. Take two drachms of Juniper berries, of Terra lemnia ℈ i. make both into fine powder, and mix it with Honey, and take of it as much as a hasell Nut in three drachms of honeyed water made up thus: Take a pint of Honey, and of water eight pints, seeth and scum it at an easie fire, till the fourth part be wasted: It is an excellent Antidote against Poy∣son and Plague; if the Poyson be taken before, it will ex∣pell it by vomit, if not, the Medicine will stay in the sto∣mack. Another. Take Zedoary roots the best you can get, great Raisins, and Licorice, champ it with thy teeth and swallow it, if you be in∣fected it preserveth without danger.
Another fobotches, boyls, and tokens. Take of ripe Ivy berries dryed in the shade, as much of the powder as will lye upon a groat or more, and put it into three or four ounces of white Wine, and lie in bed and sweat well; after your sweat is over, change shirt, and sheets, and all the bed clothes if he may, if not, yet change his shirt and sheets. Some have taken this powder over night, and found them∣selves well in the morning, and walked about the house fully cured. One having a Plague sore under the thigh, another under the left arme-pit, taking this powder in the morning, and a∣gain that night, the sores brake of themselves, by this excel∣lent Medicine sent by Almighty God: It is good for Botches, Boyles, Plague-sores, Tokens, Shingles, Erisipella, and such like, &c. Thus farre Doctor Edwards Doctor in Physick and Chirurgery.
Experiments tried by my selfe. For the Plague. TAke of Pillulae pestilentiales, called Ruffi, or of Panchy Ma∣gogon (or for want of it) of extraction Rudii, of each half a drachm, mingle these, into six pills for two doses, where∣of take three at a time in the morning fasting, for two dayes together. Another excellent approved Remedy. Take eight or nine grains of Aurum vitae, either in Triacle water, or made up in Diascordium, fasting. Another excellent sweating powder for the Plague. Take of the powder e Chelis Cancrorum, of Aromaticum rosatim, and of Corusa Antimonii, of each half a scruple, min∣gle these up together in a diaphoretick powder, and take it in four spoonfuls of Triacle water well mingled toge∣ther.
The Cure of Diseases in Remote Regions. The Calenture, HAppeneth to our Nation in intemperate Climates; by Inflammation of bloud, and proceedeth often of immo∣derate drinking of wine, and eating of pleasant fruits, which are such nourishers thereof, as they prevent the meanes used in curing the same. To know the Calenture. At the first apprehension it afflicts the Patient with great pain in the head, and heat in the body, which is continuall or increasing, and doth not diminish and angment, as other Fe∣vers doe; and is oft an Introduction to the Taberdilla or Pe∣stilence, but then the body will seem very yellow. To cure the Calenture. So soon as you perceive the Patient possest of the Calen∣ture, (except the Chirurgion, for danger of the sign defer it) I have seen the time of the day not respected, open the Me∣dian vein of the right arm, and take such quantity of bloud, as agreeth with the ability of the bodie; but if it asswage not the heat by the next day, open the same vein in the left arme, and take so much more like quantity of bloud at his discre∣tion; and if the body be costive, (as commonly they are) give him some meet purgation, and suffer him to drink no o∣ther then water cold, wherein Barley and Annise-seeds have been boyled with bruised Liquorice. And if within 4. dayes the partie amend not, or being recovered, take it again, open the vein Cephalick in one or both hands, bathing them in
warm water, untill there come so much more bloud as cause requires. Suffer not the Patient to drinke seven dayes after he is perfectly recovered, any other drinke, then such water, as is before herein directed. The Taberdilla, IS a disease so called by the Spaniards, by the Mexicans, Co∣calista, and by other Indians is named Taberdet, and is so exceeding pestilent and infectious, that whole Kingdomes in both the India's have been depopulated by it, for want of knowledge to redresse themselves of it. To know the Taberdilla. It first assaults the Patient vehemently with pain in the head and back: and the body seeming yellow, is some sign there∣of, and within 24 hours it is so torturous, that the possest there∣of cannot rest or sleep, turning himself on either side, back or belly, burning in his back most extreamly. And when it growes to perfection, there will appear red and blue spots upon the Patients breast and wrists. And such persons as have not presently requisite means applyed to them to prevent it, will be, by the vehement torment thereof, deprived of their wits, and many to cease their pain by losse of their lives have despairingly slain, and drowned themselves. The Cure of the Taberdilla. When you perceive it afflict the Patient, permit him not to lie very warm, nor upon feathers (for of what quality soever he bee in Spain, having this sickness he is laid upon wheat∣straw:) Then immediatly open the Median Vein, first in one arm, and the next day in the other, taking a good quantity of bloud: Let him have water cold, wherein Barlie and An∣nise-seeds have been sodden without Liquorice (for the Spa∣nish
Physicians hold Liquorice to bee hurtfull unto them) so much as he will desie, which will be every moment; but no other drink, nor any  fuits: Assoon as the spots appear, give him some Cdia potion: and laying him upon his belly, set six Ventoses gether on his back, between and be∣neath the shoulders; and scaing them, draw out (if it be a body of strong constitution) 18 ounces of bloud. After which, and that he hath sle, he will find ease within twenty four hours, and sch alteration in himself, as he will thinke he is delivered of a most strange torment. Then give him moderately nourishing meats, (for he will desire to eat much) the fourth day, give him some convenient Purgations. And if in the mean while he is costive, provoke him every day by Clisters; and warn him to forbear 15 dayes all other drink then what is ordained: And be very carefull of his diet, for if this Taberdilla, which we call here in England Gods Tokens, come againe unto the Patient, he can hardly escape it. And it is no lesse Infectious, then the usuall English Plague. The Espinlas IS a strange sicknes, usuall in those parts to such as take cold in their Breasts, after great heat or travell. It comes most times to those that lye with their breasts upon the ground (especially) in the night. To know the Espinlas. The Party having it, will be giddie in the head, and have pain and pricking at his breast, as with many thornes; from whence I thinke it is called, for Espina in Spanish signifies a thorn; and there will be upon the Focell, being the upper bone of his arm, a hand breadth above the wrist, a little ker∣nell by the which it is certainly known: He that hath this disease, will have appetite neither to meat, nor drinke, nor can digest meat though he be invited and moved to take it.
To cure the Espinlas. The Espinlas appearing by the former signs, take presently oyle Clives, and therewith chafe the kernell upon the Patients arm, using so to doe twice every day, untill it be dissolved; and laying oyle likewise upon his breast, stroke it upward somes hat hard with the hand; then spread fine flaxe upon it and the kernel, making it fast with a rowler, and within two or three dayes the diseased will be recovered thereof, where∣as else it is very dangerous to deprive them of lire. Camera de Sangre. LAxativeness, or Blondy Flux, proceed in those parts of divers causes: As by eating Grapes, Oranges, Limons, Me∣lons, Plantains, and especially a great fruit growing in the West Indies called Pina, like a Pine-apple, but bigger then four of the greatest which I have seen, which the Spaniars hold for the most delicate fruit that is there, and many other fruits. Also by sudden cold, or sitting (being very hot) upon a cold stone, or being hot by drinking water abundantly. And also eating of Butter, yle, and ish is so hurtfull to the parties that have it, that they must refrain to eat thereof, and what∣soever else, that may ingender any slimie substance in the In∣trals. The Cure of the Bloudie Flux. There is more possibility of cure, by how much more expe∣dition the medicine is ministred: and detracting it, the Pa∣tients often die suddenly, without feeling much grief. For speedy and assured remedie, the Patients bodie must be clean∣sed of the sliminess, ingendred in the passages of the nutri∣ments, before any sustenance can remain in his bodie. To that purpose purge him in the morning, with halfe a pint of white wine cold, wherein half an ounce of Rubard being smal
cut hath been sodden, putting some Sugar Candie to it, to sweeten it, and immediatly after he hath so purged, keep at his navell Rosemary sod in strong Vinegar, applyed in the mor∣ning and evening very hot, untill it be stayed; giving him often Quinces bruised, and rouled in Marmalade like Pills, which he should swallow whole, and none of the fruits or meats before recited, nor any more white wine, but red wine of any sort: And if it be one the land use the Livers of Goats, (especially) Sheeps, or Bullocks rosted; not willingly permit∣ting the Patient to eat any other meat: And if at Sea, Rice onely sodden in water, rather then any thing else usuall there, untill the infirmitie bee perfectly asswaged. The Erisipela, REigneth much in those Countries, proceeding from the unwholsome aires and vapours those hot Countries doe yeeld, whereof many perish; and if it bee not prevented by Medicines presently ministred to the Sick Patients, it pro∣veth incurable. To know the Erisipela. Hee will be swoln in the face, or some part of him, and it will be of yellow colour mixed with red. And when it is pressed with the finger, there will remain a sign or dint of the same, and then by degrees it will fill again to the former proportion. It speedily infecteth the inward parts, because such swellings come sooner unto perfection in hot places, then in temperat Countries, and therefore the diseased thereof, must immediatly be provided of remedie. To Cure the Erisipela. The Savage people first found out perfectly how to cure this disease, (though it is the Spanish name of the Maladie) by bruising so much Tobacco as will yeeld four spoonfuls of
juyce, and to drinke it presently after they are infected there∣with, and to launce the places swollen, thereunto putting Ca∣sade wet, and made into paste, continuing in cold and shadie places neer Rivers: and not to travell and labour till they bee recovered: The Spaniards in India doe recover them∣selves by taking the same juyce of Tobacco, and setting so many Ventoses upon the swoln places as they can contain, scarifying them, and drawing out the corrupted humour so congealed, using the like in two or three other parts of the bodie, where the disease doth not appeare. The juyce of Tobacco is very excellent to expell poison, and is the ordinary remedie used by the Indians, and other Savages when they are poisoned, and bitten with Scorpions, or other venemous creatures: But they make presently some incision where they are bitten or stung, and wash it with the juyce of Tobacco, then applying the same bruised thereunto two or three dayes, they heal it up with dried Tobacco. The Tinoso or Scurvie. IS an infecting disease sufficiently known unto Sea-fayring men, who by putrified meats, and corrupted drinks, eating Bisket flourie, or foul crusted, and wearing wet apparrel (especially sleeping in it) and slothfull demeanour, or by grosse humours contained in their bodies get the same, To know the Scurvie. Many have perished when they returned out of hot Regi∣ons into cold Climates, where they have had the parts of their bodies, which with heat, were nimble and tractable to every motion of the Spirits, dulled and benummed with cold, which is a token that this disease is ingendring in their joynts; and soonest appears by swelling of their ankles, and knees, and blackness of their gums, or looseness of their teeth, which will sometimes come forth, when there is no remedie used in season.
Preservatives against the Scurvy. You must have a care to preserve those things before re∣hearsed well conditioned, the badnesse whereof, in part breed this dsease; they must use exercise of body, and such as are exemptd from doing of labour, must hang or swing by the ares twie or thice every day; they must not have scarcity of drink in hot limates, and coming into the cold, must be da y eleeved with Aqua vitae or Wine: It is also an assured Mee against this disease, to have such quantity of Beer brewed wil granes and long Pepper, as in the morning, twic eery wek, there may be given a good draught to a man, pportioning three quarters of a pound of graines, and three quarters of a pound of long Pepper, to a Hogshead of Beer: Also white Wine, or Syder, boyled and brewed with graines and long Pepper in like quantity, is very singular good: And it is not fit to suffer the gumes to abound with flesh, and therefore sometimes let them bleed, and cleer them with strong Vinegar. To cure the Scurvy. If the Scurvy be setled in his mouth, the corrupted and black flesh must be taken away, and his mouth washed with strong Vinegar, wherein graines and long Pepper have been infused and brewed, and give him daily the drink that is before pre∣scribed; and as well such as have it in their mouths, as those that are swoln in their limbs, must have some meet ugation presently; but those so swoln or stiffe (for so some will be without swelling) to scarifie the parts infected, and to ap∣ply thereto a Poultis or Cataplasme of Barly meal, more hot than the Patient will willingly suffer it; so doing every morn∣ing, permit him not to rest two houres after, although being nummed or faint, he be supported to walk, and suffer him not to eat any salt meats, if other meats may be had. My self having eighty men, eight hundred leagues out of
England, sick of the Scurvy, I used scarifiing, and to the places scarified (being destitute of the helps mentioned) I applyed Poultisses of Bisket beaten in a morter, and sod in water, which, with the comfort of some fresh meats obtained, reco∣vered them all except one person, and they arrived in England, perfectly sound. Other Observations concerning the Scurvy taken out of other Books. 1. THose that are troubled with the Scurvy, their thighs are stained with a violet colour, that one would think, that something of that colour were spread upon it, their gummes are corrupted, and their teeth loose; these ever are signes of that disease. 2. Some are onely pained in their teeth and gums, some otherwise; some doe never break out, others their whole thighs are stained. Observations out of Sennertus, concerning the Scurvy. 1. MUltitude of passions, and change of diseases in it. 2. Greif of mind, and uneasie breathing and stopping. 3. Corruptnesse of the gums, and ill savour of the mouth. 4. Ach of the teeth. 5. Spots. 6. Urine. 7. Pulse. 8. Vein of the legs about the ankles, together with the hands and fingers, the nuch, the knees, and the moving of many parts, with swellings. 9. Pain in the belly; about the forepart of the belly, about the short ribs.
10. Feeblenesse and ache in the joynts. 11. Paines of the reines, and strangury. 12. Head-ache. 13. Plurisie. 14. Gout. 15. Benumming, and the Palsie. 16. Trembling, and panting of the heart, and shaking. 17. Cramp, pricking or shooting Aches, and Epilepsie. 18. Contractions, and stiffenesse of limbs. 19. Apoplexie. 20. Over-much Sleeping. Watching. 21. Fear and sadnesse. 22. Madnesse. 23. Abundant bleeding about the nose. 24. Memory weak. 25. Ache in the shoulders. 26. Appetite decayed, thirst and drinesse of mouth. 27. Belching upwards. 28. Disposition to vomit, or vomiting. 29. Continuall spitting. 30. Loosenesse in the belly, sometimes with bloud. 31. Belly bound at other times. 32. Muck sweat, with ill savour of the body, and Ptysick. 33. Ill colour of the face, and yellow Jaundies. 34. Swelling of the legs, and Dropsie of the belly. 35. Mighty heat. 36. Fevers. 1. Quotidian. 2. Tertian. 3. Quartain. 4. Continuall. 37. Plague or Pestilence. 38. Swelling, or puffing up of the flesh. 39. Lamenesse of the thighs and whole body. 40. Saint Anthonies fire. 41. Gangrean, when the sore parts rot and mortifie.
A Water to make a man see within 40. dayes, though he have been blind seven years before, if he be under fiftie years of age. TAke Smallage, Fennel, Rue, Betonie, Vervain, Egrimonie, Cinquefoil, Pimpernel, Eyebright, Celydonie, Sage, ana a quartern, and wash them clean and stamp them, doe them in a fair mashing pan, put thereto a quart of good white wine, and the pouder of thirty Pepper cornes, six spoonfuls of life Honie, and ten spoonfulls of a man childs urine that is inno∣cent, and mingle them well together, and seeth them till the half be wasted, and then take it down and strein it, and after∣ward clarifie it, and put it in a glasse Vessell well stopt, and put thereof with a feather into the eyes of the blind, and let the Patient use this Medicine at night when he goeth to bed, and within forty dayes he shall see. It is good for all man∣ner of sore eyes. Wilde Tansey water is good for the eye∣sight; and eating of Fennell seed is good for the same. For the Web in the Eye. The Leaves of white Honie-suckles, and ground Ivie, ana, ground together, and put every day into the eye, cureth the Web. Salt burnt in a flaxen cloth, and tempered with Honey, and with a Feather annointed on the eye-lids, killeth wormes that annoy the eye-lids. For Wind in the Side, that maketh the Head swim. Take of Cammomil three ounces, a penniworth of pouder of Cummin sewed in a Poke like a stomacher, boil it well in stale Ale, lay it to the side hot, and when it is cold renew it again hot. Contra Surditatem. 1. Betonica saepe injecta tepide, mire proficit contra aurium dolo∣rem
& surditatem, & alia vitia, & sonos extraneos non sinit ma∣nere. 2. Rost an Onion as hot as you may suffer it, lay it upon the ear with a linnen cloth laid between. Probatum est. Cont lupum, venit saepe sper oculum aut pedem. If it be incurable, it stinketh, fretteth, and the wound wax∣eth black. Take Salt, and Honey, and lty, ana, burn them in an Oven, wash the wound with Vingar, and dry it with linnen clothes, and then lay on the pouder, and doe so till it amend, Pro Cancro & Lupo. Take half a pint of Juyce of Mollein, and half a pint of Honey, sodden to the thickness of honey, and mingle with these pouders, and lay on the sore. Take Orpiment and Ver∣di-grease, of either a drachm and a half, juyce of Walwort a pound and a half, honey a quartern, Vinegar, boil them altoge∣ther till it be as thick as honey, lay thereof on the hole of the sore twice every day, with juyce of Ribwort, and drinke juyce of Avence. Ribwort stamped and laid on the sore will kill it. Pro Oculis. 1. Lac mulieris quae masculum genuit, sed praecipu quae gemines masculos genuit, mixtum cum albumine ovi, & in lana compsi∣tum passiones & lachrymas oculorum mitigat, et desiccat, si fronti la∣cymantis imponatur: & proficit, etiam ad oculum ictu percus∣sum, & sanguinem emittentem, vel epiphoras habentem, vel in do∣lore constitutum. 2. Si quis duarum faeminarum, matris & filiae lacte perunctus fu∣eri, qui uno & eodem tempore masculos habent, in omni vita sua dolorem oculorum non habebit. 3. Eyebright juyce, or water, is excellent good for the eyes.
4: Annoint a red cole leaf cum albumine ovi, & quando is cubitum oculo applica. For Bleared Eyes. Take the juyce Peritory, temper it with the white of an Egg, and lay it all night to your eyes, & quando removes, lava cum succo. Corns. Annoint thy cornes often with fasting spittle: Or cleave a black Snail to it. Take Woodsoure and say to the c, and that shall gather out the Callum thereof, and be whole, but you must first cut it about with a knie. Apostema. 1. Gentian used twice or thrice in a week ad quantitatem pili destruit Apostema. 2. Drinke water of Endive, Petty Morrell, with the pulp of Cassia Fistula. 3. Take Scabios, red Pimpernel, Solsickle and Fumitorie, make these into pouder, and use a spoonful thereof in the mor∣ning, especially in May. Probatum est. Pro stomacho frigido. 1. Oates parched and laid in a Satchell upon a cold stomack, is an approved cure. 2. The crust of a brown loaf made hot and sprinkled with vinegar, and laid on a cold stomack, Salvabit. 3. A tile stone made hot and sprinkled with Vinegar, Eysell or Ale, wrapt in a clout, and laid to the stomack, is good. Pro dolore stomachi. 1. Stamp Fennell, and temper it with stale ale, & bibat tria ccclearia sinul. Seeth Penniroyall and binde it to his Na∣vel as hot as he may suffer it. For winde or gnawing in the Belly. Take Calamus Aromaticus, Galingale, and a little Fennel seed, Cloves, and Cinnamon, grate or beat them together, and take them in pouder, or drink them with ale. For the Small Pox. Take Almonds, and make Almond milk, and take the cram
thereof, and bath the face twice or thrice, though all the Pocks be pulled away, it shall not be Pock fret. Annoint oft the Patients eyes with a linnen cloth wet in the juyce of Sengreen, and it will save them from the Pox. For a stroke in the eye. Juyce of Smallage and Fennel, and the white of an Egg, mingled together, and put into the eye. Bloudshed in the eye. Five leaved grasse, stampt with Swines grease, and with a little salt bound to the eye. Pro Oculo & Aure. Sint calida quae aure imponuntur, & frigida quae in oculo. For a Venomed sore. Take Lavender, Marigolds, Sengreen and Betonie, and stamp them together, and lay them to the sore. To make a swelling break. Take pisse and Vinegar, and Sage M. i. stamped, and flour, and boil them together, and lay it hot on a cloth to the sore. For the Squinsie. Bray Sage, Rue, and Parsely Roots, and lay them hot to the throat. For Biting of a mad Dog. Stamp Mint, and clear Leeks, and lay it to the sore. To breake a Botch. Make a Plaister of Woodbine leaves, and lay to the sore. For gnawings. Take Hearb Bennet, and Sheeps tallow, and oyle Olive, frie them together, and lay it to the sore place. To increase Milk. Pouder of Annise, and the juice of the bark of Fennell root drunke. If milk be thick. Eat mints, and boil mints in wine and oyle, and lay on the breasts. For Botches, Wounds, and Sores, a salve. Boil black Rosin, red Lead, and oyle Olive together; & fiat emplastrum.
Qui bibit novem dies simul propria urinam, nec habebit epilep∣siam, paralysin, nec colicam. Venenum. 1. Qui bibit propriam urinam, sanabitur a sumpto veneno. 2. Garlick, Rue, Centaury, graines of Juniper, valent contra venenum. 3. Pouder Hempseed, and mingle it with Goats milk, and let them boyle a little, and use this drink three dayes, valet contra inflationem, venenum, Bubonem, Felon, & squinanciam. Pro Auribus. Green Ash leaves burnt, and the liquor that drops out of them impositum valet. Euphorbium pounded with Oil Citron, and laid hot on the eares, cureth sounding of the eares, tingling, and Fistulaes. Caput-purgium. Take the juyce of Ivy, and powder of Pepper, mingle them, together, and drink it. For the bloudy Flix. The yellow that groweth in red Roses put into pottage, and so eaten, is good for the bloudy Flix. Vermes Stomachi. The same yellow drunk in Ale▪ valet contra Vermes. For a Felon. Scabious stamped small, a good quantity of Tar, and greace ana. temper them together, and all raw, lay them to the sore place. For the Reines of the back. Boyl your own water well, scum it, then take a quart of that water, oyle of Bayes one ounce, oyle of Roses one ounce, boyle all in a pot, and therewith annoint well the reines in the hot sunne, or against the fire. Ʋnge renes, cum nasturtio & propria urina jejunus saepe, & ju∣vat renes. Coque mel & butyrum simul & unge renes coram igne. Seeth Smallage, and temper it with Wine, and drink it fa∣sting, and you shall be healed.
For them that cannot goe upright for pain in their back and reines. Take a fat Hen, and scald her, and draw her, and fill her with Sene cddes 1d weight, and Polipody of an Oak, and of Annis, 1d weight, boyl her well, and strain her into a vessell, and take two spoonfuls thereof, and give it the sick first and last. For the Stitch. Take three handfuls of Mallowes, seeth them in a litte raw Milk, and put thereto a handfull of wheat bran, and let them boyle together, and then wring out the Milk, and lay it hot to the Stitch, apply it often. Take a few leaves of Rue, and Yarrow, stamp them toge∣ther, and wring out the juyce, and drink it with a little Ale. For the Stitch in the side. Make Balls of red Wortes sodden, and burne them in a new pot, and then grind them to powder, and mingle them with Honey and old Greace, and make a plaister, and lay it thereto when it is well sodden. To heal Wounds. Take Ribwort, Plantain, Smallage, ana. take well nigh as much May Butter as of the juyce, mingle it together, that it be standing, and put it in a Box that no air come thereto, and make an Ointment, and this is the securest Medicine for healing Wounds. For swelling of Joynts. Bray Mallowes, and boyle them in new Milk, and make it into an emplaister, and apply it to the place. To knit Sinews or Veins that are kickt or broke. Take two Onions in summer, when thou findest two Wormes knit together, cut off the knots, and lay them to dry against the Sun, and make thereof powder, and cast it in the Wounds, and it will doe as aforesaid. Ut virga hominis nunquam erigatur. Formicas istas pulverisabis, misce cum vaccinio lacte & da euivis in potu &c.
Verrucae, Porri, ficus. Cortix salicis combustus & temperatus cum aceto, & appositus, verrucas, porros & ficus tollit. Portulaca fricata tollit verrucas. Agrimonia trita & emplastrata cum aceto verrucas tollit Stercus ovis si misceatur cum aceto, & fiat emplaistrum, tollit variolas & verrucas. For Cornes. Take Beanes and chew them in thy mouth, and lay them to the Corn, doe this at night. For Warts. 1. Purslane rubbed on the Warts maketh them fall away. 2. The juyce of the roots of Rushes applied, healeth them. For a Wound that bleedeth inwardly. Take Filago, and temper it with Ale or Wine, and give it him, and anon the bloud shall goe out by his mouth; and if the Patient cannot open his mouth, open it with a key, and put it in, and he shall receive his speech, this hath been proved. If men have any blood within them of any hurt. Let them drink Eufrase sodden with water, and anon they shall cast it out by vomit. Aqua proscabie, tumore, & prurita. Ashes made of green Ashen wood sifted clean, and min∣gled with clean water, and often stirred, all a whole day, the water thereof, that is clear gathered, and mingled with a little Vinegar, and a little Allome, and sodden together, is a pretious water to wash with, sores of swellings, and for itchings, and cleansing of divers sores. An vulneratus vivat, vel non. The juyce of Pimpernell drunk with water, if it come out at the Wound of a wounded man he shall dye, if it come not he shall live. Also give him Trefoile to drink, if he cast it out he shall die. To destroy an Imposthume, in what place soever it be. Take the roots of marsh-mallowes, wash them and boyle them, afterwards take the same water, and boyle it with the
seed of Fenugreek, and Line, then bake it with the bran of Barly, afterwards fry it with Bores greace, make thereof an emplaister, and apply it hot, and within a short time the Pati∣ent will be cured. For Warts. 1. Agrimony stampt with Salt, and tempered with Vinegar, and laid on the Warts, within four dayes doth take them away. 2. Take the yolk of an Egg well roasted, stamp it with oyle of Olive, or oyle of Violets, and make it in manner of a plaister, and this will doe away the Warts in a night. 3. Rub them oft with oaken Apples, and bind a plaister there∣of on them, and bray blossomes of Golds, and Agrimony with Salt, and lay them to as a plaister. 4. Burn Willow tree rind, and temper the Ashes with Vi∣negar, & utere. Oleum Nucum. Take Nuts whole, seeth them in water, and then break them, and take out the kernels and stamp them, and then wring them through a cloth, and that Oyle is noble and mollifi∣cative. Ʋnguentum Dialaehaeae optimum pro podagra. Take Brocks greace, Swines greace, Ducks greace, Capons greace, Ganders greace, suet of a Deer, Sheeps tallow, ana. p. ae. melt them in an earthen pan, then take the juyce of Rubarb, marsh-Mallowes, Morrel, Comfrey, Daysie, Rue, Plantain, Mace, Heyrif, Matfelon, and Dragons, ana. p. ae. fry them in a pan with the foresaid greace, secretum pro podagra. For the Collick and Stone. ℞. Cepas Rubras, pista commixta cum mulvasceto, & bibe calide. Aqua propter ulcera & malum mortuum. ℞. Aquam fabri potell. i. salviae, cuprifolii nasturtii & mo∣dicum mellis, coque ad medium, & lava locum. Aqua pro alceribus. ℞. Apii, Salviae, Sempervivae, ana. M. i. pista & coque in unalb. 8. aquae currentis, postea cola & adde, ℥. iiii. Aluminis, Mellis,lb. ss. Bulliet alumen modicum, adde ℥. iiii. Camphora & reserva.
Capitis dolor. Coque Cumium in malvazeto, & lava caput. Pista rutum, cum sale, & fiat emplastrum. For Bones broken in a mans Head. ℞ Agrimoniae Contisam fiat emplastrum. Item bibe Betonicam p. i. & resurgant ossa & sanatis pro acto vulnera. Capitis dolor. ℞. Rutae, hederae terrestris, folia lauri, coque in aqua vel vino & fiat emplastrum super caput. ℞. Celidoniam, pista & coque cum butyro versus dolorem capi∣tis etsi cranium cecidit de loco, &c. & lava cum decoctione ejusdem erbae. Corvi albi. Attende cum corvus habet ova, & unge ter vel quater cum melle, & pulli eorum erunt albi. Ebrii. Qui prius biberit crecum quam ad potationem inierit, crapulam vel ebrietatem non incurret. Acetum. Ʋt acetum redeat in vinum semen porri immitte per duas noctes. Ova rotunda producunt gallinas, longa vero gallos. Fistula. Hebba Roberti Fistulae emplastrata, vel succus ejus in eam posi∣ta eam curat. Succus caprifolii naribus impositus, polypum recentem & cancrum, & fistulam curat. Pro virga virili combusta cum muliere. ℞. Sume morellae & sedi & axungiae porcinae, p. ae. frixa & sup∣pone. Contra exitum ani. ℞. Ʋrticas rubras pista, & in olla terrea coque in vino albo
ad medium, postea bibe mane & sero calide, & faeces superpone. Contra fluxum. 1. ℞, Cornu cervi, & conchas ostrei, combure & da pulverem ma∣ne & sero 9 dies. Plaister of Paris. 2. ℞ Pulverem alabastri misce cum albumine ovi, pone super tempora & alia loca. An virgo corrupta. Pulveriza fortiter flores lilii crocei quae sunt inter albos flores, da ti comedere de illo pulvere, & si est corrupta statim minget. Ut dens cadat▪ Pulvis stercoris caprae positus supra dentem, facit cadere: cave alia. Pro combusto cum muliere. Take pouder of a linnen cloth when it is well burnt, and take the yolks of eggs, and mingle them well together, and therewith annoint the sore, and put the pouder into the hole. A Drink that healeth all Wounds without any Plaister or Ointment, or without any taint most perfectly. Take Sanicle, Milfoil, and Bugle, ana, p. ae. stamp them in a morter, and temper them with wine, and give the sick that is wounded to drinke twice or thrice in a day till he be whole. Bugle holdeth open the wound, Millfoil cleanseth the wound. Sanicle healeth it, but Sanicle may not be given to him that is hurt in the head, if the brain-pan be broken, for it will slay him, and therefore it is better in another place: This is a good and tryed Medicine. Ʋnguentum genistae. Take Flores genistae, floures and leaves of Woodbind, ana, p. ae. stamp them with May Butter, and let them stand so together all night, and in the morning make thereof an ointment, and melt it, and scum it well: This Medicine is good for all cold evils, and for sleeping of hand and foot. Unguentum Augustinum is good for all sore legs that be red and hot. Take Groundsell and Petty Morrell, and stamp them, and
temper them with May Butter, and put them in a pot fast closed, and let them stand so nine dayes, and then frie it over an easie fire, and strein it through a cloth, and put it in a box for your use. Unguentum viride is good pro erectione virgae, and for the mormale; no ointment worketh stronger then this. Take a pound of Swines grease, one ounce of Verdigrease, half a scruple of Sal gemmae, this ointment may be kept 40. winters: Valet contra cancros, and for running holes, it fretteth away dead flesh, and bringeth new, and healeth old wounds; put it within the wound that it fester not: Put to this oint∣ment, Pitch, rosin, and waxe, and it will be a fine heat for old bruises, swellings, and Mormales. Unguentum nigrum, for wounds, heating and burning. Take a quart of oyle of Olive, and boil it well, then cast in a quart of red lead, and stir it well with a slice, and boil it till it be black, and then let it cool; and keep it for drawing and healing. Ʋnguentum Rubrum. Take a pint of honey, half a pint of Vinegar, and a porti∣on of Verdigrease, boil them together, and it is good for all manner of sores. Contra vomitum. 1. ℞. Rosewater, pouder of Cloves, and Mastick, and drinke it hot. 2. Take Mints thre ounces, Roses half an ounce, Mastick one ounce, Barlie meal, and a crust of bread tosted, and this man∣ner of Plaister apply to the stomack. 3. Rutae cochleare i. bibe cum vino vel cerevisia, multum valet. 4. Pouder of Gilliflowers strewed on his meats, stancheth immediately. Note, He must eat no meat whilst he casteth (ut virtus maneat. Fluxus sanguinis narium. 1. Hens feathers burnt, and the smoke thereof applyed to the nostrils stinteth it.
2. A pigs turd burnt, and made into pouder, blown into the nostrils. 3. The juyce of Smallage drunk restraineth bleeding. Probat. 4. Succus menth & rutae mixtus curat fluxum narium. Contra Sciaticam. Stercora leporis temperata et calido vino applica forma empla∣stri dolori. Freckens of the face. 1. Grease your face with oyle of Almonds, & bibe succum plan∣taginis. 2. Annoint your visage well and often with Hares bloud. To know if a man be a Leper or no. Let him bleed, and put the bloud into water, and if the bloud swim above, he is a Leper, and if it descend, he is clean. For ache in the loins. Take Waybread, and Sanicle, stamp them, and put thereto Bores grease, & forma emplastri calide dolori applica. For a scald Head. 1 Wash thy head with Vinegar, and Cammomil stampt and mingled together, there is no better thing for the Scall. Probat. 2. Grinde white Hellebor, grinde it with Swines grease, ap∣plica capiti. 3. Take Culver dung, with Salt, and a little Vinegar, and stirre them well together, and therewith wash thy head, & sanabit capitis faeditates. Ad ornatum faciei. Take fresh Bores grease, and the white of an Egg, and stamp them together, with a little pouder of Bayes, and there∣with annoint the visage, and it shall clear the skin, and make it white. If the Liver rot. Eat raw Parsely 9. dayes, and 6. dayes after eat Sage, and that will cleanse that the Parsely hath wrought. Note, All Hearbs whose roots be medicinable, are best in Aprill. For stopping of the Pipes. ℞. I eaves and tender stocks of Horehound, stamp them and
seeth them well in Butter, then wring it through a cloth, cool it, and adde to that pouder of Liquorice, and of Hysop, mixe them together, and keep it in a Box, and when thou wilt, take a spoonfull, and temper it with hot wine, and use it when thou goest to bed. Aliud. ℞. A good quantity of Hysop, seeth it in half a gallon of good wine, till half bee fodden away, and let the sick use it first and last, at evening hot, and at morning cold. Probat. Aliud. ℞. The juyce of Cinquefoil stamped, and drinke a sup there∣of with wine or ale, and it shall clear thee of much flegm, a∣bove and beneath. The Plague Water. TAke a handfull of Sage and a handful of rue, and boil them in three pints of Malmsie, or Muscadine, untill one pint be wated, then take it off the fire, and strain the wine from the hearbs, then put into the wine two penniworth of long Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmeg, all grosly bruised, and let it boil a little again: This done, take it off the fire, and dissolve it in half an ounce of good Venic Triale, and a quarter of an ounce of Mithri∣date, and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong Angelica wa∣ter; so keep it in a glasse close stopped for your use: For pre∣servation you shall take every morning a spoonfull warm, and lay you down to sweat upon it, and so continue to take it twice a day untill you perfectly recover. This water likewise cureth the small Pox, the Masels, Surfets, and Pestilentiall Fevers. A Cordiall Water good for the Plague, Pox, Measels, all kind of Convulsions, Fevers, and all pain of the Stomack. Take Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Celandine, Seabios, Agrimonie, Mugwort, Woormwood, Pimpernel, Dragon, Carduus bene∣dictus, Rosa solis, Betonie▪ Marigold leaves and flowers, Cen∣turie,
Polipodium, Scurvie grasse, of each a handfull, wash them and swing them in a clean cloth till they be dry, then shred them small, and take the roots of Zedoarie, Tormentill, Enula campana, Angela, Licorice, of each half an ounce scraped, and sliced, thertake of the best white wine eight pints; put them all into an earthen pot well leaded, let them stand two dayes close covered, and stirre them once in the day, then still them in a Limbeck, with a temperate fire; it will be two dayes and a night in the still: keep the first pint by it self; of which you may take a spoonful at a time; of the next quart take twice so much; of the next pint you may give to little children a spoonful at a time: Lute the still well, that no aire come forth, and keep it in close glasses. For a Child that hath the Ague. Take the Hearb called Hartshorn, stamp it, then mingle it with bay Salt, and three or four houres before the fit come apply it, spread upon a linnen cloth, to the Childs wrists, and when the fit is past, apply a fresh one before the next fit, and in a few fits, God willing, she shall be cured. For a burning Fever. Take red mints two handfull, boyle them in a quart of run∣ning water, to the consumption of half, strain it, and put thereto four or five spoonfuls of white Wine Vinegar, and as much Honey, boyle it to the height of a Sirrup. Take of Endive two handfuls, boyle it in a quart of wa∣ter, to the consumption of half, take two spoonfulls of this, and one of the Sirrup, in the morning fasting, and at any other time you please. For the Jaundies black or yellow. Take of White Wine one pint, steep therein of the root of Caelidon, the weight of twelve pence, of Saffron one penny∣worth, a rase of Turmarick; bruise all, and bind them in a fine peece of Laun, and let it infuse in the Wine a night, drink
a part thereof in the morning, one other part at noon, and the rest at night. To bring down the Flowers. Take of Alligant, or Muskadine, or Clarret, a pint, burn it, and sweeten it well with Sugar, put thereto two spoon∣fulls of Sallet oyle, then take a good Bead of Amber in pou∣der in a spoon with some of the wine after it, take it evening and morning. To stay the Flowers. Take Amber, Corrall, Pearl, Jeat, of each alike, grind them to a fine pouder, and searse them; take thereof as much as will lye upon six pence with conserve of Quinces, and drink after it a draught of new milk, use it every morning. For the Mother. Take a brown tost of sour bread of the nether crust, and wash it with Vinegar, and put thereto black Sope, like as you would butter a tost, and lay it under the Navill. For the Stone. Take Saxifrage, Pellitorie, Parslie, Eyebright, wild Thime, of each two handfuls; of Raddish roots two or three, steep all in a pottle of red cowes milk a night, then still it, make of this quantity two stillings. You must take at a time nine spoonfuls, as much Renish or White wine, and the juice of a Lemon, sweeten all with Su∣gar, and take it fasting, if your stomack be cold, slice a little Ginger, and put into it. For a cold, cough, Ptissick, or any defect of the Lungs. Take Horehound, Maiden hair, Liver-wort, Harts tongue, Germander, Hysope, Agrimonie, of each a handfull, wash them and boil them in six pints of running water in a pipkin, till four pints be consumed at least, strain it, and put the li∣quor into another clean Pipkin, put thereto of the root of Enula campana in pouder and searsed one ounce, of Licorice so used two ounces, of pure honie eight or nine spoonfulls;
boyl it till it wax somewhat thick, then set it to cool: Take the quantity of half a nut at a time, as often as you please. The best time to make it is in May. For a Stitch. Take of stale Ale, two pints, clarifie it, and boyl therein of the tops of green broom a handful, then sweeten it with Sugar, and give thereof to the sick warm to drink. Also take Beer, make it very Salt, put a little Nutmeg there∣to, and drinke thereof bloud-warm. Apply upon the grief outward, Fennel seed, and Cammomile made wet with Malmsie, as hot as can be suffered, three or four dayes together. Or take a tost of Rie bread tosted on a gridiron, and spread Tar thick thereon, lay it hot next the skin, and let it lye 9, or 10 houres, and if the pain be not gone at first, apply it again. For a Consumption. Take a Leg of Veal, cut away the fat, and take a red Cock, scald him, and wash him clean, then let the Cock and Veal lye in water the space of three houres, seeth them with two pot∣tles of fair water, and scum it clean: as the fat riseth, take it off, and seeth it till half be consumed, then put in a pottle of the best Claret wine, and let it seeth together till it come to a quart, clarifie it with three or four whites of Eggs; let it run through a Jelly bag; then set it on the fire again, and put to it of Sugar a pound, let it seeth a little, then drinke of it warm three or four spoonfuls at a time, as often as you please▪ For the Green sickness. Take an Orange, cut off the top, and pick out some of the meat, then put therein a little Saffron, rost it gently, when it is rosted, put it presently into a pint of white Wine, keep it covered, and drink thereof fasting. A speciall Water for all Sores. Take of running water four pints, of Sage, Smallage, of
each three handfulls, of Housleek a handfull and a half, seeth them together to the consumption of half, then strain it, take of Allum two ounces, of white Copperis an ounce and a half, of Camphire two drachms, beat all severally into fine pouder, put all into the water, and let it boyle a little, then put there∣to of clarified Honie half a pint, and let it simper a while then reserve it in a glasse close stopped. Wash the sore therewith, and wet a cloth therein, and lay thereto; if it heal too fast, lay dry lint therein. For the trembling of the Heart Take a spoonfull of the spirit of Tartar when you find your self troubled. Or take Lignum aloes, Riponticum, Eupatorium, red Sanders, of each two ounces, beat them, and boyle them in fix pints of fair water till two pints be consumed; of the four pints that remain, being strained, make a Sirrup with Sugar, and while it is hot, put thereto of Saffron one scruple, of Ginger one drachm, of Musk two carets, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each a scru∣ple and a half, keep it in a glasse close shut, take thereof a drachm at a time in a little Broth, or Burrage water, fasting. For a Flux of the Womb. Take Chalke finely scraped, stir thereof in whites of Eggs till it be thick, spread thereof on brown paper, and lay it on a Gridiron on the fire untill it stiffen a little, bind it hot upon the Navill. Take Milk and set it on the fire, when it seeths, throw in a peice of Allum, which will turn it to a Posset, of the thin thereof, give a Glister in the morning, and at four in the afternoon. A purging drink for superfluous humours, for Aches in the joynts, sinewes, and for Agues. Take Sarsaperilla, Sasafrass, Polipodium, of each a handfull,
Hermodactiles the third part of an ounce, Licorice one ounce, cut and slice the abovenamed, and put them into a new Pip∣kin glassed, and having a cover, and put thereto five quarts of spring water, let all infuse four and twenty houres, then put thereto of Fennell seed two ounces, Raisins of the Sun stoned and picked four ounces, Carduus benedictus, red Sage, Agri∣mony, Maiden-hair, of each a handfull, put all into the Pipkin, and close it with paste, set it within a pan of warm water on the fire, and let it boyle two houres, then put thereto of Sena one ounce, let it boyle again half a quarter of an hour, and take it out, letting it stand covered two houres, then strain it with∣out wringing, and keep it in a glasse or stone bottle. You must take at a time half a pint in the morning, and fast one hour after, it will not purge in five or six houres, you may use it at any time in the year, but in extream heat, and in frosts. A pretious Eye-water for any disease of the Eyes, often proved. Take of the best white Wine two little glasse fulls, of white Rose water half a pint, of the water of Selendine, Fennell, Eyebright, and Rue, of each two ounces, of prepared Tutia six ounces, of Cloves as much, Sugar rosate a drachm, of Cam∣phire, and Aloes, each half a drachm. The Tatia is thus prepared. In a Crusible (such as the Goldsmiths use) put your Tutia and with a charcoale fire let it be made red hot six severall times, and every time quenched in Rose-water and Wine mixt together; the last time cast the water away, and grinde the Tutia to very fine powder. You must mix the Aloes with the water after this manner Put the Aloes in a clean Morter, and pour upon it of the mixt waters, with the Pestill grinde it too and fro, and as it mixeth with the water pour it off, putting more water to it, till it be all dissolved.
To bring the Camphire to powder. In a clean Morter beat one Almond, then put in the Cam∣phire, and beat it to a fine powder, without which it will not come to a powder. Likewise beat all the Cloves to a fine powder, then mix all together in a strong glasse, stop it close and lute it, that no air enter, and let it stand forty dayes and nights abroad in the hot∣test time of summer, and shake it well thrice a day. The use. Drop a drop of the water into the eye thrice a day with a black Hens Feather, the infirm lying on their back, and stirring the eye up and down. If there be any thing grow upon the eye. Take four drops of oyle of Amber rectified, and mix with half an ounce of the water, dresse the eye as before. For any Ague. Take a quarter of a pint of Canary Sack, put into it a penny∣worth of oyle of Spike, a pennyworth of Sirrup of Poppyes, and one grain of Bezar, mingle these together, and let them stand infused all night, and exhibite it next morning to the Patient fasting. For an Ague. Boyle two ounces of Roch in a Pipkin, in a pint of Ale, about a quarter of an hour or better, then give the party grieved to drink of it pretty warm, some two houres before the fit cometh, about half of it, and what the party cannot drink at the first draught, let it be warmed against the second fit, and give it as before, after two houres be past, let the party drink as much posset drink as he can. Another. Take the quantity of a Wallnut of black Sope, and three times as much crown Sope, mix them together, then shred a pretty quantity of Rue, and half a spoonfull of Pepper finely beaten, and a quarter of a spoonfull of fine wheat flour; min∣gle
all these together, then take as much strong Beer as will make it spread upon a linnen cloth, whereof make two plai∣sters, and lay to each wrist one, and sow them fast on for nine dayes; this must be applied as the cold fitt beginneth to come upon them. To make Pills to cleanse the backe. Boyle Venice Turpentine in Plantain water, then take the Turpentine, and bray it in a Morter to very fine powder, take the powder and mingle it with powder of white Amber, powder of Oculorum cancrorum, and powder of Nutmeg, of each half a drachm: mix them up into Pills, and take three of them in a morning. A Bath. Take Mallow leaves, Violet leaves, Endive, Motherwort, Mugwort, Rose leaves, Lettice, Cammomill, Bay leaves; boyle of all these one handfull, in a sufficient quantity of pure running water, and set in the Bath about an hour, then goe into a warm bed and sweat awhile, and when you come out of your sweat, and are pretty cool, eat Strawberries and Su∣gar, this will clear the body and purifie the blood. For the Cough of the Lungs, and defluxions. You may take sometimes of Sirrup magistrall, of Scabious and of Oxymell Jutianizans, of each one ounce, and of Dia∣codium half an ounce, and of Sirrup of Diasereos half an ounce: Mingle these all well together, and mingle with it also a drachm of pure flower of Sulphur finely searced; and take of this the quantity of a large Nutmeg three or four times in a day, at morning, an hour before dinner, an hour before supper, and last at night; it will cut the flegm, and carry it gently away, without any perturbation or violent trouble of cough∣ing, and cause quiet rest.
To cause a woman to have her Flowers. Take of Gladwin Roots about a handful, boyle them in Vi∣negar, or in white Wine till they be very tender, and after put this into a Vessel on the ground in a close stool, so that the woman may sit over it very close stopped, so that the heat may strike up into her body: This Medicine is reported never to fail, but to bring them down: But you must have a speciall care that no woman being with child have this Medicine ad∣ministred to her. For the Cough of the Lungs. Take of Coltsfoot two handfuls, of Hysop, and the tops of red Nettles, of each one handful, of Horehound, and Maiden∣hair, of each half a handfull, of Raisins of the sun, having their stones taken out three ounces, of Liquorice sliced half an ounce, and of Elecampane roots sliced one ounce, of Annise∣seeds half an ounce grosly bruised, boil all these together in a gallon of water in an earthen Pipkin with a gentle fire, till the third part be boyled away, then strein it, and take a quart of the decoction, and put to it two ounces of Sugar-Candie beaten, and let it boil a little over the fire again, till the Sugar Candie be melted, then take it off the fire, and put it up into a glasse close stopped, and drinke of it three or four spoonfuls morning and evening so long as it lasteth, a little warmed. For Cramp or Numnesse. Take a penniworth of Saffron, put it into a little bag, then put it into three ounces of Rosewater, and stir it well in the Rosewater, then take four penniworth of Camphire, and in∣fuse that in the Rosewater, and being so infused and mixed; chafe the place with it warm, and smell to it, as he bathes the place.
For a Cough, Winde, and a cold Stomack. Take four ounces of good Annise-seed water, mingle it with one ounce of spirit of Mint, and dissolve it with two ounces of pure white Sugar candie, beaten into very fine pouder; set it upon a chafingdish of coals in a peuter dish, and when it beginneth to walm, burn it with a paper as you doe wine, stir∣ring it well together with a spoon, then take it off the fire, and evening and morning, take a good spoonful of it first and last. It will comfort the stomack, and is good against cough and winde. For a Cough and Consumption. Take of Lungwort, Liverwort, Hysop, Violet, and Straw∣brrie leaves of each one handful, Licorice sliced, and scraped, Annise-seeds, and Fennel-seeds, of each one penniworth a little bruised, a Parsly and a Fennel root clean scraped, pithed, and cut into small peeces, twelve figs sliced, four ounces of good great Raisins having their stones taken out; boyl all these together in a pottle of clear running water, till it come to three pints, then put into it two ounces of pure white hard Sugar, dissolve it upon the fire with the other decoction, then take it off, strein it, and drink thrice a day of it, that is in the morning, about four in the afternoon, and last at night, three or four ounces of it at a time, and it will asswage the driness and thirst, and open the obstructions and stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and cause your Flegm to com away with more ease. For a Cold Dropsie. Take Olibanum, and rost it in a Fig, and apply it to their great Toe: But if they be swelled in their face or head; then take anew layd Egg roasted hard, take out the yolk, aend put into the hole so much Cummin Seed as will fill it, and ap∣ply it as hot as it may be endured to the nape of the neck.
For the Dropsie. Take a pottle of White or Rhenish Wine, an ounce of Cin∣namon, and a pint of green Broom ashes, put them together in an earthen pot eight and forty houres, the Cinnamon being first bruised; stirre them all often, and then put them up into a white Cotten bag, and let the liquor drain out of them, put it up again twice upon the lees, and then use four times a day of it, drink it cold, in the morning, one hour before dinner, one hour before supper, and when you goe to bed, at each time drink a quarter of a pint; if the greif be not fully re∣moved, use a second or third pottle so made up, but with most persons one pottle sufficeth. For an Ague. Take as much black Sope as a Wallnut, and three times as much crown Sope, and mingle them together, then shred a∣bout a pugill of Rue, and put thereto half a spoonfull of Pepper very finely beaten, and with a quatter of a spoonfull of fine wheat flour, or as much as shall suffice; mingle all these toge∣ther, then take as much strong Beer as will make it spread upon a linnen cloth, and make it up into two plaisters, and apply to each wrist one, and keep them fast on for nine dayes together; you must apply the plaisters just as the cold fit be∣ginneth to come upon them. Sweat is held by all experienced Phisitians, to be very good to cure an Ague, but they must be put into their sweat before the cold fit come upon them; you must use this twice or thrice before the Ague will be quite cured; and let them drink no other drink during their sweat but Aqua vitae and small Beer mingled together, but you must not make it too strong of the Aqua vitae. To comfort and strengthen the Joynts and Sinewes. ℞. Of the flowers and seeeds of Saint Johns Wort three
ounces, steep them three dayes in sufficient Wine, and then seeth them in a brazen Vessell till the Wine be consumed, then strain them, and put to the straining as much of fresh Saint Johns Wort stamped, and steep it again three dayes, and af∣terward add thereunto, of Turpentine three ounces, of old Oyle eight ounces, of Saffron one scruple; of Mastick ʒ ss. of Myrrh, of Frankincense, ana. ʒ. ii. ss, afterward put in the straining the space of a moneth, of the flowers and seed of Saint Johns Wort one handfull and half, of Madder brayed, of sine grain wherewith Scarlet is died, ana. three drachms, of the Juyce of Yarrow two ounces, seeth them to the consumpti∣on of the Juyce, with earth Wormes washed with Wine two ounces, and a little Wine odoriferous. For obstructions of Liver and Spleen. ℞. Flowers of Burrage, Buglosse, Marigolds, Violets, En∣dive, of each a handfull, Dates stoned three ounces, of the best blew Currans two ounces, sweet Fennell-feed half an ounce, Graines and Coriander, of each one drachm, whole brown Watercresses nine leaves, Hysop stripped downwards nine little branches, of french Barly three ounces; boyl all these together in a pottle of spring water till a third part be consu∣med, then strain it, and when it is strained adde of the con∣serve of Barberries three ounces, Sirrup of Lemons and of Quinces, of each three ounces, this is to be taken morning and evening, nine spoonfuls at a time. The Flowers are to be had at the Apothecaries, dry all the year. For the Palsie in the head. For the Palsie in the head, take of the oyles, of Amber, Fox, and Beaver, and mingle them together, and annoint the nape of the neck with them evening and morning, chafe it in with a warm hand, and chafingdish of hot coales. And take of the oyle of Amber alone, and with your finger
put some of it every morning into your nose, and take two or three drops of it, and rub it into your head upon the mould thereof. And take two or three drops of the same Oyle, and put it into your Beer or Ale for your mornings draught, especially at the change or full of the Moon, for four or five dayes together. Be sure to keep warm, and avoid going abroad in rain, misty, or moist weather. Oyle of Saint Johns Wort for ache and pain. Take a quart of Sallet oyle, put thereto a quart of flowers of Saint Johns Wort well picked, let them lie therein all the summer, untill the seeds of that hearb be ripe, the glasse must be kept warm, either in the Sun or in water, all the sum∣mer untill the seeds be ripe, then put in a quart of Saint Johns Wort seeds whole, and so let it stand twelve houres, the glasse being kept open, then you must seeth the oyle eight houres, the water in the pot full as high as the oyle in the glasse, when it is cold strain it, that the seed remain not in it, and so keep it for your use. For the knitting together and strenthening of bones. Give inwardly Knotgrasse, Plantain, or Ribwort water, with Sirrup of the greater Comfrey, to three spoonfuls of the water exhibit one of the sirrup, so often as they use it: There are also vulnerary Potions prescribed for this purpose in the Dispensatories. For the Courses. When you give Oculos cancrorum (truly called Lapides cancrrum) to provoke a womans Courses, you must give her almost a spoonfull of it, mixed with some water of Mother∣wort, called Artemisia, causing her to drink a good glass-full
of the water immediately after it; the best time to exhibite it, is to give it hot in the morning by four of the clock, and let her sleep after it, you must give it about those times she ordinarily expecteth her Courses; if you cannot get Morher∣wort water, you may use in stead of it Penniroyall water. You may dissolve your powder of Lapidum cancrorum, either with juyce of Lemons, or with distilled Vinegar, and spirit of Vitrioll; If you put a greater proportion of Vitrioll, then of the other, it will sooner dissolve, you need but cover it with the juyce or spirits, and after some few houres poure off the spirits from the powder. A Cordiall excellent good for melancholy, panting and trembling of the heart, swounding, fainting, coldnesse, and rawnesse of the stomack, and also for many other greifs arising from a cold and moist complexion, often proved with happy successe. Take of Saffron half an ounce, of Angelica roots finely sliced one ounce, of Cloves six drachms, Balm two handfuls, Rosemary tops four handfuls, shread the hearbs and roots, and beat the spices grosly, then put them, with half a pound of Sugar, into three pints of small Cinnamon water, or of small Aqua vitae, and let them stand infused three or four dayes together, after boyle them, and let the Aqua vitae burn, stir∣ring them well together, till near a pint thereof be consumed away, then strain it, and when it is settled poure off the clear from the bottome; keep the clear for your own use, and re∣serve the bottome, which you may give away unto poor peo∣ple, for it will be good and comfortable, though not so strong: The way to use it, is to take every morning fasting a spoonfull, and after every meal, at each severall time, a spoonfull. A sudden way to make up this excellent Cordiall. Take of the best of Doctor Mountfords water, ana. ℥. iiii. Of very good Angelica water ana. ℥. iiii.
Of Clove water, ana. ℥. iiii. Of Rosemary water, ana. ℥. iiii. Of Balm water, ana. ℥. iiii. Of spirit of Saffron ℥. ii. Mingle all these together, and with as much sirrup of pure Sugar as shall suffice mingled, make it up, and put into either of these two Medicines, of Musk and Ambergrease, of each a grain. Both these are excellent Cordials for all the greifes before rehearsed. Pills to purge flegm and Wind. Take of the best Aloes succotrina nine drachms, of Ru∣barb, Jallop, and Agarick, of each six drachms, of Mastick four drachms, of red Rose leaves three drachms, let all these be beaten severally into very fine powder, and searced, then mix them well, and beat them up into a paste, with sirrup of da∣mask Roses as much as shall suffice, at the end add unto it twenty drops of oyle of Anniseeds: when you have occasion to use these Pills, take about two scruples thereof for one dose made up into three Pills. For the Gout. Take of new extracted Honey two spoonfuls, a pennyworth of red Nettle seeds finely bruised, mingle them well together, and apply it to the Gout: Let the party drink every third day for a sevenninght in the morning in his bed half a pint of new Milk, of a red or black Cow. For the Gout, My Lord Denni's Medicine. Take Burdocks leaves and stalks, cut them small, and stamp them very small, then strain them, and cleanse them, and when you have so done put them into glasses, and put pure oyle of Olives a top of them, and stop it close from the air, and when you would use it for the Gout, poure it into a porrenger and
warm it, and wet linnen clothes in it, and apply it warm to the greived place, warming your clothes one after another, as they grow cold that are on. Another, very good for the Gout. Take the Yest of Ale, and spread it upon brown paper, and apply it upon the greived place pretty warm, the space of twelve houres: some first warm the pickle of Olives, and then bath the greived place therewith, putting their feet into it, and after use the former Medicine. My Lord Denni's Medicine must not be taken till three dayes after the change of the Moon, then after it must be ta∣ken six dayes together, then six dayes before the full it must be taken twice a day. To stay the Courses when they come down too violently. Take half a drachm or a drachm of Diascordium, dissolve it in a drachm of posset Ale, wherein formerly hath been boyled half a handfull of Shepherds purse, and as much knotgrasse, and of the greater Comfrey, and drink thereof a good draught at a time morning and evening. For the Whites. Take a quarter of a handfull of white Archangell, Plantain, Sheaphards purse, and of the greater Comfrey, of each half a handfull, of the hearbs Horse-taile, and Cats-taile, of each half a handfull, boyle all these in two quarts of Milk till half be con∣sumed away, then strain it, and sweeten it with good white Su∣gar Candy finely beaten, and drink of it twice a day for ten or fifteen dayes together. To keep the body soluble, and to purifie the bloud. Take Maydenhair, wild Germander, wood-Sorrell, and
Balm, of each a pugill, of wild Mercury half a handfull, of da∣mask Roses two handfuls, of clarified Whey six pints, let it stand scalding hot for an houre stirring it sometimes, after an hour is past strain it, and drink it twice or thrice a day a good draught of it; and if you wash your hands in Beef broth after your taking it, it will take away all roughnesse and haires of the hands, it may be taken safe of a woman with child For the green Sicknesse, or yellow Jaundies. For cure hereof first purge universally with this or the like purgation. ℞. of Hiera picra four scruples, of Rubarb, and Trochisces of Agarick, of each half a drachm, of rasped Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each half a scruple, of Cinnamon six graines, of Saffron four graines, of Diacatholicon half an ounce; in∣fuse these things in the Whey of Cows Milk, or in the distilled water of Alkakengie, or in Dodder water, or Endive water, you may adde Oxymell thereto. An Electuary for the green Sicknesse. Take of Diatrion santalon, and Diarrhodon abbatis, of each one drachm, of Diacurcuma, and confection of Alkermes, of each half an ounce, of Diamargariton frigidum, and Calidum, of each two drachms, of rasped Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each one drachm, of all these make an Electuary, and give it evening and morning by it self, or with Dodder or Endive water, the dose is one drachm, pro tempore uno. An excellent Powder for the green Sicknesse. ℞. four scruples of Gentian made into fine powder, of rasped Ivory, and Hartshorn, of each two scruples; make these into a fine powder, and give a spoonfull thereof with white Wine, or the like, at once.
Another Medicine. ℞. Three or four spoonfuls of flemish Madder, boyle it in two quarts of white Wine, with a peice of Sugar, to the con∣sumption of half of it, strain it, and let the Maiden drink there∣of morning and evening a good draught warm, and walk, or use some exercise to heat the body, but take no cold; use this for eleven or twelve dayes together. A singular purging Potion against the green Sicknesse, and all opilations of the Liver, and causeth young Maids to look fresh, and fair, and cherry-cheek'd, and will bring down their Courses, the stopping whereof causeth this greif, and it is good against all manner of itch, scabs, breaking out, and mangi∣nesse of the body, purifying the blood from all corruption. ℞. Of the roots of Monkes Rubarb, that is red Dock, and of red Madder, ana. half a pound, of Sena four ounces, of An∣niseseed, and Licorice, of each two ounces, of Scabious, and Agrimony, of each one handfull; slice the roots of Rubarb, and bruise the Anniseseed and Licorice, break the hearbs small, and put them all into a pot with four gallons of strong Ale, and infuse them all the space of three dayes, then drink of this drink, for your ordinary drink, for three weeks at the least, the longer the better, and make new as need requireth; it cureth the Dropsie, and yellow Jaundies also, if you put in of Cammomill one handfull. For the green Sicknesse, or Jaundies. ℞. Of white Briony root sliced half an ounce, boyle it in a pint of Ale gently a quarter of an hour, and drink a good draught thereof, and sweat, and in your sweat drink it all, or as much as you can, the next day make new and drink again, but without sweating, and use some exercise to keep the body warm; use this last order twelve dayes together, use
good Cordials and Restoratives, with sirrup and conserve of Fumitory. For the green Sicknesse, and Jaundies. Boyle of Rue, and Sage, of each a bundle, in a quart or three pints of Ale, with one scruple of Saffron. To cure this disease, the Electuary of Steel is excellent, if the body be first purged, for it doth open all obstructions: but the Patient must use some exercise after the taking it, to stirre up naturall heat the better; the dose is half an ounce at a time to take of it. The Steel for the Electuary is thus prepared. ℞. Of the filings of the best Iron, or Steel, as much as you please, grinde it subtilly and finely, upon a Porphiry, or red Marble stone, with Vinegar, then dry it at the Sun, or at the fire, and grinde it again with Vinegar as at the first, and doe thus seven times one after another, and thus you have the Steel prepared fit for you. The Electuary of Steel is made up thus. ℞. Of the filings of Steel so prepared half an ounce, Cinna∣mon, Nutmegs condited, of each three drachms, of chosen Rubarb two drachms, of the species of Aromaticum rosatum half a drachm, of chosen Honey, and of fine white Sugar, of each one pound and one ounce; mingle these all together over a soft fire, and make it up into an Electuary. After the taking of this Electuary, let the Patient in all cases use some bodily exercises, being first universally purged, for this Electuary is most excellent against all obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, or other disease, and for the green Sicknesse. For the green Sicknesse, or green Jaundies. The green Sicknesse, or Jaundies cometh of yellow choller
mixed with corrupt or putrified flegm, and corruption of bloud, debility of nature, and faintnesse of heart; it happen∣eth also when the Liver is weakened that it cannot convert the nourishment into bloud, but the digestion is raw and crude, so that the whole body is filled with water and flegm instead of good bloud; it is cheifly found in young Maidens, who de∣sire to abate their fresh colours, and, as they conceive, to be fine, and fair, and foolishly feed upon trash (which altereth the colour and state of their bodies) as of unripe Apples, Peares, Plums, Cherries, and raw Fruits, and Hearbs, or Meale, Wheat, Barly, raw Milk, Chalk, Lime, and the like, and they that have this disease are very pale and greenish; if they chance to cut their finger, no bloud, but water, will follow; they feele great pain in their head, with continuall beating, are faint, short-breathed, and their naturall Flowers are stopped and stayed, to the prevention and cure whereof, the body must first be well and orderly purged, as by the Medicines before pre∣scribed. FINIS.
The Table for the Child-Bearers Cabinet. WHat things are to be taken heed of in the two first Moneths page 1 Orders for the third moneth page 2 From the fourth moneth page 3 From the fifth, sixth, and seventh moneth ibid In the eighth moneth page 4 In the ninth moneth page 5 A Liniment page 6 The Fomentation ibid The Bath page 7 Suffumigations of the Genitals to facilitate delivery ibid What meat is most usefull page 8 What manner of Chamber the woman with child should lye in ibid What is to be done at the Birth ibid How and wherewith the child-bed womans bed ought to be furni∣shed page 9 To whom the seat may agree and be fit ibid What the Midwife shall doe in the very moment of the Birth ibid What to be done when the Infant is come into the world page 10 If the Secondines break not readily page 11 What is to be done after the child is born, if yet the Secondine, or after-Birth be retained ibid Another approved Remedie for drawing them forth page 12 Another Receipt ibid. To draw forth a dead child ibid How the bellies of Child-bearing women, being costive or bound, may be loosned page 13 What things are to be applyed to the naturall or Secret Parts ibid The Fomentation ibid
Another page 14 An Ointment ibid. A Girdle for the Belly ibid. The order from he seventh day after the woman is brought to bed page 15 On the eighth day ibid. On the ninth day ibid. A Liniment to scatter and disperse the Milk ibid. When, and whath Bath they must use page 16 Another page 17 Against the gripings of the belly in Children ibid. Outward Remdies for the same ibid. Inward helps in their meats ibid. A Drink ibid. The government of the Nurse page 18 The Care of the Infant page 19 A Bath of sweet water very profitable for Children, as by whose meanes they may grow up and increase page 20 The diseases of Infants page 21 The diseases and symptomes proceeding from the birth in women with child ibid. Against the Rupture of the Cods, and perinaeum, and the part be∣tween the rising of the Yeard and the Fundament, which proceedeth from difficulty of bringing forth page 22 For windinesse, or Collick of the Belly page 23 For the Itch ibid. For the Flux of the bloud page 24 For falling down of the Matrix from the birth ibid. For the Piles after the birth page 25 Against pain of the Breasts contracted by too much Milk ibid. For the Imposthume of the Breasts ibid. What is to be administred to the Child after it is born, for the first thing it taketh page 27 For Infants troubled with wind and flegm page 28 A most excellent Medicine to cause Children to teeth easily ibid. For Agues in Children ibid. For Wormes in Children ibid. For Heart-Wormes page 29
The Cure ibid. To cause a young Child to goe to stool ibid. Another certain Experiment. ibid. The Table of the Cures for seve∣rall Diseases. FOr Ach in the bones 33 For all Aches, and lame Members ibid. An Ointment for all Aches which come from cold causes, shrunken Sinewes, straines in man or beast, it is incomparable, and will keep forty yeares, but it must be made onely in May 34 To counterfeit beyond-Sea Azure ibid. To know good Azure and pure 35 For an Ague ibid. For a Tertian, or a double Tertian Ague ibid. For a short Breath ibid. An Electuary for the shortnesse of Breath. 36 For a Bruise or Squat ibid. A Restorative for the back 37 For Aches in the Back ibid. For bleeding at the Nose ibid. For burning or Scalding ibid. For a Cough of the Lungs 38 For purging of Colds, Coughs, and Comforting the Lungs ibid. A Julep for a Cough 39 Another ibid. For a Canker in the Mouth ibid. For a Consumption, and Cough of the Lungs 40 For Collick, and paines in the Back ibid. For the Cramp 41 For a Canker ibid. Another ibid. For a Canker in the Lips ibid. A water for a Consumption ibid. For the Cough 42
For a Cough or shortness of Breath ibid F a Consumption ibid F the Dropsie 43 other ibid pains in the Eyes ibid sore Eyes by salt Rheum ibid To cleer the Eye-sight 44 Fo the Flux ibid Another 45 For the bloudie Flux ibid Another for the same ibid Ather for the same 46 Another for the same ibid An Ointment for the Flux 47 For all Fluxes of bloud, and other Fluxes, pains in the back or Liver, and for inward effects ibid A Powder for the Flux 48 A Clyster ibid For Morphew, or Scurf of the face or Skin ibid To blanch the Face ibid To make the Skin smooth. 49 For the Morphew and Freckles ibid For the Gout, or Ache in the joynts ibid For the Gout or Bone-ach ibid For the Gout, or Joynt-ach 50 For the Gout ibid For the Gout or Bone-ach ibid Hermes Tree ibid A Plaister to help any Stitch, or Imposthume wheresoever 51 For an Imposthme of the Stomack ibid A good Oyle to bring in Joynts that have been out for the space of seven years, to give strength to veins and sinnews, and to keep them brought in, in their places ibid For the black Jaundies 52 Another for the same ibid To make Hartshorn Jelly. 53 For the yellow Jaundies. ibid
Another for the same ibid. For a lame Leg 54 For the same ibid. For chopt Lips 55 A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs, and Consumption ibid. To make a Laxative Whey ibid. A good Laxtive for a Child ibid. To cause Loosenesse. 56 For a costive by burnt Choller. ibid. For Rheume procuring a Cough of the Lungs ibid. A Drink for the Cough of the Lungs 57 A cooling Almond Milk ibid. A Water to restore Nature ibid. To restore Nature consumed 58 For the French Pox ibid Another 59 Another ibid A Posset good in all cold Agues, or Pestilentiall Diseases. ibid The Plague Water 60 An Antidote against the Pestilence, by Dr. B. ibid For the shaking Palsie 61 Another ibid To restore lost Speech ibid To restore speech to an Apoplectick ibid A Restorative Electuary ibid A Restorative good in all diseases 62 For the Rickets ibid. Doctor Vanhecks Rosa Vitae 63 A Sear-cloth for divers causes. 64 For the Stone 65 For the Stone, Strangury, and Collick ibid. For the Stone in the Bladder ibid. To break and drive out the Stone ibid. To cause Ʋrine, and break the Stone ibid, For the Stone 66 For the Stone in the Reines and Bladder ibid. A Posset for the Stone 67
For the Spleen ibid. Another ibid. For Swelling of Armes, Legs, and Feet ibid. For Sinewes, and Nerves, cut asunder 68 For Bruises, or streined Sinewes ibid. For shrinkng of Sinewes ibid. For Sinewes shrunk, and to supple impotent Limbs 69 To cure an old Sore. ibid. For the Scurvy ibid. To cool the Skin, and heal a Sore 70 To help paines in the Stomack ibid. An Ointment for the Stomack ibid. For the pricking of a Thorn 71 To draw a Thorn or Splinter out of the flesh ibid For the Tooth-ach ibid To keep Teeth White, and kill the Worms ibid To take away a Wen ibid A Table for the Treatise concerning the Plague and Small Pox. VVHat the Plague is 1 Cause of the Plague ibid Warnings of the Plague to come 3 How to prevent the Plague 4 A good perfume in Summer season 5 A good perfume in Winter Season ibid An excellent good preservative against the Plague 6 Another preservative ibid Another very good 7 An Excellent Quilt or Bag 8 Another Bag ibid A Pomander good in the Summer time 9 Another for the Winter season ibid
A good Nodule for the Summer season ibid Another Nodule for the Winter season ibid A Nosegay for the same purpose 10 A Suppository ibid A good Clyster 11 How to make Raisins laxative ibid A good Ointment to keep one soluble ibid Good Pills to keep one soluble, and they doe also resist the Pestilence 12 Pills good to purge 13 A good purging Potion ibid A Purging powder for such as cannot take Pills 14 Flours stopt, how to provoke them ibid Issues commended against the Plague ibid What diet we ought to keep 15 What for your Pottage you may take in the Summer 16 What exercise and Order is to be kept 17 What Orders Magistrates and Rulers of Cities and Towns shall cause to bee observed 18 What you must doe when you go to visit the sick 19 The signs of the Infection 21 Good signs ibid Evill signs ibid The means how to cure the Plague 23 An excellent Powder to expell the Plague 26 Another good powder ibid A good Opiat to expel Venome, and to provoke sweat 27 Another excellent good means for the same ibid An excellent good water against the Plague, and divers other dis∣eases, which is to be made in May or June 28 Directions what the Patient must doe after the taking of the Cor∣diall ibid A good defensative Ʋnguent 29 Epithemation ibid Another ibid A Quilt for the Heart 30 A Cordial Julip ibid Another ibid A Julip to quench thirst 31
A Julep to quench thirst, and to resist Venenositie 32 A good purgation in a strong body 33 Another in a plethorick and full bodie ibid A good purgation for a weak bodie ibid Another gentle purgation 34 A good Cordial to be taken after Purging ibid Another good Cordial to be given where great heat is ibid A good Cordial Potion ibid What Symptoms often chance, and the manner how to help them 35 For lightnsse of the head through want of sleep ibid An Ointment to provoke sleep ibid For raving and raging ibid A good Sacculus for raving and raging 36 An Aphtham to help it ibid A good Gargarism for the mouth ibid Vomiting extreamly how to help it ibid A good Bag for the Soomack 37 Yex, or yexing to stay it ibid Flix how to stop it 38 Epithemation for the heart ibid The generall cure of a Botch when it appeareth outwardly 39 A good Maturative ibid Another ibid Another where no Inflammation is 40 A Digestive ibid A Digestive Cataplasm ibid How to bring the Botch out, that lieth deep within the body or flesh 41 A good Maturative Cataplasm ibid Another 42 Another which is sooner made ibid A Vesicatorie ibid When the Botch will not come to Maturation, but continueth al∣wayes hard 43 An Epithemation ibid A Digestive ibid What is to be done when the Botch strikes in again 44 How to draw a Botch from one place to another, and so to discuss
him without breaking ibid Epithemation 45 How to know a Carbuncle or blain, as also the cure of the same 46 The cure of the Carbuncle 47 A Maturative Cataplasm ibid Mundificative Anodines ibid Another Mundificative ibid When the Carbuncle doth come with great pain and Inflammation 48 A Bag good against it ibid A Cataplasm 49 The Table of the Treatise concerning the Cure of the Small Pox. WHat the small Pox and Measels are, and whereof they proceed 50 What the Measels or Males are 51 The cause of the Pox and Measels ibid To know the signs when one is infected, as also the good and ill signs in the disease 52 How to know of what humours this disease cometh 53 How to cure the Measels or small Pox 54 A Clyster 55 How to preserve the eyes ibid What is to be done when the Pox or Measels are slow in coming forth 57 Another good drink to expell the Pox or Measels ibid Epithemation for the eart 58 How to quench the th t ibid What is to be done when all the Pox are come out ibid When the Pox, after they be come out, doe not grow to maturation, how you shall help it 60 How to help ulceration ibid A very good Ʋnguent for the same purpose 61 For extream heat and burnings in the soles of the feet, and palms of the hands ibid
For to help the sorenesse and ulceration of the mouth ibid For inflammation, and pain in the tonsils and throat 62 Another ibid How to open the eye-lids that are fastened together with the Pox ibid A good Collary for a Web, or Ungula in the eye ibid How to help divers accidents which chance after the Pox are cured and gone 63 For rednesse of the face and hands after the Pox are gone ibid For spots in the face remaining when the Pox are gone ibid A good Ointment for the same purpose 64 For holes remaining when the small Pox are gone ibid Running of the Eares how to help it ibid For stopping of the Nostrils to help it 65 For hoarsenesse remaining when the Pox are gone ibid For filthy and moist Scabs after the Pox are gone ibid The Table of the additionall Observations. A Preservative against the infection of the Air and Plague, often approved by Pope Adrian, and many other of great rank and quality 97 A Cordiall water against the Infection ibid Severall opinions against wearing of Arsenick Amulets, as Preser∣vatives against the Plague 98 Causes of the Plague 100 Signs of the Plague 101 How the infection of the Plague entreth into a man ibid The cure of the Plague 102 Another 103 Another ibid Another ibid Another for Botches, Boyles, and Tokens 104 Experiments for the cure of the Plague 105 Another approved Remedy ibid A sweating Powder ibid The Table of the cure of Diseases in remote Regions. THe Calenture 106 To know the Calenture ibid To cure the Calenture ibid The Taberdilla 107
To know the Taberdilla ibid The cure of the Taberdilla ibid The Espinlas 108 To know the Espinlas ibid To cure the Espinlas 109 Camera de Sangre ibid The cure of the bloudy Flux ibid The Erisipela 110 To know the Erisipela ibid To cure the Erisipela ibid The Tinoso or Scurvy 111 To know the Scurvy ibid Preservatives against the Scurvy 112 To cure the Scurvy ibid Sennertus his Observations of the Scurvy 113 A water to make a man see within forty dayes, though he have been blind seven yeares before, if he be under fifty yeares of age 115 For the Web in the eye ibid For the Wind in the side, that maketh the head swim ibid Against Deafnesse ibid Contra lupum veniens super oculum aut pedem 116 Pro Cancro & lupo ibid Pro oculis ibid For bleared eyes 117 Cornes ibid Apostema ibid For a cold Stomack ibid For the pain of the Stomack ibid For wind, or gnawing in the belly ibid For the small Pox ibid For a stroak in the eye 118 Bloudshed in the eye ibid Pro oculo & aure ibid For a venomed Sore ibid To make a Swelling break ibid For the Squinsie ibid For biting of a mad Dog ibid To break a Botch ibid
For gnawings ibid To increase Milk ibid If Milk be thick ibid A Salve for Botches, Wounds, and Sores ibid Venena 119 Pro auribus ibid Caput-purgium ibid For the bloudy Flix ibid For Stomack-Wormes ibid For a Felon ibid For the Reins of the Back ibid For them that cannot goe upright for pain in their Back and Reines 120 For the Stitch ibid For the Stitch in the side ibid To heal Wounds ibid For swelling of Joynts ibid To knit Sinewes, or Veines, that are kickt or broke ibid Ut virga hominis nunquam eri∣gatur ibid Verrucae, Porri, ficus 121 For Cornes ibid For Warts ibid For a Wound that bleedeth in∣wardly ibid If men have any bloud within them of any hurt ibid Aqua pro scable, tumore, & pruritu ibid An vulneratus vivat, vel non ibid To destroy an Imposthume, in what place soever it be ibid For Warts 122 Oleum Nucum ibid Unguentum Dialaehaeae optimum pro podagra ibid For the Collick and Stone ibid Aqua propter ulcera & malum mortuum ibid Aqua pro ulceribus ibid Capitis dolor 123 For Bones broken in a mans Head ibid Capitis dolor ibid Corvi albi ibid Ebrii ibid Acetum ibid Fistula ibid Pro virga virili combusta cum muliere ibid Contra exitum ani ibid Contra fluxum 124 Plaister of Paris ibid An virgo corrupta ibid Ut dens cadat ibid Pro cumbusto cum muliere ibid A Drink that healeth all Wounds without any Plaister, or Oint∣ment, or without any taint most perfectly ibid Unguentum genistae ibid Unguentum Augustinum is good for all sore Legs that be red and hot ibid Unguentum viride is good pro erectione virgae, and for the Mormale; no Ointment work∣eth stronger then this 125 Unguentum nigrum for Wounds, eating and burning ibid Unguentum Rubrum ibid
Contra Vomitum ibid Fluxus sanguinis narium ibid Contra Sciaticam 126 Freckles of the face ibid To know if a man be a Leper or no ibid For ach in the loins ibid For a scald head ibid Ad ornatum faciei ibid If the Liver rot ibid For stopping of the Pipes ibid Two more of the same 127 The Plague Water ibid A Cordial water good for the Plague, Pox, Measels, all kind of Convulsions, Fevers, and all pain of the stomack ibid For a child that hath the Ague 128 For a burning Fever ibid For the Jaundies black or yellow ibid To bring down the flowers 129 To stay the flowres ibid For the Mother ibid For the stone ibid For a cold, cough, Ptissick, or any defect of the Lungs ibid For a Stitch 130 For a Consumption ibid For the green sickness ibid A specill water for all Sores ibid For the trembling of the heart 131 For a Flux of the wombe ibid A Purging drink for superfluous humours, for aches in the joynts, sinews, and for Agues ibid A precious eye water for any dis∣ease of the eyes, often proved 132 Tutia is thus prepared ibid You must mix the Aloes with the water after this manner ibid To bring the Camphire to ponder with the use 133 If there be any thing grown upon the eye ibid For any Ague ibid To make Pills to cleanse the back 134 A Bath ibid For the cough of the Lungs and defluxions ibid To cause a woman to have her flowres 135 For the Cough of the Lungs ibid For Cramp or numn sse ibid Fir a Cough, Wind, and a cold Stomack 136 For a Cough, and a Consumption ibid For a cold Dropsie ibid For the Dropsie 137 For an Ague ibid To comfort and strengthen the joynts and sinnews ibid For obstructions of Liver and Spleen 138 For the Palsie in the head ibid Oyle of Saint Johns-wort for ach and pain 139 For the knitting together and the strengthning of bones ibid For the Courses ibid
A Cordial excellent good for Me∣lancholy, panting, and trem∣bling of the heart, swouning, fainting, coldnesse, and raw∣ness of the stomack, and also for many other griefs arising from a cold and moist complexi∣on, often proved with happie successe 140 A sudden way to make up this excellent Cordial ibid Pills to purge flegm and winde 141 For the Gout ibid My Lord Dennis his Medi∣cine for the Gout ibid Another for the Gout 142 To stay the Courses when they come down too violently ibid For the whites ibid To keep the body soluble, and to purifie the bloud ibid For the green sickness, or yellow Jaundies 143 An Electuary for the green Sick∣ness ibid An excellent Powder for the green Sicknesse ibid Another 144 A singular purging Potion a∣gainst the green Sickness, &c. ibid FINIS.
