F1986 R216396 99828127 32554
A Warning TO ENGLAND, And to all that profess themselves CHRISTIANS, Who Have the Form, but deny the Power of Godliness, that they Sin No More, lest a worse Thing come to them. Let this be speedily dispersed. George Fox. As ye have received Christ Jesus, the Lord, so walk in him, Colos. 2.6. For, even our God is a Consuming Fire, Heb. 12.29. Printed in the Year 1674.
A WARNING TO ENGLAND, &c. This is to all ye People that are call'd Christians, that walk not in the Spirit of Christ, to consider your Lives and Conversations, and for to see, how unlike you are unto Christ and his Apostles, which all True Christians are to walk as he walked, and as the Apostles and the true Christians in the Primitive Times did; and your Conversati∣ons should be in Heaven, as theirs was. AND now, all you that do not walk as you have the Apostles for Ex∣amples, and to walk as Christ
walked, as in 1 John 2.6. If the Lord God Almighty, who is the Creator of all, and the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made, shou d deal with you as you deal with him, who spend his Creatures upon your Lusts, and devour them and consume them immoderately; I say, If the Lord God, that created all, and gives the Increase of all, and upholds all by his Word and Pow∣er (For, the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fulness thereof.) I say, If the Lord God should restrain the Earth from Encreasing, and all other Creatures which give you Food, for Three or Four Years, what a Condition would you be in, that destroy them so upon your Lusts? If the Lord God should bring a FAMINE, and stop (I say) the Earth from yielding its Increase to you, that so destroy and consume his Creatures upon your Un∣godly Devouring Lusts, Wasteing so much avinly, which would nourish so many both in Cloaths and Dyet, as are ready to Famish, and Starve for Want? Have not you seen how the Lord God hath brought the Sword among you? And are not you as Proud and as Vain, without his Fear as you were, though so many have been consumed by Sword? Then did not he bring the Plague, and swept away many Thousands thereby, and
scattered you out of your City of London? And then after did not he bring the Fire, to the Astonishment of many? And what if the Lord should hinder the Earth from Increa∣sing, how could you but say, It were Just with the Lord so to do, and to bring a Famine upon you, seeing that you do not Repent, and Amend your Lives, and Fear and Serve him that made you? And all these good outward Creatures, which he has given to you, and daily gives in his Mercy, that you might serve and fear him, and not to consume them upon your own Lusts, and has given you Rain and Fruitful Seasons; now what, if the Lord should Restrain his Hand in those things from you, that do so devour them, and con∣sume them, and waste them upon your Lusts, Could you say any other wise, but The Lord is Just in so doing? seeing that you a∣mend not your Lives, Wayes, Words and Doings; and are such, that feast and are fee∣ding your selves without all Fear, as you may see in Jude 12. and so are the Clouds without Water, and Trees without Fruit. So, if God should send you Clouds without Water in them, and your Trees without Fruit, remember the Fig-Tree that Christ cursed, that did not bear Fruit, and think
upon your selves, & you are all Trees: but see what Fruits of Righteousness, of Godliness, of Virtue and of Holiness you bear to God; for, without Holiness none shall see God: And therefore take heed of promising your selves Liberty, whilst your selves are Servants of Uncleanness and Corruptions, as in 2 Pet. 2. And when you Destroy, Consume and De∣vour God's good Creatures upon your Lusts, do you think of God? Don't you feed with∣out any Fear of God? And do not many live after that sort, as they did that said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye? as in 1 Cor. 15.42. And doth not the Apostle say, That every Creature of God is good, & nothing ouht to be refus'd, if it be receiv'd with thanks∣giving; for God hath created them to be re∣ceived with Thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer? And now when you destroy the Creatures upon your Lusts, with Gluttony, Greediness and Drun∣kenness, you are not in a Capacity then of Praying or giving Thanks, but of Cursing, Swearing, Damning and Murdering, and all other Evils you are subject to run into, and then often brings Misery and many Evils up∣on your selves and Families. Tim. 1.4. Now Every Creature of God is
good [Mark] and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving; for God created them to be received with Thanksgi∣ving: And the Thanksgiving must be given to him that created them; and therefore you ought to receive no Creature but with Thanksgiving to the Creator, and you ought to give him Thanks that created all to his Glory; and if you do not, you are of them that feed without all Fear of God, your and their Creator. And they that take the Crea∣tures in God's Fear with Thanksgiving, will not destroy them, nor consume them upon their own Lusts, and they are sensible of the Goodness of the Creatures, and of the Goodness of God that gave them: And they that feed without the Fear, and are the Clouds without Water, and the Trees with∣out Fruit, and devour, consume, destroy and waste the Creatures of God upon their own Lusts, destroy their Bodies and Souls, their own Families, Wives and Children, and bring themselves to Rags and Beggery. And such are not sensible of the Good∣ness of the Creatures, nor the Goodness of the Creator; and from such God had no true Thanks, but his Name is Blasphemed by such daily: And though many may say, that We say Grace before Meat and after;
but you should live in Grace, and not turn from the Grace of God into Wantonness, and walk despightfully against the Spirit of Grace; for the true Giving of Thanks to God, is with the Spirit of Grace and Suppli∣cation, Zach. 12.10. & Jude 14. So they cannot truly give Thanks to God, that turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, and walk despightfully against the Spirit of Grace; and therefore Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thess. 5.19. And the Lord saith, What hast thou to do to take my Name into thy Mouth, and hatest to be reformed? And every one that names the Name of Jesus, is to depart from Iniquity: else, Christ will bid such as do not depart from Iniquity, Depart from him; this is a sad Sentence, for the Saviour and Redeemer and Mediator, to bid them Depart from him ye Workers of Iniquity; for I know ye not: So, though you may say Grace (as you call it) with your Lips; yet if you feed without Fear, and work Iniquity, Christ won't own such. And James saith, Ye have lived in Plea∣sures on the Earth, and in Wantonness ye have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaugh∣ter, and so forth: Were not such to Weep and Howl? And therefore don't you think this Day won't come upon you, that are
found in these things: Therefore be you Warned in time. And doth not the Apostle command you (Ephes. 5.16.) To redeem the Time; for the Dayes are Evil? And therefore see how you can redeem your Time that is past; for does not the Apostle tell you what the Fruits of the Flesh are, and what the Fruits of the Spirit? So see what Fruits you bear, and of what sort. And don't you read in Rom. 1. of such, that gave themselves up to Vile Affections, and were filled with Unrighteousness, For∣nication, Wickedness, Covetousness, full of Envy and Murder, Debate and Deceit, ta∣king all things in the Evil Part, Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God, Doers of Wrong, Proud Boasters, Inventors of Evil Things, Disobedient to Parents, without Understan∣ding, Covenant-Breakers, without Natural Affections, such as never cease from Sin, which Men (though they knew the Law of God, how that they which commit such things are worthy of Death) not only do the same, but have Pleasure in them that do them, Rom. 1. And therefore consider these things, all you who are found in these Practices, and Amend, lest God's Wrath and Judgments break forth suddenly upon
you, ere ye be aware. For, do not you know, that The Ʋnrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Idolaters, nor Wantons, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Extortioners, nor Railers shall inherit the Kingdom of God: There∣fore ye must forsake all these things, if ye expect to inherit the Kingdom of God, as you may see in 1 Cor. 6. And don't you read of some, that in Words professed God, but in their Works denyed him? And have not they that have professed them∣selves Christians, brought a great Dishonour to Christianity, yea, among the very Turks and Heathen, by their Drunkenness, Whore∣doms and Uncleannesses, Cozening and Cheating, and Cursing and Swearing, Thefts and Murders; so that amongst the Turks it is become a By-word, What! Dost thou think I am a Christian? Therefore, oh! that that Holy Name (whose Name is above every Name) by which you are called, that you should walk so unworthy of it, as to cause his Holy Name to be Blasphemed! and knowing, there is no Salvation by any other Name under Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus, Oh! therefore, that every one that names his Name, would Depart from Iniqui∣ty,
and might walk as he walked: And let your Moderation (ye that be called Chri∣stians) be known unto all men; for the Lord is at hand, and sees all things, and will ren∣der unto every Man according to his Works: And don't you know, ye must give an Ac∣count for every Idle Word? and therefore, ought they not to be Gracious, and season'd with Grace? And whether therefore you Eat or Drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Now there is no Wa∣ster, Drunkard, Glutton, that can Eat and Drink to the Glory of God; but to the Dis∣honouring God, Devouring and Destroy∣ing his Creatures, and Consuming them up∣on their Lusts, and feeding themselves with∣out the Fear of God: And if all Christians did mind this, Whether they Eat or Drink, that they do it to the Praise and Glory of God, there would be no Drunkard, no Destroyer, no Devourer, nor Waster of God's Crea∣tures found in Christendom. And likewise, Whatsoever you do, to do it to the Praise and Glory of God. [Mark] What∣soever you do: In this no Christian would Dis∣honour God; in this they would alwayes have the Lord before their Eyes, and his Fear placed in their Hearts.
And therefore, whether we live, we should live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we should dye unto the Lord: So all that are true Christians do live & dye unto the Lord; But they that live in Pleasures, are dead whilst they live, as in 1 Tim. 5. And consider ye what the Prophet Hosea saith to the professing Jews, that did not live according to the Law of God, nor the Pro∣phets; and may not the same be said unto you, that profess your selves Christians, but live not according to the Gospel? Saith the Lord, I gave them Corn, Wine and Oyl, and multitude of Silver and Gold, &c. And therefore I will return, saith the Lord, and take away my Corn in the Time thereof, and my Wine in the Season thereof; and I will re∣cover my Wool and my Flax, given to cover their Shame. And therefore consider this, ye Christians, What (I say) if the Lord should stop the Earth from Increasing (for the Lord has given you Corn, Wine and Oyl, Silver and Gold, Wool and Flax, which you consume and destroy upon your Lusts, the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which is not of the Father) so that you should not have so much Corn as to feed you, and
as much Flax & Wool as to cover your Shame, think you, would it not be Just with the Lord so to do? Let the Witness of God in your Consciences, and your daily Practice, and the Scriptures answer and testifie a∣gainst you. For truly, when I was in Lancaster-Pri∣son, I looked out of the Bars of the Window in the Tower, and saw the Angel of the Lord God, with his Drawn Glistering SWORD, shaking it over this Nation, to Execute God's Vengeance, and the Court was all as a Fla∣ming Fire; And this I saw before the begin∣ning of the Dutch War, before the Plague, and before the Fire: And now I say again, If God Almighty, that created all for his Glory, and gives the Increase of all (For, the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fulness there∣of) and, Whether you Eat or Drink, or what∣soever you do, you should do it to the Praise and Glory of God) and now, if you do not, but con∣sume the Creatures of God upon your own Lusts, and with Gluttony and Drunkenness waste and destroy them, and live Wantonly, Wickedly and in Pleasures on the Earth, which is a Mark that such are Dead from God and Christ whilst they live: Now, I say, if God Almighty, the Creator, should stop the Earth from Increasing with Cattel and o∣ther
Creatures, and bring a FAMINE upon you, how could any but say, The Lord is Just in so doing? For, look over Christen∣dom, and see what Voluptuousness, Drun∣kenness, Excess, Rioting, Debauchery, Oaths, Cursing and Swearing, that makes the Land to mourn! Do you think there was the-like in Sodom and Gomorrah, whom God fet forth as Examples of his Wrath, and such as suffered the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, who followed Strange Flesh? Therefore Dread all ye that defile your selves and fol∣low after Strange Flesh; see Jude. Though you may think ye sit as Queens, and glorifie your selves in your Pleasures, and may say in your Hearts, Ye shall see no Sorrow; but alas! Wo and Torment will follow: And therefore, before it be too late, Repent, and consider these things. And remember Esau, that prophane Per∣son, which for a Morsel of Meat sold his Birth-right, and afterwards he would have in∣herited the Blessing, but he was rejected; for he found no place of Repentance, though he sought it with Tears: And therefore while ye have Time, Repent; for, know ye not, that all that forget God, and do wick∣edly, he will turn into Hell? And therefore forsake your Wickedness.
And do not you read, That the Lord Jesus will shew himself from Heaven with hs migh∣ty Angels in Flaming Fire, rendring Veng∣ance unto them that do not know God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ [mark, that do not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; [People may Talk of it, but not Obey it] who shall be pu∣nished with Everlasting Perdition from the Presence of the Lord and from the Glory of his Power. Mark this Sentence, and take it to Heart, as in 2 Thes. 1.7, 8. And see the sad Sentence upon the Wicked in Mat. 24.51. and chap. 25.41. And was it not in all Ages the Sins of the People, and their committing Evil and Wickedness in the Sight of the Lord, that brought the Wrath, and the Plagues, and the Sword, and the Famine upon them, as you may read from Moses, in the Time of the Law, to the Dayes of Christ, and after Christ? And is it not the same that brings it upon them called Christians now, that make a Profession of the New Testament, as the Jews did of the Old, and live not ac∣cording to it? Oh England! consider these things; oh Christendom (so called) consider these things; and walk honestly, as becomes the Gospel, and not in Gluttonny and Drun∣kenness,
in Chambering and Wantonness neither in Strife nor Envy, but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no Thought for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof, Rom. 13.13. But unto them that are Contentious, and disobey the Truth, though they may talk of it, shall be Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish will be upon the Soul of every man that doth Evil: And therefore take heed, lest (after the Hardness of your Hearts, and your Impenitency) you heap unto your selves ah against the Day of Wrath, and of the Revelation of the Just Judgment of God: Take heed of this, you that deny Revelati∣on; you will find you will feel it in the End, if you Amend not, Rom. 2. And therefore take heed of Disobedience, and Rebelling against the Lord's Good Spi∣rit, as in Neh. 9. For unto them which are Disobedient, Christ is a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offence; and therefore, it is not the Professing, but the Obedient and Belie∣ving, to whom he is Elect and Precious. For behold, saith the Lord, the Day co∣meth, that shall burn as an Oven; and all the Proud, yea, and all that do Wickedly, shall be as Stubble; and the Day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, and
shall leave them neither Root nor Branch, Ma. 4. Therefore consider all ye that are Proud, and do Wickedly; Do ye think this Day will not come upon you ere you be aware, and neither leave you Root nor Branch? What Good will all your Profession do you, if ye do Wickedly and are Proud, when ye are found but as Chaff and Stubble consum'd by Fire? Therefore take these things to Heart in your private Chambers, and see whether ye be not as Stubble or Chaff: But upon them that fear the Name of the Lord, shall the Son of Righteousness arise, with Healing in his Wings; and they shall grow up as Calves in the Stall. And therefore, my Desire is, That you may all Repent, and A∣mend your Lives and Doings, and turn to the Lord, from all your Evil Wayes, Words, Lives and Conversations, and fear him, which to do, is to Depart from Evil, that the Wrath of God and the Lamb may not come upon you; for I desire the Good of all your Souls, and the Eternal Welfare of all Peo∣ple. And the Apostle saith in 1 Cor. 10. Nei∣ther let us (to wit, the Christians) commit Fornication, as some of them (to wit, the Jews) did, and fell in one day three and twen∣ty Thousand.
Neither be ye Idolaters (to wit, the Chri∣stians) as some of them were (to wit, the Jews) as it is written, The People sate down to Eat and Drink, and rose up to play. Now, all these things came upon them (to wi the Jews) for Example, and they were written to admonish us, that Christians should not follow them. And the Prophet saith, Hab. 2.15. We unto him that giveth his Neighbour Drink, that puttest thy Bottle to him, and makest him Drunk also, that thou mayst look on his Na∣kedness; thou art filled with Shame for Glory: Drink thou also, and let thy Nakedness be uncovered; the Cup of the Lord's Right Hand shall be turned unto thee. Now consider this, ye that profess your selves Christians, and live not the Life of Christianity, whether ye be not found in these Practices that the Scriptures declare against. Hagg. 1.6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye are not satisfied; ye drink, and are not filled; ye cloathe you, but you are not warm; and he that earneth Wages, putteth it into a broken Bag. Now, is not this the Condition of many called Christians, that drink, and are never filled; and eat, and are not satisfied; and earn, but waste their Wages?
And in Amos 3.15. and 4.1. I will smite, saith the Lord, the Winter-House and the Summer-House, and the Houses of Ivory shall perish, and the Great Houses shall be con∣sumed, saith the Lord, Hear this Word, ye Kine of Bashan, that are in the Mountains of Samaria, which Oppress the Poor and De∣stroy the Needy; and they say uto their Ma∣sters, Bring, and let us drink, &c. Now, consider this, ye that are found in such Practices, and see what Judgment the Lord brought against such. And in Hosea 4.18. there you may see how Ephraim's Drunkenness stinked; Their Drunkenness stinketh (saith the Prophet) they have committed Whoredom. And does not the nominal Christians Drunkenness stink, think ye, together with other their Uncleanness? And in Prov. 20. its said, Wine is a Moc∣ker, and Strong Drink is Raging; and who∣soever is deceived thereby is not wise. So mark, ye unwise Christians, that are found in this Raging with this Strong Drink; and do ye think that ye are wise, that are deceived with Wine, the Mocker? And in Prov. 4.14. to the 18th v. Enter not into the Way of the Wicked, and walk not in the Way of Evil Men, and avoid it, and
go not by it; but turn from it, and pass by; for they cannot sleep except they do Evil; and they cause some to fall; for they eat the Bread of Wickedness, and drink the Wine of Vio∣lence. Were not these things judged by the Law of God? And are they not judged by the Gospel? And don't you think that the Lord will make such to drink the Wine of Giddiness? as in Psal 60.3. &c. And in Psal. 80.5. Thou hast fed them with the Bread of Tears, and gave them Tears to drink in a great Measure. And do ye think that ye Christians, that feed your selves with∣out the Fear of God, and consume his good Creatures upon your Lusts, must not be fed with the Bread of Tears, and have Tears to drink from the Hand of the Lord. And in Isa. 56.12. Come ye, say they (to wit, the Shepherds or the Watch-men) I will fh Wine, and we will fill our selves with Strong Drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. And were not these reproved by the Prophets? And are not such reproved now by the Gospel? And in Isa. 28.7, 8. For all their Tables are full of filthy Vomitings. Now look into your Houses of Drunkenness, ye called Chri∣stians, and see what Filthiness is there; and by such Doings ye Devour the Creation, and
cause the Drink of the Thirsty to fail, which would do them Good, which you destroy, and do your selves Hurt withal. And the Prophet Isaiah saith, But they have erred because of Wine, and are out of the Way by Strong Drink: The Priests and the Prophets also have erred by Strong Drink; they are swallowed up with Wine, they are gone astray through Strong Drink; they fail in Vision, they stumble in Judgment. Come, try your selves by these Scriptures, ye that call your selves Christians, and ye Priests and Prophets; and see whether by Strong Drink ye have not stumbled in Judg∣ment, and erred in Vision, and are some of you swallowed up with Wine? And does not the Prophet cry against the Pride and the Drunkenness of Ephraim? And do not many now, that are called Chri∣stians, take a Pleasure and Pride in making others Drunk? And were not such threatned with judgments, and cryed against then? And are nor such to be Warned now, as then? And now take heed, lest this come upon you, as is spoaken of in Isaiah 24. The Earth shall be clean emptied, and utterly spoil∣ed, the Lord hath spoaken it; because the In∣habitants of the Earth have transgressed his
Laws, and changed his Ordinances, and bro∣ his Everlasting Covenant; therefore the se devours the Earth, and the Habitations thereof: Then the Wine faileth, and all that were of a merry Heart do mourn; the Mirth of Tabrets ceaseth; the Voice of them that Rejoyce endeth; the Joy of the Harp ceaseth; the Earth lamenteth and fadeth away; the World is feeble and decayed; the Proud People of the Earth are weakened; they shall not drink Wine with Mirth; Strong Drink shall be bitter to them that drink it; the City of Va∣nity is broken down; every House is shut up, that no man cometh into it: There is a Cry for Wine in the Streets; all Joy is darkened; the Mirth of the World is gone away: Surely this shall be in the midst of the Earth among the People as the shaking of an Olive-Tree, and as the Grapes when the Vintage is ended. Now, consider these things, ye that pro∣fess your selves Christians, and are the Trans∣gressors of the Gospel, and the Commands and Law of Jesus, as these Jews did, the Law of God and his Ordinances under the Old Covenant: Do ye think this Curse and Judgments wont come upon you, that are found in these Practices? And in Isa. 5. VVo unto them that rise up early to follow Drunkenness, and to them that
continue untill Night, till Wine doth inflame them; and the Harp, Vial, Timbrel and Pipe and VVine are in their Feasts; but they re∣gard not the VVork of the Lord, nor consider they the VVorks of his Hands: Therefore (does not the Lord say) he will lay his Vine∣yard waste, and it shall bring forth Bryars and Thorns. And therefore take heed, ye Christians, so called, that practise such things, lest your Vineyard be laid waste also. And VVo unto them (sayes the Prophet) that are mighty to drink VVine, and to them that are strong to pour in Strong Drink; which justifie the VVicked for a Reward, and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him; and call Evil Good and Good Evil. Therefore as the Flaming Fire devours the Stubble, and as the Chaff is consumed of the Flame, so their Root shall be as Rottenness, and their Bud shall rise up like Dust, because they have cast off the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and contemned the Wine of the Holy One of Israel: Therefore is the VVrath of the Lord kindled against his People, and he hath stretch∣ed out his Hand upon them, &c. And now consider ye this, that profess your selves Christians, and are found in these Pra∣ctices; Have not ye cast away the Com∣mand
and Law of Jesus Christ, and con∣temned his Instructions, who sayes, Be ye Holy, as I am Holy; without which none shall see the Lord: And ye ought to walk as Christ walked: And won't he render Ven∣geance in Flames of Fire against all such as obey not the Gospel, and walk not as be∣comes the Gospel? And did not the Lord bring his Judgments upon the Jews for such Actions? And do you think he will clear you of such Acti∣ons, because ye make a Profession of Chri∣stianity and the Gospel? Nay, nay; be not deceived: God's Wrath and Righteous Judgments will be revealed from Heaven a∣gainst all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; and therefore Amend and Repent, lest these Judgments come upon you at un∣awares: When you and your Priests are crying, Peace, Peace, sudden Destruction comes upon you, as it did upon Sodom and the Old World. And you that be found out of the Power of Godliness, as the Jews were found out of the Law of God; do ye think that the Stone won't cry out of the Wall, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer to it, a∣gainst you that delight in Sin and Wick∣edness?
This Vision is plain, saith the Lord; he that runs may read it: and the Vision is for an appointed time, but at the last it shall speak, Hab. 2. Therefore while ye have time Repent, and give over pleading for your Sin and Body of Death & Wickedness to the Grave; for there is no Repentance there; and as the Tree falls, so it lies; Therefore cease to sin, and break off your Iniquities by Repentance. For the Grave cannot confess to the Lord, nor Death cannot praise him, and they that go down into the Pit cannot hope for the Truth; but the Living, the Living shall confess thee, as I do this day; the Father to the Children shall declare the Truth, thus saith Hezekiah, Isa. 38.18, 19. And you may see these Evil Works and Workers before mentioned, to wit, Drun∣kenness, Ʋncleanness, &c. are the Works of such as go into Hell; for the Scripture saith, All that forget God, and do wickedly, shall be turned into Hell, as afore-said; and so into that which burns with Fire and Brim∣stone; and therefore saith the Prophet, Hell hath enlarged her self, and opened her Mouth without Measure; and their Glory, and their Pomp, and he that rejoyceth among them shall
descend into it, Isa. 5.14. Therefore con∣sider this, all ye Drunkards and Unclean Persons, that feed your selves without Fear, and destroy & devour the Creatures of God upon your Lusts, lest Hell swallow you up, which has opened its Mouth without Mea∣sure; be sur it will, except you speedily Repent and Amend your Lives and Doings, and turn unto the Lord. Though you may call Drunkenness and Ʋncleanness Good-Fel∣lowship, and call others Fools that won't follow you into the same Excess of Riot, yet it is the bad Fellowship; for the Good Fel∣lowship is in the Good Spirit of God, which mortifies these Evils and the Works of the Flesh, which are manifest; as, Adultery, Fornication, Ʋncleanness, Wantonness, Envy, Murder, Drunkenness, Gluttony, &c. whereof I tell you (says the Apostle) that they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. Worester-Prison, this 1st of the 11th Mo∣neth, 1674. G. F. THE END.
