F2047 12112069 54217
A DEFENCE OF THE SCOTS Settlement at DARIEN. WITH An Answer to the Spanish MEMORIAL against it. AND ARGUMENTS to prove, That it is the Interest of ENGLAND to join with the SCOTS, and protect it. To which is added A DESCRIPTION of the Countrey, and a particular Account of the SCOTS Colony. Printed in the Year, M. DC. XC. IX.
TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty. SIR, THE Interest you have in the flourishing of Your Antient King∣dom of Scotland, whose Crown is transmitted to You by an Hundred and eleven of your Ancestors, without ever having been on the Head of a Forraigner, emboldens the Author to lay the following Sheets at your Majesties Feet. The design of them is to vindicate the Settlement of the Scots in Darien, and Your Majesties Justice in protecting them, against the O∣blique Aspersions which are cast upon it in the Spanish Memorial. The Soveraignty of the Crown of Scotland hath alwise been held Sacred by our Ancestors, who never were sparing of their Blood to de∣fend it either from the Invasion of Foreigners, or the mean Compliance of some few of our Princes that were unworthie to wear it; and there∣fore were either totally excluded from it, as the Family of Baliol, or oblig'd to reassert its Right when rescu'd out of the Hands of their E∣nemies, as happen'd to our William I. and James I. Providence having now plac'd it on the Head of Your Majesty, whose Heroic Courage is known to all the World, our Nation should be unjust to Your Character to expect any thing less than that our Crown, which You receiv'd free and independent from Your Ancestors, should be trans∣mitted by You with greater Advantages than ever to Your Successors. Therefore it is, Great Sir, that a privat Subject of your Antient Kingdom takes the holdness to vindicate the Soveraignty and Dignity of Your Crown as Kings of Scots, and to put such as are Enemies to it in mind, that when Edward I, and II. of England invaded it, the Scotish Nation did gallantly defend it, advanced Robert Bruce to the
Exclusion of Baliol the nearest Heir, and acquainted the Princes of Christendom that they did so in defence of their Independency; adding that they would expel Robert Bruce, if he offered to betray their Li∣berty, and would never subject their Crown to that of England, whilst there were 100 Scots men alive. This being the fundamental Constitution of our Government, and the Condition on which that Prince and his Successors were admitted to Our Crown; they can in no wise be look'd upon as Friends to your Majesties Dignitie as King of Scots, who call in question what You enact in the Parliament of that Kingdom, or that offer to traverse it by contrary Proclamations. We are Your Majesties Subjects as well as our Neighbours, and have an equal Right to share your Protection, which its hop'd they will at last be convinc'd it is their Interest to agree to in relation to our Ame∣rican Settlement. Your Majesty's Paternal Affection to the Kingdom of Scorland, hath discover'd it self in many Instances: nor is it to be desired or expected by our Nation, that it should any way interfere with the like Care and Affection, which is owing to our Brethren of England; but there is no reason that they should enjoy a Freedom of Trade throughout the World, and that we should be denied it. our Majesty in yor Gracious Proposals os an Union, gave sufficient Evidence of a Fatherly Concern for both Nations. Thereforo as it hath pleased GOD to make You the Glorious Instrument of our Common Deliverance▪ that He would also make you the happy Instrument of our Inseparable Union, and after a long Reign here, Crown You with Ever∣lasting Glory hereafter, is the sincere and ardent Prayer of Your Majesty's Loyal and Affectionate Subject, Philo Caledon.
A DEFENCE of the Settlement of the SCOTS on the Isthmus of DARIEN in America With Ar∣guments to prove, That it is the Interest of England to join with them, and to protect them in that Colony. THE Heads propos'd to be insisted upon in the following Sheers, ar, The Legality of the SCOTS Establishment, The Advantage or Disadvantage that may redound from it to England: Whether the Scots without the Assistance of the English may be able to maintain their footing in America; and what, may probably be the Consequences, if the Scots should be oppos'd therein by the English, and miscarry in the Undertaking. The chief Objections against the Legality of their Establish∣ment, arie from the Memorial delivered in against it to the King, by the Ambassad or Extraordinary of Spain, May 3, 1699. O, S, as follows: THE Under-Subscriber, Ambassador Extraordinary from his Catholick Majestie, finds himself oblig'd by express Orders, to represent to your Majesty, that the King his Master having receiv'd Information from different places, and last of all from the Governor of Havana, of the Inult and Attempt of some Scots Ships, equip'd with Men and other things requisit, who design to settle themselves in his Majestres Sove∣raign Demains in America, and particularly the Province of Da∣rien. His Majesty receiv'd those Advices with very much dif∣content, and looks upon the same as a Token of small Friend∣ship, and as a Rupture of the Alliance betwixt the two Crowns (which his Majesty hath observed hitherto, and alwayes ob∣serves
very religiously, and from which so many Advantages and profits hath resulted both to your Majesty and you Sub∣jects) as a Consequence of which good Correspondence, his Majestie did not expect such sudden Insults and Attempts by your Majesties Subjects, and that too in a time of Peace, with∣out pretext (or any Cause) in the very heart o his Demains. All that the King desires, is, That this may be represented to your Majesty, and that your Majesty may be acquainted, that he is very sensible of such Hostilities and unjust Procedures, a∣gainst which his Majesty will take such Measures as he thinks convenient. Given at London, May . 1699. It were easie to make proper Remarks upon the Weakness, Insolence and ingratitude of this Memorial, but it is not worth while; all the World knows what the Crown of Spain ows to his Majesty of Great Britain; and therefore a more civil Appli∣cation might reasonably have been expected to a Prince, who hath not only saved the Netherlands, but prevented his Catho∣lick Majesty from being insulted on his Throne at Madrid. But these things we pass over, and come to the chief point in the Me∣morial, which is, That the Scots have posted themselves in the King of Spain's Demains in America, contrary to the Allyance be∣twixt the two Crowns. If this be proved to be alse, then the cause of the Complaint ceases, and his Majesty of Great Britain hath reason to demand Satisfaction for the Affront offered thereby to his Justice and Soveraignty. To prove the falshood of the Allegation, That the Province of Darien is part of the King of Spains Demains: It is positively denied by the SCOTS, who challenge the Spaniards to prove their Right to the said Province, either by Inheritance, Mrriage, Donation, Purchase, Reversion, Surrender or Conquest; which being the only Titles by which they or any other People can claim a Right to those or any other Dominions, if the Spaniards cannot make out their Right by those of any of those, their Claim must of consequence be null and void.
It is evident that the Spaniards cannot pretend a Tittle to that Countrey by Inheritance, Marti, or the Donation of Prince and People; and as to Conquest it would be ridiculous to al∣leadge it; since the Dariens are in actual possession of their Liber∣ty, and were never subdued, nor receiv'd ny Spanish Govern∣or or Garison amongst them. Nay, they were so far from it, that Wafer, Dampier, and others that have wrote of that Coun∣trey, do all agree that they mortally hate the Spaniards, were in War with them, and that the Spaniards had no Commerce with those Indians, nor command over them in all the North side of the Isthmus a little beyond Porto Bello. New Voyag and description o the  of America. p. 11. 6, 149, 150, 151. Capt. Sharp in the Journal of his Expedition, published in Cap Hacke's Collection of Voyages, gives an account, that in 1680 he landed at Golden Island with 330 Men, and being joyn'd by one of the Darien Princes, whom they call'd Emperor, and another to whom they gave the Tittle of King Golden▪ Cap, with some hundreds of their Men, took Sancta Maria, attempted Panama, and made prize of several Spanish Ships; which is the more re∣markable, because Capt. Sharp was afterwards tryed in England for Robbery and piracy on this very Account, but acquitted be∣cause of his Commission from those Darien Princes: which is a plain Demonstration that the Government of England did then look upon Darein to be no way subject to Spain, whateve some who are Enemies to the SCOTS, do now say against the Legality of their Settlement in that Country. This same Expedition against the Spaniards by assistance of the Darien Indians is confirm'd by Mr. Dampier in his Introduction to his New Voyage round the World. And the p of Chiapa a Prelate of their own, in his Relation of the Spanish Voyages an Cruelties in the West-Indies. p 217. owns that the Spaniards had no Title to the Americans, as their Sub∣jects, by right of Inheritance, Purchase, o Conquest.
We have likewise a large Account, and a full Confirmation of the War and perpetual Enmity betwixt the Dariens and the Spa∣niards in the History of the Buccaneers of America, Vol. 2. Part 4. wrote by Basil Ringrose, who was one of their Company. There he inorms us that the Indians of Darien, and the Spaniards are commonly at War with one another; and that the Buccaneers were invited into that Countrey, and join'd by the Darien Prin∣ces, Capt. Andrea, Captain Antonio, and the King of Darien, who assisted thm in the taking of Sancta Maria, au their Attempt u∣pon anama; and the King whose Daughter the Spaniards had stole away, promised to join the Buccaneers with 50000 Men. This is the more remarkable, because those very Princes, or their Successors are now in League with the Scots, and have joy∣fully receiv'd them into their Countrey. So that it is the strang∣est Imposition that can be put upon any Nation, and one of the most audacious affronts that ever was put upon so Great a Prince as K William, for the Spaniards to pretend a Right to Darien, and accuse him of a Beach of the Peace, because a Colony of his Subjects have settled themselves there; when it is so well known to the World that the Crown of Spain has no manner of Title to that Province. Then as to any Claim by virtue of Possession, the Spaniards have no the least grund of Plea: All they can alledge on this head is, that they were once admitted by the consent of Capt. Diego, another of the Darien Princes, to work on some Golden Mines, within 15 Leagues, or thereabouts, of the SCOTS Settle∣ment: But it is plain that this makes nothing for their purpose. That Prince admitted them only as Labourers, but not as Pro∣prietors; and when they broke the Conitions on which they were admitted, viz: to allow the Dariens such and such Shares of the Product, they were expell'd again by forc; and ever since that time the Dariens refuse to have any further dealings with the Spaniards, who made themselves odious to them by their Treach∣ery
and Insolence: So that Mr. Wafer tells us pag. 133. they allow a distinguishing Mark of Honour to him who has kill'd  Spaniard: and pag. 179. that Lacenta one of the chief of the Darien Princes, did in his converse with him, express his Sense and Resentment of the havock made by the Spaniards in the West of America, at their first coming thither. It remains then that the Spaniards can lay no other claim to Darien but what they plead from the Pope's general Grant of Ame∣rica, its being bounded by their Dominions, and the Treaties with England. which shall be considered in their Order. To urge the Pope's Grant amongst Protestants is ridicolous, and amongst Papists themselves but precarious: but admtting it were sufficient to justifie their Title, it is easie to prove that the Spaniards have forfited all the Right that they can claim by vir∣tue of that Grant. The Church o Rome will not publickly own her power to grant a Right of Conquest, but in order to propagate the Faith, and not that neither, except the Infidel Prince or People be guilty of a breach of Treaty. So that the Pope's Grant with these Re∣strictions is so far from establishing the Title of the Spaniards, that it plainly overthows it. That the Indians were committed to the Spaniards by Pope Alexander the VI. on condition that they should teach them the Christian Religion, is proved by Don Bartholomew de las Casas Bishop of Chipa, iu his Account of the first Voyages and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in America, and the Relation of their unpa∣rallel a Cruelties, p. 165. and there he likewise owns, that their acquitting themselves so ill of that Commission, they ought to make Restitution of all they have taken from them under this pretxt. And pag. 200, he charges them with breach of the Terms prescrib'd by the Apostolical Brief, tho Queen Isabella▪ to whom it was granted earnestly entreated them to keep exactly to it. P. 218. he says that the Title of the King of Spain to the
Indians▪ is ounded only on the Obligation he hd taken upo himsel to instruct them in the true Faith, as appears by the Apostolick Bief: which they wre so far from performing, that instead of converting their Sous, they destroyed their Bodies, having in those early dayes, viz: In the time o the Emperor Chales V. mudered above 40 Millions of them; and ook so lit∣tle care to  them in the Christian Religion, that they per∣fectly obstucted their Conversion, and sold those very Idol that some of the poor people had  away with abhorrence, to o∣her of the Indians; ibid▪ p▪ 194. which, together with heir  horrid , ceated an aversion in hose poor Infidls fo Heaven it self; according to the known Story of Hathwey an ndi∣an Prince, ibid. p. 21. wh being fast'ned to▪ a Sake▪ by the Spa∣niards in oder to be burnt, or no other Crime but  to defend himself and his ubjects against their , ask't a Fria that was discoursing to▪him of Heaven, promising him E∣ternal Happines there▪if he would believe, and threatning him with Hell if he did not, whether Heaven was opened to the Spaniards; answer'd that it was to such of tem as were good, replied immediatly that h would not go thither, fo fear of meeting such Cruel and wicked Company as they were, but would much ather chuse to go to Hell, where he might be De∣liver'd from the troublesome sight o such kind of People. So that their forfeiture of all Right or Title to Darien, by the Pope's Gant, if it were of any validity, is plainly demonstrated. Their next Plea is, that Darien is bounded or inclosed by their Dominions, Viz. by Portobello and Carthagena, with heir Ter∣ritories on the Noth, and Panama and Sancta Maria on the South. To this it is Answered, that Darien is bounded only by he Sea on both sides, without so much as a Spanish Fort or Garrison, from Nombre de Dios, to the Gulf of Darien on the North Sea, or rom the River of Chepo, to the River of Cong on the South
Sea. The Territories of the Spaniards confining on bo th end of the Isthmus are not unlimited, but are restricted on both sides by the Dariens, who, as has been already said, were never subject to Spain. Nor is it any new thing in the World, for independent Soveraignty s to ly inclos'd within the Domi∣nions of other Princes, to instance in no more than Orange and Avignon in Europe, Ceuta, Metilla. &c. possessed by the Spani∣ards themselves in Africk, which lye in the very bosome of Morocco, and yet the Spaniards don't think their Title to them e're a whit the worse. The Dutch and Portugueze have both of them Settlements on the Coast of Brasil, to which the Spaniards pretend a Right. The French have settlements in Hispaniola and Guiana, notwithstanding the Neighbour-hood of the Spaniards. The English and French have both of 'em Plantations in Newfound∣land. The Dutch in time of Peace settled in Long Island, in the middle of the English Plantations, yet no War ensued upon it. The English Plantations themselves of Bahama Islands, tho the Spanish Fleet passed betwixt them and Florida: And the English have several times settled at Port-Royal in Campechy Bay, to cut Loggwood, &c. and remov'd and settled as they found Conveni∣ent. K. Charles II▪ in time of Peace granted a Patent to Mr. Cox, to settle a Colonie in the Bay of Mexico, which was never Ques∣tion'd by the Spaniards: And the French have now since the Conclusion of the last Peace, planted a Colony on the River Mississipi in that same Bay; against which we hear of no Com∣plaints from Madrid▪ So that the Plea of the Spaniards from this Topick is perfectly overturn'd by Common Practice, the Law of Nations, and their own Concessions in parallel Cases. The next Plea of the Spaniards is from the Treaties betwixt them and the Crown of Great Britain, of which they alledge the Settlement of the Scots at Darien to be a Breach, But that there's no Ground for this Allegation. will appear to those that peruse the said. Treaties, viz. That of May 23 1667. and that of July 1670, wherein there's not the least Mention of Excluding
either Party from enlarging their Dominions in Ameriea, upon Wastes, or by consent of the Natives, in such places as have ne∣ver yet been possest by Spain or Great Britain. So that all that can be infe'd from those Treaties, is, that they were a mutul se∣curity for the peaceable possession of what each Crown enjoy'd in that Countrey. and no more; which is sufficiently confirm'd by the Patent granted to Dr. Cox, and the settling and removing of the English in Campechy Bay, &c. without Controul, as before mention'd. Having thus made it evident that the Spaniards have no man∣ner of Title or Right to Darien, it is Natural in the next place to shew that they themselves are guilty of the Breach of Treaty by proceeding in this Affair as they have done. By the third Article of the Treaty between the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain▪ concluded at Madrid May 23. 1667. it is pro∣vided, That if any Injury shall be done by either of the said Kings, or by the People or Subjects of either of them, to the People or Subjects of the other, against the Articles of that Alliance, or against common Right, there shall not therefore be given Letters of Reprisal, Marque or Countermarque, by any of the Confederates, until such time as Justice is follow'd in the ordinary Course of Law. Yet the Spaniards with∣out any such Procedure, or offering in the least to prove their Title to Darien, present a virulent and huffig Memorial, at the very first charging the King with want of Friendship, and a Breach of Alliance, and threatning to take such measures as they shall think meet: when their sickly Monarchy has not yet had time to breath, since rescu'd from the common danger, wherein Europe was involv'd, by the Arms of that very Prince whom they treat so ungratefully. But this is not all; for contrary to the express Words of that same Treaty, they attack the Scots by Sea and Land, who had done them no Injury, but acquainted them that they came peaceably, without any hostile design against them or any other People; And
were so generous as to reject the Motion of Capt. Andreas, one of the Darien Princes, and their Ally, when he offered to make them Masters of Panama, if they would but join him with 500 of their Men. The Spaniards have also, contrary to the 10th and 11th Arti∣cles of the Treaty concluded at Madrid. July 18 1670, concern∣ing America, detain'd the Scots and English Prisoners who were forc'd ashoar at Carthagena by Shipwrack, tho all such practices be expresly provided against by the said Articles; and they have also violated the 14th Article of that Treaty, which forbids Re∣prisals, except in case of denying or unreasonably delaying Justice, From all which it is evident, that the King of Great Britain has just reason to demand Satisfaction of the Spaniards sor attacking his Subjects contrary to Treaty; and that the SCOTS being thus injuriously treated, may very lawfully, not only make Reprisals upon the Spaniards for themselves, but join with the King of Da∣rien in taking Sancta Maria, Panama, or any other place helong∣ing to the Spaniards in that Countrey, of which the Dariens are Natural Lords, and the Spaniards Tyrannical Usurpers, as is pleaded by the King of Darien himself; and therefore he invit∣ed the English Buccaneers to assist him to retake it: and by this Capt. Sawkins justified his proceedings in a Letter to the Gover∣nor of Panama, asserting that the King of Darien was true Lord of Panama, and all the Countrey thereabouts; and that they came to assist him. History of Buccaneers, Vol. 2. part 4. p. 32. And we have mentioned before that Capt. Sharp, who was accused of Piracy, for that same Expedition, and succeeded Sawkins in his Command, was acquitted in England, because he had that Prince's Commission. Having fully prov'd that the Spaniards have no Title in Darien, it remains to be prov'd that the SCOTS have as good and just a Title to their Settlement there, as any People in the World can have; which may easily be demonstrated thus:
They were authorized by an Act of Parliament, and the Kings Letters Patent, to plant Colonies in Asia, Africa, or America, upon Places not inhabited, or any other Place by Consent of the Natives, not possest by any European Prince or State. Being provided with this Authority than which there cannot be a Greater, or one more duly and honestly limited, they equipp'd their Ships, and landed on the North side of the Isthmus of Darien in November 1698. where the Spaniards, as has been fully prov'd, never had any possession, and no other European Prince or State pretends any Claim to it. Being arriv'd there, they fairly obtained the Con∣sent of the Princes and People of the Country, and particularly of Captain Andreas, who is the chief Man in that Tract; And after a solemn Treaty and Alliance deliberatly made, and wrote in Spanish, because the said Prince understands that Language, they peaceably enter upon their new Colony, without either Force or Fraud. So that they have religiously kept to the Con∣ditions of the Act and Patent, which is a plain demonstration hat they have a just and legal Title to their Settlement. and a Right to the Protection of the Government, against the Attempts of the Spaniards, or any other People whatsoever. The next Topick to be insisted upon. is the Advantage or Dis∣advantage that may redound to England from this Settlement. We shall begin with the Disadvantage which consists in the supposed Damage it may do to the Trade of England, and that it may, as is pretended, occasion a Rupture between them and Spain. To this we may easily reply, that being a distinct and independent Nation, we are not oblig'd to consult their Interest, any further than they consult ours; and that we have as much Reason to maintain this Colony, because of the Advantage it may bring to our selves, as they have to oppose it, because of the Disadvanta∣ges that they fancy may arise from thence to England. But with∣al we deny that it can be any damage to their Trade, which from that part of the World consists chiefly in Sugar and Tobacco, nei∣ther of which are yet to be found in New Caledonia. But that which
we look upon to be a compleat Answer to the Objection, is this, That they may be sharers with Us in the settlement if they please, and by consequence Partners in the Profits and Trade, and lay it under such Regulations as may prevent its endamaging the Com∣merce of England. And whereas it is further objected, That by the great Immuni∣ties and freedom granted to the SCOTS Company for so many Years, we shall be able to undersell the English Company forestal their Markets, and lessen his Majesties Customs; we answer, that this Objection is in a great measure obvated, since we do not now pretend to set up an East-India Trade; but admitting it were true, it will be to the general Advanage of the English Na∣tion, since the Buyers are always more than the Sellers. It must certainly be better for the Kingdom in general, that every one who has occasion for Musln or Indian Silks, &c. should have so many shillings per Yard or peice in their Pockets, than that some two or three Merchants should once in an Age get Money enough to make a Daughter or two a Countess or Dutchess. No can it be denied but it's better for England, that Housekeepers in general should save that Money to buy Provisions for their Fami∣lies, which consumes our own Product, than that a dozen of Mer∣chants should be enabled by the extravagant prices of those com∣modities to keep their Coaches. Add to this, that the English if they please by joining with the SCOTS, may have an equal share of all those Immunities; and if there should be for some time a lessening of the King's Customs, of which there is at present no manner of prospect, it will be sufficiently made up in time to come by a large Addition, if that Colony prospers; so that the King's Bounty in that respect, is but like the bestowing of charge to improve barren or waste Ground, which will return with treble Interest to him or his Heirs. There's another Objection made against the SCOTS Company, that by their Constitution, such Ships as belong to them must
break Buk o  but in Scotland, whch will diminish th number of English Ships and Semen, and make Scotland the on∣ly Free Port of all these Commodities. o which it's eplyed, That tho ou own Ships are obliged to break Bulk no where but at home, they don't lay same Obligation upon others, but allow∣ing them a free Trade to Darien, they may cary their Goods where they please; or upon fair Proposals, there's no doubt but the Parliament of Scotland will give he English all possible Liber∣ty as to that matter. Then as to the hazad of a Rupture with Spain, we reply, Tha the Spaniards are in no condition to break with England, when they are not able to maintain themselves against the Insuts of the French by Sea and Land: and the only way to secure them in th British Interest, is to have a powerful Colony in Darien, which lying in the very Centre o their American Dominions, and within reach of their Silver and Gold Mines, will be an effectual Cub upon them, and not only prevent their own Hostlities, but their joining at any time with our Enemies; or if they do, being Ma∣sters of their Money, we shall speedily cut e sinews of their War. In the ext place we uge that it will be very much for the In∣rest and Advantage of England to incourage and support us in his Settlement. 1. Because by this means the SCOTS will increase their shipp∣ing, and come in time to have a Naval Force, capable of assisting the English in the common Defence of the sland, in maintaining the Soveraignty of the Seas, and convoying their Merchant Men in time of Wa; the necessity of which is obvious enough, since they and the Duch▪ both have been scarce able to secure their Tade, maintain their Dominion in the Seas, and defend themselves from the Invasions of the French during the last War. Nor can the English always promise to themselves the Amity of the Dutch, who are their Rivals in Trade, and difer far enough from
them both in Tmper and Interest, there's nohing to cement them but the Life of our pesent Soveraign: Whereas the SCOTS be∣ing united with the English under the same Government, and in∣habiting the same Island, must of  have the same interest as to Trade, and to defend the Couny against all Forraign In∣vad ers, as they constantly did in fomer times, against Romans, Danes, Saxons, and Normans,  thir living then under a separat Prince, and their frequent Wars with England. No is that brave Resistance which a few of them made to the Dutch at Chattam to be forgotten, which did in a great measure repair the Honour of England, and make amends or the Ignominy and dis∣grace which that Attempt put upon the English Nation▪ 2. As Scotland increases in shipping, they will increase in Wealth and by consequence be able to bear a greater share of the Burden of any Foreign War, which will save Men and Money to England, and lighten their Taxes. 3. The Success of the SCOS in their Americn Colony▪ wll be an additional strength to the English  in the West-In∣dies, as well as an Advancement of their Trade, by consuming their product, and giving them theirs in Exchange. 4. The success of the Scots at Darien will be o great advantage to England; for the more Mony the Scots acquire by their Trade, the more they will spend in England, which being the Seat of the Government, must frequently be visited by their No∣bility and Gentry, who generally furnish theseves in England with their best Apparel, Household-, Coaches and Horses &c. besides the Money that the young Noblemen and Gentlemen spend in their passage through that Nation, when they go & come from their Travels. These things occasion their laying out vast Summs of Money annually in the City of Lonn, hich being the Seat of the Government, will as certainly draw Money from Scotland, as the Sun draws Vapours after it. 5. The success of the Scots in their Forreign Platation will not
only ease England of a great number of their Pdlars, so frequent∣ly  of in , by Country Corporations and , but it will occasion the return home, and prevent the going ot of vst numbers of their Youth, who follow the  sort of , or betake themselves to the Sword in Denmark, , ▪ Movy▪ Germany, Holland, and ; By whch mens the Government of Great Britin, may funish tir Fts and Armies at a much Cheaper and easier Rate than fomerly, and wth as good Mariners and Souldiers as any in the Worl. 6. The Eglish by joining with the Scots, and supporting their Colony at Drien, may have their Plate brought home in their own Bottoms, and from their own Mines, with which we are assured that Country abounds, without being obliged to touch at Cadiz, or any  Port, being lyable to the Vexatious Induos of Forreign Princes, or in such hazard of being Intercep∣ted▪ as they many times were duing the late War. 7. The English may by joining with the Scots, render them∣selves more Capable than ever of keeping the Ballance of Europe in their Hnds; a Trust which Nature and Providence seems to have assign'd them, since their Situation and Naval Force, not only maks it propper for them, but they have had an opportun∣ity put into their hans in lttle above the Revolution of ne Century, of twice breakig the Chaines of Europe, when threat∣ned with Slavery; first by the Spaniards, and then by the French. This is so much the more evident, that by being possess'd of Darien, they will be able either to prevent the uniting the Spa∣nih and French Monarchies; or if not so, to render that Union so much the less dangerous, when it will be in their power to size their  a Dominions in the Indies, without which that bulky Monachy, must fall by his own weight. This is likewise of so mch the greater importance, that it may very probably▪ ether  a Religious War, owards which the Papists dis∣cover so muh , or at least bring it to a  Con∣clusion:
For we have as good Reason to look upon the Spanish Mines in the West-Indies to be Antichrist's Pouch, by which he maintaines his War against the Church, as the old Taborites had to call the Silver Mines in Bohemia by that Name. It is cetain∣ly the surest Method of destroying Antichrist, to seize his Purse; for if he once be depriv'd of Judas's Bag, he will quickly drop St. Peter's Key. It's by the Charms of her Gold, that the Babylonish Whore hath made the whole World to wonder after her, and the Kings of the Earth to be Drunk with the Cup of her Fornication. 8. By this means the English may be better able to prevent the ruin of their Trade in the Mediterranean and West-Indies, if the French should possess themselves of the Kingdim of Spain: and they will like∣wise be the better able to prevent their possessing themselves of the Netherlands; which if once they should do, and get Ports there capa∣ble of holding a Fleet, they would also ruin thier Estland Trade, and put a period to the Liberties of Great Britain. 9. It will effectually unite the Scots to England by an inseparable Tie, if the English join us in this Undertaking: Their Ancestors would have gladly purchased this Union at a much dearer rate, but were alise out bid by France: and the want of which Union made the English not only an easie prey to their successive Conquerors, but lost them all the large Provinces that they enjoy'd beyond sea, which were their natural Barriers▪ gave them a free Access to the Continent, and made the English Name so glorious in the days of their Ancestors. 10. It will be of general advantge to the Protestat Interest, and contribute to the advancement of pure Christianity, without any of the Romish sophistications: which certainly ought to weigh much with all true Protestants; and so much the more, that the Pope and the Conclave of Rome have espoused the Quarrel of the Spaniards in this Affair as a Cause of Religion. Doubtless the poor Americans will be more i clinable to embrace Christianity, when they find the difference of the Morals and Doctrine betwixt Protestants and Papists, and see t the
former treat tbem with Humanity, and seek their Welfare both in Bo∣dy and Soul; whereas the Spaniards have render'd , and the Religion hey profess▪ odious, by the inhuman Cruelties and bru∣tish Lusts, wbich they have exercised upn so many Millions of the Na∣tives. This is so far from being a Calumny, that an unexceptionable Author of their own, Don Btholomew de las casas Bishop of Chi∣apa, frmerly mentioned, who was an Eye witness of their Cruelties, gives an account that they had in his time destroyed above 40 Millions of the poor Indians; tho they receiv'd them with the greatest kindness imaginable, were ready to do 'em all the Friendly Offices that one man could desire of anoher, and testified their great Inclination to have embrac'd the Christian Religion. But the Spaniards aim'd at the de∣struction, and not at the Conversion of the Inians; and are avowedly charged with it by the said Bishop, who in many places of his Book de∣clres, that fter they had sent for the Chiefs of the Countries to meet them in an amicable manner, which the poor armless Creatures did without suspicion of any d, these merciless  murdered them wholesale, on purpose to make themselves terribe to them. This was a Practice so inconsistent with Humanity, that all the People of the World ought to have reente  it; as having mh more reason to declare the Spaniads to be Enemies to Mankind, than ever the Roman Senate had to declare Nero to be such. But this sort of Treatment, compar'd with what they made o∣thers to suffer, may well be call'd Mercy: for tho it was dath, the Indians were hereby quickly deliver'd from their Misery; whereas they put mulitude of others to liing deaths, that they might eel themselves die gradully; and yet this is not so into∣lble neith as to the condiion of those poor people, tha had the misfortune to survive that Cruelty; for the whole time of th Lives under that miserable Servitude, i but Death prolong∣ed, or making his attacks upon 'em by intolerable Labor, and continual hunger, the most insupportable o all plagues; these poor Creatures that oil in the Mines, and are imploy'd in Pearl
fishing▪ &c. having no more Sustenance allowed them, and that  of the  sot, thn is just enough to keep the Soul and Body together, in order to prolong their Misery. Then let any Mn, who has bu the least remains of Humaniy left him, judge whether the Scos could be criminal, if hey should have actu∣lly lnded upon a Spanish Settlment, nd have seiz'd the same, n oder to deli their Brethren the Sons of Adam▪ fom such hellish Sevitude nd Oppression s the above metion'd Bshop describes; and i any man tha has any Bowels of Compassio within him can sy thy could, what shadow of Reason is there to bame te Scots fo recting a Colony where the Spaniards neve had any footing? The net thing to be consider'd is, whether the Scots without the assistance of England, may probably maintain their footing here▪ which thre's no doubt may very well be dtermin'd in the affimative▪ 1. Becaus the whole Kingdom of Scotland being mor zealous for it, and  in it, than they have been in any other  for fourty or fifty yers past, it is not to be doubted, but tey will use their utmost Efforts to support themselves in it by their own strength; or if that will not do, by making Alliances with other Natins that are able to assist hem with a Naval force. 2. If they met with no other Opposition but what the Spani∣ards are abl to make t them, it will be asie for the Nbility, and Genty, and Royl Burroughs of Scotland▪ to raise Money upo their Lands, &c. to increase their Stock for the American Trde, and buy Ships of foce to protect it; Nay, without that it's but giving Commision to the Buccaneers o▪ become an Over∣match for the Spaniards▪ 3. Supposing the Frenc should offer to join with the Spaniards, ad assist them to drive the Scots from Darn, a some ay they have already proffered; we are no to imagine that the Spaniàrds will accept their Proffrs in this case, when they  ed them as to he dving the Mrs from before Ceuta. The Resons are
obvious: They declin'd the accepting their Proffrs as to Ceuta▪ because they would not thereby give the French an opportunity of possessing themselves of any of their Towns in Africa, as it is but too common for Forreign Auxiliarys to do in such cases. Then cetainly they have much greater Reason to refuse their Proffers as to Darien, America being of infinitly mo  to them than some African Towns: and if once the French should get ooting there, it would be in vain for the Spanish Gandees any further to dispute te succession of France to teir Crown; for they wold immediatly seize upon their Mines an Treasures in the West∣Indes, without which the Spanish Monarchy is not able to sup∣port it self. O supposing that the King of Spain should live for many years, and by consequene keep the French out of possession; ye hav∣ing once got footing at Darien, which they will certainly do, i the Scots be expell'd by their assistance, the Spaniards will quick∣ly be convinc'd to their cost, that they ar more dngerous  thn th Scots; not only because of their gater power to do them moe mischief, but because o their  Tem∣per, which all Europe is sensible of; and being of the sam Rligion with the Spaniards▪ and havig of late years set up for the Cham∣pions of Popery, they will by the Influence of the Clrgy, bring all the Spanish settlements in America to a depenence upon them, and a love for them as the great Protectors of the Catholick Faith; which will at once destroy the Interest of Spain in America. This will appear to be no vain speculation, to hose hat con∣sider the Tempe of the Popish Clergy, and the Inolence of the Spanish Inquisitors, who so daingly reflected upon the late Ally∣ance of Spain with Potestant Princes and States, tho absolutly necessay to preserve that Nation srom being swallowed up by France. Whereas the Scots being zealous Protestants, and for that very Reason hateful to the Popish Clergy and Lity, they are under a
moral Impossibility of having so much Influence to withdraw the American settlements from the Obedience of Spain: and bees, being under an Obligation by the Principles of their Religion, and their fundamental Constitution, not to invade the Property of an other, the Spaniards have no Cause to tear any thing from them▪ provided they forbear Hostilities on their part; but on the contra∣ry may find them true and faithful Allies; and useful to assist them in the defence of their Countrey. if attack'd by the French as in the late War: it being the interest of the Scots, as well as of the Spaniards, to prevent the accession of the Crown of Spain to that of France. These things, together with the known Endeavours of the French to prouce an Interest amongst the Natives of that Coun∣try, and especially with Don Pedro and Corbet. in order to a Settle∣ment, make it evident enough that it is the Interest of Spain the Scots should rather have it than the French, who have already been tampering with the Spaniards, as well as with the Indians, and doubt not to have a large share of America when ever the King of Spain dies. But admitting that the Spaniards should so far mistake their In∣terest, as to accept of the Proffers of the French to expell the Scots, it is not impossible for the latter to find other Allies than the English to assist them with a naval Force to maintain their Possession. The Dutch are known to be a People that seldom or never mistake their Interest: They are sensible how useful the Alliance of Scotland may be to them, both in regard of their Liberty to fish in our Seas without controul, and of being a Curb upon Eng∣land, in case the old Roman Maxim of delenda est Carthago, should come any more to be applied by the English to that Republick, as in the Reign of K. Charles II. They are likewise sensible of the Advantage it would be to their trade to be partners with the Scots at Darien; and how effectual it may be to disable the
Frech to psue thei Clim to Spin, nd by  to  te old Title of tht own upon their own Seven, as well as to swallow up th other tn Provinces. Thse things, together w  lon coninu'd Amity and Trade bext Scotlnd and Holland and their Union in Religion and Ecclesiastical Disciplin are sufficient to evince that th Dutch would become ou  in America with little . Tht they re able to as us in that Case with a  Force suffici▪ is beond contradi∣ction; and that they would soon be convinc'd it is th  to do it, to prevent that mostrous Icrease of the Fren M∣chy, is obvious enough from the part they acted in the l W. But admitting tht none of those  should preil with the Dutch, ad that they should likewis abandon us; it is not impoble for us to obtain a Alliance ad Naval Force  te Norther Crons: It's well engh k tat   abound ith Me and Shippig, and that they     a their hearts to mke an Exchange of  for the Gold  Silver of America, which they might eaily carry from To to To,  from Market to Market.  the trouble of a Wl-barr, as they are now obliged to do ith their per. Fr all ich it is evident  that it is not impble or    maintain themselves i Darien wiout the Aance of England. The next thing to be discours'd of is, what the  may probably be, if the Eglish should oppose us in this Set∣tlement. We could hily wish the d ever been any ground for this suggestion, and that the Opposition we have met with from England had been les National han that which we hd from both their Houss of Parliament, af the pssing an Act▪ for an African Company, &c. in ous▪ a it  to be wish▪d  so many of the English had not given us such proofs of an alienat∣ed mind and  to our Welfare, as they hve don sinc
by their Resident at Hamborough, and thei late Proclamations in their West▪ India Plantations; and we could have wish'd above all that his Majesty of England had not in the least concu'd, or given his Countenance to that Opposition; for as King of Scots it is ain he could not do it: he ha h confirm▪d what we have done by the Touch of his Scepter, which no private Order or  can revoke. And we could wish that his English Counsellors, who put m upon those things, would remember that Strafford and Laud lost their eads, or giving K Charles the First, that fatal Advice in oppressing and opposing the Scots. We di verily think that the suffering of our Crown to be uni∣ed with that of England, in the person of K James their first, and our Sixth; our seasonable coming to the rescue of heir expiing Libees in the Reign of K. Charles I. our being so instrumental to rescue them from Anarchy and Confusion▪ by the Restoration o K. Charles II. and above all, our Generous and Frank Con∣currence with them in the late happy Revoluion, and Advance∣ment of K. William III. We did verily think that all these things deserv'd a better Treatment; and to evince that they did, we shall begg leave to nsist a little upon the first and last. The English have no cause to think that we were ignorant of the Reason why their Politick Henry VII. Chose rather to match his Eldest Daughter with the King of Scots, than with the King of France, because he foresaw, that if the King of Scots should by that means come to the Crown of England, he would remove the Seat of his Government thither, which would add to the Grandeur and Riches of England: Whereas if the King of France did by that means fall Heir to the English Crown, he would certanly draw the Ct of England to Paris. his the Scots were so  from being ignorant of, that many of the No∣bility and Genry did express their dislke of the Union of the Crowns, as well knowing that it would reduce our Kingdom in∣to a Subjection and Dependance upon England, and drain us of
what Substance we had; and theresore some of them express'd themselves on that occasion, that Scotland was never Conquer'd till then: Yet such was our Zeal for the common Wellfare of the Island, the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and of Europe in general, which were then almost in as much danger by Spain, as they have been since by France, that we quietly and freely parted with our King, and suffer'd him to accept the English Crown, rather than the Nation should be involv'd in War and Confusion, and the Protestant Religion indanger'd by another Successor, as it must necessarily have been, had the Infanta of Spain, whose Title. was then promoted by the Popish Interest, Succeeded. And all the reward we had for this Condescension and Kindness, was a contemptuous and disdainful refusal, on the part of England, of an Union of the Ntions when proposed, tho the same would visibly have tended to the Benefit of the whole Island, the general advantage o Europe, and the security and in∣crease of the Protestant Interest. And our King was so little thank∣ful on his part, that tho he promis'd solemnly in the Great Church of Edinburgh before his departure, that he would visit his Antient Kingdom, once in three years, he never saw it after but once, and that not till 14 years after. And by the influence of that same Faction in England, who are still our Enemies, he made Innovations both in Church and State, contrary to the Laws of the Land, and his own solemn Oath; which laid the founda∣tion of all those Disasters that ended in the faal Exit of his Son, and the subversion of the Government of both Nations. These were the first Advantages we had by the Union of the Crowns. His Son King Charles I, had scarce ascended the Throne, when we had new Proofs of the Disadvantages we labour'd under by that Union; For he by the Advice of some Enemies to our Nation, did in an Imperious and Arbitrary manner, send for our Crown, tho the only Monument almost left us of our Independency and Freedom; but was generously answer'd by him that had it in keep∣ing,
That if he would come and be Crown'd in Scotland, he should have all the Honour done him, that ever was to his Ancestors; but if he dd not think it worth his while, they might perhaps be inclin'd to make choe of another Soveraign, or to that effect; as recordd in the Conuation of Sr Richard Baker's History. Another  we had by that Union of the Crown, was this, That that unfortunate Prince being inspir'd with an Aversion to the Constitution of our Country, by his Edu∣cation in the Court of England, he made an unnatural War upon us, to bring us to a Conformity with England in Church-Matters. We shall not here offer to debate, which of the Churches was best constuted, or most agreeable to the Scripture-Pattern: It suffices for our Argument, that we were injur'd in having a For∣reign Model offered to be obtruded upon us, which was he Con∣squence of the Union of the Crowns, and of having our King eucated in another Ntion; but that was not all, another mis∣chievous effect of the Union was this, that whatever K. Charles had deserv'd at our hands. et out of natural Afection, Consci∣ence and Honour. we were oblig'd to do what we could to prevent his illegal Trial and Death, and to defend his Sons Title, which threw us into Convulsions at home occasion'd us the loss of several Armies, and exposd our Nation afterwards to Ruine and Devatation by our implacable Enemy the Usurper, which together with the Ungrateful Retributions made us by the Government after the Restoration, were enough to have wearied any Nation under Heavn, but our selves, of the Union of the Crowns. Yet such was our Zal for the Protestant Intrest, the Welfare of the Islnd, and the Liberty of Europe, that tho we had a  oppority of providing otherwise for our  and the Ad∣vancement of ou Trade, and of forming our selves into a Com∣mon wealth, or or bringing England to our own terms, yet we frankly and generously concurr'd with them to settl our Gvern∣ment on the same Persons, and in the same manner as they did
theirs, and all the Reward we had from them is, that an Union of the Nations, tho twice propos'd by his Majesty in Parliament, hath been  rejected, our King questioned by Par∣liament of England or an Act of his Parliament in Scotland, which is a manifest Impeachment of our Soveraignty; a Compliance with which excluded Baliol and his Heirs for ever from our Crown▪ and to this they have added an opposition to our receiving foreign Subscriptions at Hamburgh and elsewhere, refus'd us a Supply of Corn for our Money▪ to relieve us in our Distress; and discourag'd our Settlement a Darien, by forbidding their Subjects to Trade with us there. If these continued Slights and Injuries be not enough to make us weary of the Union of the Crowns, let any Man judge. To discover a little of the unreasonableness of this sort of Treat∣ment, we dare appeal to the calm thoughts of such of our Neigh∣bours in England, as prefer the Interest of the Publick to private Animosities, and foolish ill-grounded Piques, either as to Church or State; whether at the time of the Revolution, and before we declar'd our selves, they would not have been wil∣ling to have assur'd themselves of our Friendship, at the rare of uniting with us as one Nation? Had we but demurr'd upon for∣eiting the late K. James, or made but a Proffer of renewing our antient League with France, and joining with that Crown to keep that Prince upon rhe Throne of Great-Britain; they know we might have made what Terms we pleas'd with the late King & Louis XIV. on that condition, and might have been restor'd to all the Honours and Privileges that our Ancestors enjoy'd in France, which were almost equal to those of the Ntives; and yet that gallant Nation thought it no disparagement to them, however we be despis'd and udervalued now by a certain Party in England. Had we but seem'd to have made such Overtures, the English must needs have foreseen that the natural Consequences of such a design, i it had taken effect, must have been these, viz the late King's Adherents in England would certainly have join'd
us and our Nation would have afforded them a safe retreat, in case of any Disaster, till they could have concerted Matters to the best advantage; the late King would not have yielded him∣self such an easy Conquest, nor disbanded his Army in such a manner as he did; Ireland had certainly never revolted, since every one knows that the Revolution was begun, and in a great mea∣sure perfected there by the Scots of the North; so that England must have become the Theatre of War, been lyable to an Invasi∣on rom France on all occasions, would only have strengthned her Fetters by struggling with them, and expos'd all the Patriots of her Religion and Liberty to Butchery and Destruction. These must certainly have been the Consequences os our ad∣hering to the late King, and the English would have thought they had had a very good Bargain if they could have bought us off in that Case with uniting both the Kingdoms into one, and granting us a joint Trade to their own Plantations; whereas now they will not allow us to settle a Forreign Colony of our own, and treat us as Forreigners in theirs. To shew that this is not a mere Conjecture, that has no other ground but a Vision of the Brain, they may be pleased to consider the honourable Privileges granted US by their Ancestors, and some of the greatest Princes that ever swayed their Scepter, viz; King Edward and William the Conqueror, who by the Consent of the States in Parliament assembled, enacted, That the Scots should be accounted Denizns of England, and enjoy the same privileges with themselves, because of their frequent Intermarriages with the English, and that they did ever stand stoutly as one Man with them, for the common Utility of the Crown and Kingdom, against the Danes and Norwegians, fought it most valiantly and unanimously against the com∣mon Enemy, and bore the burden of most fierce Wars in the Kingdom. This they will sind in a Book call'd Archaionomia, translated from the Saxon by William Lambard, and printed at London by Jon Day in 1568.
It must be granted, that the Reasons of such a grateful Retri∣bution are redoubled now: Intermarriages betwixt the two Na∣tions are more frequent than ever; the Union of the Kingdoms under one Crown for almost 100 years; the generous Concurrence of the Scots in the last Revolution; their loss of so many gallant Officers and brave Soldiers in the common Cause during the late War, and the preservation of Ireland, which hath been twice ow∣ing to ou Countreymen, might reasonably entitle us to the same Priviledges now, that our Ancestors were formerly allow'd by K. Edward, and William the Conqueror. We need not insist on another sort of Obligatin, that we have put upon England, twice within this 60 years, viz: the delivering them from their Oppressions in the time of K. Charles I. the Anarchy of the Rump, and several Models of Armies and Juntos. by encouraging General Monk's Undertaking; for it cannot be denied that we had the Ballance of Europe in our hands, at the time of the last Revolution, and that we turned the Scale to the advantage of England in particular, and of Europe in general, which must be allowed to be as great a Service, as that which was so thank∣fully rewarded by Edward, and William the Conquero; whence it is evident that those Englishmen; who at present oppose our Settlement in America, don't inherit the gratitude of their Ancestors, when they not only will not allow us to trade in Conjunction with them, but withstand our doing any thing that may advance▪ a Trade▪ by our selves. If they object that what we did in all those cases, was no more thn our duty, and what we ow'd to our own preservation as well as to theirs: it is easie to reply, that admitting it to be so, yet by the Laws of GOD and Men People are encouraged to perform their Duties by Rewards; and their Ancestors were so sensible of this, that tho they knew we were equally coneern'd to defend the Island against foreign Invaders as well as they, yet they thought themselves obliged in Policy as well as Gratitude, to reward us; which they not only did by that Honorary Premium of allowing us to be Denisons of England. as abovemention∣ed, but sometimes gave to us, and at other times confirm'd to us the
three Northern Counties of Northumberland, Westmorland, and Cumberland, to be held in Fee of the Crown of England. It is likewise very well known with how much honour the Parliament of England treated us, when they courted onr Assistance against K. Char∣les I. and what large Promises that Prince made us, if we would have but stood Neuter; which tho we had reason to think many of those that opposed him had no great kindness neither for our Civil nor Ecclesiasti∣cal Constitution, yet the sence that we had of the common danger that our Religion and Liberties were in at that time, made us proof against all those Tentations; so that after all Endeavours for a Reconciliation betwixt the King and Parliament of England proved unsuccessful, we sent an Army, which cast the Ballance on the side of the latter, who before that time were reduced low enough by the Kings Army, as is very well known to such as are acquainted with the History of those times, and is own'd by my Lord Hollis in his Memoirs lately published. But to return to the last Revolution; Tho we must own that we owe our Deliverance to his present Majesty, and were oblig'd in Conscience and Honour to concurr with him; Tet who could have blam'd us to have stood upon Terms before we had fallen in with England, Especially considering how ungratefully (nay villan∣ously) we were treated by Cromwel and his Party, after we had sav'd them and the Parliament of England, from the Scorpions that the Cavaliers had prepar'd to chastise them with; as is own'd by the said Lord Hollis. Not could we have been any way Calpable, if we had stood upon higher and surer Terms with his Majesty, Considering how unthankfully we were abus'd and enslav'd by our late Kings, for whom we had acted and suffered so much. And tho we must own that no less Present than that of ou Crown, was sufficient to testify our Gratitude for what the Prince of O∣range had done for us, yet we were under no necessity of gratify∣ing him in that manner, since our Deliverance was effected be∣fore hand, and that he himself in his Declaration, expres'd it to be no part of his design to come for the Crown, so that our Re ward was as frank and generous as his Service.
Then as to England, we were under no manner of obligation to continue the Union with them; We might have insisted upon having our King obliged to reside as much amongst us, as amongst them: that we should be govern'd without any Consideration or respect to their Interest, any further than it fell in with our own. We might have insisted upon an Act, that we should not be oblig'd to at∣tend his Majesty at any time at the Court of England, about our Affairs; but that he should either attend upon our Administra∣tion in person pro re nata, as he does now upon the Affairs of Holland, or lay down Methods to have his Pleasure signified to us at Home in such cases as it was requir'd; which would save a vast deal of Money annually to the Kingdom of Scotland. Then as to the Succession, we were under no Necessity of settling it in the same manner as they did in England; for since they had made a Breach in the Line, they could not handsomely have blam'd us to have made an improvement of it, and either to have limited the Reversion after his present Majesty's Death, or otherwise as we should have thought best, for the Security of our Civil and Religious Liberties; or we might have settled it upon the Prince of Orange, and his Issue by any other Wife, there be∣ing cause enough then to conceive that he was never like to have any by his late excellent Princess. Had we taken any of these Methods, it must be own'd that England would have been con∣siderably weakned, and lessen'd in the Esteem of the World by it; that we should have thereby had an opportunity of making such Forreign Alliances with France, as formerly, or with any other Nation, as would have made England uneasy, and perhaps unsafe on occasion; and therefore it must be reckon'd highly im∣politick, as well as ungrateful, in our Neighbours to treat us continually at such a rate, as if they had a mind to bring us under Subjection, since we have so many open Doors to get out at.
They must not think that we have so far degenerated from the Courage and Honour of our Ancestors, as tamely to submit to become their Vassals, when for 2000 years we have maintain'd our Free∣dom; and therefore it is not their Interest to oppress us too much. If they consult their Histories, they will find that we alwayes broke their Yoke at long-run, if at any time we were brought under it by force or Fraud. The best way to assure themselves of us, is to treat us in a Friendly manner: Tho we be not so great and powerful as they, it is not impossible for us to find such Allies as may enable us to defend our selves now as well as formerly. None of these things are suggested with an ill design to raise Annimosity betwixt the Nations, or to perswade to a Separation of the Crowns, but meerly to shew those of our Neighbours, who use us os unkindly, that they are bound in Gratitude, Duty and Interest to do otherwise, and particularly to support us in our American Settlement, and not to lay our King under a necessity by their froward Humours in Parliament or otherwise, to dis∣courage us in that Undertaking, as they have hitherto done, and continue still to do in their American Colonies, by their Proclamations against having any Commerce or Trade with the Scots at Darien; Tho they be settled there, according to the Terms of his own Patent, and an Act of Parliament in Scotland. We are not insensible that the present Juncture of Affairs obli∣ges the Kingdom of England to carry fair with Spain, and may admit that in part as an Apology for some of that Opposition we have met wih from them; but the questioning our Act of Parliament at first, and their hindering our Subscriptions at Ham∣burgh afterward, before ever they knew what our design was, make that excuse of little weight: but allowing it all the Force they would have it to bear, it may be worth their while to con∣sider whether it be more their Interest to incourage the Spaniards in an unjust Opposition to our American Settlement, or to sup∣port the Scots in maintaining their Right. It is certain that the Spa∣niards
are in no condition to break with England; or if they should, it's in the power of the English to reduce them speedily to reason: whereas if the Scots should miscarry in their Under∣taking by the Discouragements from England before-mentioned, which exposes our Ships to be taken and treated a Pirates by any Nation that pleases, the infallible consequence of it will be, that the Ruin and utter impov'rishment of Scotland, which must ne∣cessarily follow such a miscarriage, will immediatly affect Eng∣land both in her Trade and Strength: The City of London and the Northern Road will soon feel the Effects of it, when the Mo∣ney spent by our Gentry and Merchants continually for Cloaths, Provisions, and Goods, ceases to circulate there: England must unavoidably become an easier Prey to any forreign Enemy; since it will not be only the loss of a Tribe, but of an entire Sister-Na∣tion. Or supposing that Scotland should be able to bear up under the loss, it will lay the Foundation of an irreconcilable Feud, and perhaps issue in a War betwixt the two Nations; which did never yet terminate at long run to the advantage of England, and is as unlikely to do so now as ever: For in such a case they would find us unanimous as one Man against them; whereas we are sure that all those who wish well to the Protestant Interest, and their present Constitution, would never join in any such War a∣gainst us; and therefore those who are Enemies to the Peace of the Nations, being aware of this, labour to Effect their design by another Method, and endeavour as much as they can to dash the Government against one another. But they are mistaken in the People of Scotland: we are so sensible of our obligations to K. William; and know so well what is due to our Deliverer, that it surpasses all their Art to create in us the least ill thought of him; it is not in the temper of our Nation. The World knows that however frequent and successful we have been in reducing our bad Kings to reason, yet there never was any People under the Sun more Loyal and affectionate to good Princes than we have been;
and is, when we have been forc' to oppose our Monarchs, pri∣vate Persons have sometimes carried eir Rtments too high, yet the publick Justice of the Nation was alwe govern'd with Temper. We could multiply instances to prove this, but need go no higher than the three last Kings, who tho a o them Ene∣mies to our Constitution, as appear'd by their Principles and Practices, yet it's very well known what we both did and suf∣fer'd for them, and particularly for K Carles I. tho the Malice of a Faction in our Neighbouring Nation six'd a ous Re∣proach upon us, as if w had sold im;  which Refection we are sufficiently vindicated by the Lord Hollis's Memoirs be∣fore-mentioned; wherein that excllent Prson makes it Evident, that tho our War against that Prince was just, yet we had all pos∣sible respect for his Person, made the  Conditions e could for his Safey and Honour. and to avoid greater Mischfs, and the playing of our Enemies Came to the  of our slves and his Majesty, we were  to  him in England, Me∣moirs p. 68. Then since we carried it so to a Prince that had been no  kind to us, it will be impossible to create a Breach  s an a Prince, to whom, under God, we owe all that we  as Me and : But at the same time our Neighbours wo  o drie  Nil as far as it will go, would do well to  hat e never bliev d that Doctrine in Scotland, that it is  to resist a King, or  that has a Commission under him, upon any pretence whatsoever: we  that Doctrine in Scythia,  whce sme Aors derive our O∣rigin, and think it oly fit to be nt back to Turkey, from whence it came. We know very well how to distinguish betwixt a  , and the abuse of it; And our Ancestors rightly understood how to o∣bey the lawful Commands of their Princes▪ when Masters of themselves, and how to govern by their Authority. and in their Name, when ey were not; tho they did not think themselves obliged to oey their per∣sonal Commands. when the Fortune o War, or other Accidents had put them into the hands of our Enemies.
Thus we refused Obedience to K. James I. when detain'd prison∣et in England, contrary to the Law of Nations, and carried over into France, to command his Subjects there, not to bear Arms against the English Army, where he was in person. We told him we knew how to Extinguish betwixt the Commands of a King, and those of a Captive: And that most of the Kings of Scots have been such in Relation to us since the Union, we could hear∣tily wish were not too demonstrable. To return to the point of what may probably be the Conse∣quences, if the English should proceed to any surther degree of of Opposition; Or if the Scots should misearry in the Design. It's reasonable to believe, that the English will be so wise as to forbear Hostilities, tho we are very well satisfied, there is a Party in that Nation, who bear ours no Good-will; but they being such as are either disaffected to the present Constitution, or acted by a sordid principle of private Interest, it's to be hop'd they will never be able so far to leaven the sound part of the English Nation, as to occasion a Rupture betwixt them and us, Yet we must needs say, that we look upon their way of treating us to be a very unaccountable thing, and that it was no small surprise to us, to find that an English Parliament should look on our taking Subscriptions in England, in order to admit them Joint-Sharers with our selves, in the benefit of the Act to encour∣age our Trade, to be no less than a high Misdemeanour. We have reason likewiwe to complain of their constant practice of pressing our Sea-men in time of War, as if they were their own Subjects, and that they should treat us in other respects, as if we were Aliens; and sometimes confiscate Ships, by reckoning Scots Mariners as such: So that the English have not only depriv'd us of our Government, and the warm influences of our Court, the want o which is a considerable addition to the Natural cold∣ness of our Climate, but they likewise oppress us on all occasions,
and do  endeavour to prevent our Application to Trade. We know there's a Party in that Nation, who think we sustain'd no great loss by the removal of our Princes; but we would wish them to consider what a murmuring they themselves make when the King goes annually to the Netherlands (tho the safety of Eu∣rope requires it) because of the damp it puts upon Trade, and the Money it carries out of the Kingdom. Let them consider then what our Nation hath suffered in that respect now for almost 100 years, besides the lessening our Esteem in the eyes of the World, so that our Honour and Substance are both swallow'd up by the Kingdom of England; and yet they will neither admit us to the privileges of ellow-Subjects with themselves, nor suffer us to take such measures as may enable us to stand on our own bot∣tom. Certainly this is not the way to establish the Peace, no to increase the Wealth of the Island. We know that it was a Maxime in some of the late Reigns. That it would never be well, till all that part of Scotland on this side Forth, were reduc'd to a hunting Field: but we were in hopes the bitterness of those days had been past: yet it seems that Party have still so far the ascendant amongst our Neighbours, as to procure a publick Opposition to all our Endeavours for raising our Nation by Trade. It will upon due Examination be found as bad policy as it is Christianity, to urge, as some of our Neighbours do, that it is the Interest of England to keep the Scots low, because they are an independent and free Nation▪ and were our ancient Enemies; and therefore may be dangerous Neighbours if they grow rich and potent. Nothing but Rancor and inveterate Malice can suggest such sour thoughts as these. It were fit that sort of Men should be purg'd of their Choler. The Scots to obviate all dangers from that had, have, tho they be much the ancienter Nation, conde∣scended so far as several times to propose an Union, which the Gentlemen of that Kidney have hitherto prevented; and therefore
we would wish them to look back into their Histories, nd upon casting up their Accounts, make a true Estimate of whatever they gain'd by a War with Scotland. They will find that their Ance∣stors, as well as the Romans, have been sensible, as Tacitus ex∣presses it, Quos sibi Viros Caledonia seposuerit; and that as it was true what ou Histoian says of the unjust and treacherous War made upon us by Edwad I. that Scotor nomen pene delevit; it was also true what he says on the other hand, that Angliam vehe∣menter concussit: So that those Gentlemen take the direct way by opposing and oppressing us to un into those dangers they would avoid: for they may assure themselves that if the English Oppo∣sition to our American Settlement should once break out into Ho∣stilities, the Scots will find some Allies, antient or new, that will be glad of the opportunity to join with them. O if, which is most probable, tho highly ungrateful and impolitick, the English should so far neglect the Scots, as to suffer them to be ovpower'd by the French, they may be sure that the Scots, when put to their last shift, can always make an honourable Capitulation with Frane. It's not to be doubted, but that Crown would be very willing to renew their antient Alliance with us; and besides allowing us a share at least in the Trade of Darien, would on codition of giv∣ing them the possession of New Caledonia, restore us likewise to all our ancient Privileges in France. They would think it a very good purchase if they could secure themselves of that Colony by doing so, granting us what security we could reasonably desire for the uninterrupted Enjoyment of the Protestant Religion, and a Freedom of Trade to all places of the World, where it did not actually interfere with their own Settlements and Colonies. So that if this should be the Case, we leave it to our Nighbours to judge what would become of their East and West India Trade and Plantations, and whether they would be able to stand out against France and US, now that they have no footing on the Continent, nce formerly, when they had so many Provinces of that King∣dom
in their possession, and could not do it, and at last lost every foot of their French Dominions: Whereas had they been in Union with us, they might certainly have retain'd them, and by con∣sequence have prevented the great Calamities that Europe hath since groan'd under by the prodigious Increase of the French Monarchy. This we think sufficient to convince those angry Gntlemen in our neighbouring Nation, that are so very much disgusted with our American Settlement, that it is the Interest of England to join with us and support it, and that it may be of dangerous Conse∣quence to them? either to oppose or neglect us: Whereas by joining cordially in this Matter, they may unite us inseparably to themselves for ever, inrich their own Nation, secure and ad∣vance the Protestant Interest, keep the Ballance of Europe in their Hands, and prevent the returns of its danger, their own Expence of Blood and Treasure to save its being threatned with Slavery any more, either by the House of Bourbon or Austria. Therefore we cannot believe after all, but our wise and Politick Neigh∣bours will at last see it their Interest to protect and incourage us in this matter▪ that we may mutually strengthen and support one another a∣gainst the French, who are loudest in their Clamours against our Set∣tlement, because if incourag'd and improv'd, it will defeat all their ambitious and Antichristian Designs; And thereby we shall also be in a condition to assist the English Plan ations in the West Indies, who as we find by the proceedings of the Earl of Bellomont and the Assemblies of New England and New▪York, are suiciently sensible of their danger, from the incroaching temper of the French, which increases every day; and it is evident, that their new De∣sign'd Colony in Mississipi River looks with a dangerous Aspect upon all the English Plantations in America, and may be  justly esteemed an Incroachment upon Spain, as being in the Bay of Mexico, than our Plantation in D rien: Which argues the treacherous Humor of that Nation, to make such an Oucry a∣gainst
the Scots who have envaded no Mans Property, when they themselves are so notoriously guily of it; and therefore it would seem to be the Interest of England rather to strengthen themselves by our Friendship, and to look after the French, than to provoke us to look out or other Allies by their Opposition and Ne∣glect. We shall conclude this matter▪ with one or two more Argu∣ments to prove, That it is th Interest of England to join with us in this Affair; by which also it will appear that there is nothing advanc'd in these Shets out of any ill Design against the English Nation, or to perswade to a disuiting of the Crowns▪ but on the , that a stricter Union is absolutely necessrry, hat both Nations may have but one Interest, which will render us less lyable to Convulsions and intestine Commotions at home, and put us out of danger of being atrack'd by Enemies rom abroad. The first Argument is this; That by Encouging ou Set∣tlement at Darien, English Ships that have occasion to pass by those Coasts, will there be certain of a plac of Retreat, in case of attack either by Enemy or Tempest, without danger of be∣ing Confiscated by the Spaniards, and having their Men condemn'd to be perpetual Slaves in their Mines. 2. I we be encouaged in ou American Colony, it will Con∣tribute much to heighten the Consumption of the English Pro∣duct; since what we have not of our own, or wherein we are wanting, either as to quality or quantity, we shall suppl ou selves, or the use of our Plantation, in England; which may be of great benefit to the Northern Counties especially, whence we may conveniently furnish our selves with Beves or Victualling our Ships, ou own Cattle being for the most part too small▪ for hat use; besides many other things that we shall have occa∣sion o export to England, for the use of the Plantation, and to maintain a Commerce with the Naives.
3. By joining with us in this Colony, and securing a Post on the South-Sea, which the Princes of Darien will no doubt very readily agee to, they may shorten their Voyages to the East∣Indies▪ and by that means be able to Outdo all their Rivals in that Trade; But if they will be so far wanting to themselves, as to suffer those advantages to fall into the hands of others, who are Enemies to our Religion, and common Country; They can∣not blame the Scots, who have made them such fair Offers: And if ou Nation should miscarry in the Attempt, they themselves cannot expect to stand long, but must be buried in the common Ruines, and fall unpitied. 4. If after all the English should continue obstinate in their Oppo∣sition to us, as their late Proclamations in America, and other Pas∣sages would seem to imply they have a mind to, the World cannot blame the Scots to provide for themselves, by such other Alliances as they shall think meet, since the English are so unkind, and have been constantly growing upon us, especially since the Restoration of King Charles II. to which we did so much contribute, that without our Con∣currence, it could never have been effected. This will appear to be incontovertibly true, i we consider that in the time of K. ames I. we were uder no Restrictions, as to matters of Trade more than they, except as to the Exportation of Wool, and a few o∣ther things of English Product; and so we continu'd till the Re∣storation, when King Charles II. and the English did very ungrate∣fuly lay suh Precusions and Restrictions upon us, contrary to the Laws, relating to the Postnati, by the 12th of Car: 2. for the incouraging and increasing Shipping and Navigation, and the 15 Car: 2. for the encouraging of Trade; by which we are put in the same Circumstances, s to Trasfick with France and Holland, and in a worse Cndition than Ireland, that is a Conquest; which is so much the more unreasonable▪ since we are always invol'd and ingag'd in the Wars betwixt England and other Countries: And those with whom they have most frequent Wars, being Holland
and France, the only two Nations with whom the Scots have al∣most any Commerce, our Trade must of necessity sink▪ during such Was, whereas England hath still a great Trade to other parts of the World; and by this means we are forc'd to be shar∣ers in their Troubles, tho they will not allow us to partake of their Profits, nor suffer us to take any measures to procure such as we may call our own. It is plain from the Instance of Darien, and the Proclamations in the English American Colonies, against their Subjects Enter∣taining any Commerce with our Settlement there, that by the Union of the Crowns, upon the present footing, we are in a worse Condition than ever; For when any thing happens wherein the Interest of England seems to be contrary to Ours, it is certainly carried against us, and we are left without Remedy: So that in this respect, we are in a worse Condition than any Forreigners, with relation to England; or if a Foreign People discover any thing that may be of advantage to them, they are at Liberty to pursue it by themselves, or to take in the Assistance of others; And if they find themselves aggriev'd by England, they have their Respective Governments to make application to for Redress. But we are the most unhappy People in the World; For if End∣lnd should oppose us, we have no King to appeal to, but one that is ether an Alien and Enemy to us, as being King o a greatr Peo∣ple who are such, or if he be inclinable to protect and do us Jus∣tice as King of Scots, he is a Prisoner in England, and cannot do it: If they Question him in the Parliament of England, for any thing relating to his Government of Scotland, as in the case of our late Act for an East India and African Trade his Interest as King of England, obliges him to submit himself as King of Scotland; By which means our Crown, which we desended so gallantly for so many Ages, and which the English could never make subject to theirs by force, is now intirely subjected by a false step of our own, in suffering our King to take their Crown upon him, without
making better Terms for our selves: So that instead of having a King to fight our Battels, we hve made a Surrender of our Prince to the Enemy▪ who arm him againt us; and which is worst of all, we have satisfied our own Proverb, as to our selves, That Scots men are wise behind hand: For tho we sufficiently sma∣ed for it in the four last Reigns, yet we had not so much fore∣sight or Care of our selves, as to prevent the Consequences of it in this Reign, when it was in our power to have done it. Then if we make Application to our antient Allies, or any other foreign Power for our Assistance, when we groan under Oppession, then we are treated as Rebels: Thus our whole Nation was proclaim'd such for but offering to make Application to the King of France, as our an∣cient Friend and Ally, when a certain Party in England had arm'd our natural Sovereign K. Charles I. against us. And that which is still worse, tho our Crown from the time of the Unin has been for the most part on the head of an Alien or Enemy; yet it has iufluence enoug to divide us amongst our selves against the Interest of the Nation; as in the Reign of K. Charles II. those that comply'd with the Court of England, were brib'd with all the chief places in our Administration, whilst those who were Patriots to their Country (as for Honour sake to instance in the late Great Duke of Hamilton, and our present Lord high Chancellor) were exposed to all manner of Dangers and Vexations. This we think sufficient to convince our Neighbours that we have no Rea∣son to be fond of having the Union of the Crowns continu'd, except the Interest of the Nations, be more closely united then ever they have been hitherto. And to let them see that it is their Interest as well as ours it should be so, we shall only desire them to consider how fatal it may be to them, if by any Emergency we should be forc'd to break off the Union of the Crowns, and enter again into a Fench Alliance. It  in vain for them to object that in such a case we should betray or Religion; for we see the persecuted Hungaans were protected in that y the Tuks, tho sworn Enemies to it; nor is it less impossible but there may be a Change as to that matter in France, L. XIV. is not immortal: ad
even Julian the Apostate himself found it his Interest for some time to protect the Orthodox Christians, whom he mortally ated. But supposing (as indeed there's no great likelyhood of it) that no such Al∣lyance as this should ever happen: yet howevr, if these two Nations be not more closly united; it may be of ill Consequencc to England, if any of their Kings at any time should be so far disgusted with their Proceed∣ings, as to leave them, and betake themselves to Us. What a Field of Blood and Slaughter must England have become, had we carried off K. Charles I. when he came to our Army, or if we had join a him against the Parliament of England? What great Efforts did a Party of our Nation make to inthrone King Charles II, when England was against him? and how did our Concurrence afterwards with General Monk effect it? How soon did our espousing the D. of York's Interest turn the Tables upon those that opposed him in England? And if our Nati∣on had likewise espoused his Cause before the Revolution, the Viscount of Dundee gave a sufficient Proof what we could have done for him. There's a strong Party in England at present against allowing the King a standing Force, for fear, as they pretend, of losing their Liberties; but all their Opposition in that respect would signifie little, if in case of a Rupture) ou Nation should take part with the Court, and bring in 22000 Men. with 6 Weeks Provisions and Pay, as we are obliged to do by Act of Parliament; for his Assistance. This makes it evident that it is not the Interest of England to slight an Union with US so much as they have done▪ so so long as we remain divided, any King that is so minded, may make use of us to inslave one another; and any envious Neighbour, whose Interest it is to keep this Island low, will be sure to blow the Coals. If they'd but turn the Tables, and make our Case their own, they would quickly be satisfied of the truth of what we advance. Supposing that the Government of Scotland should traverse the Actings of the Government of England in re∣lation to their Trade, &c. as they have done ours; and supposing
that a Parliament of Scotland, when the King were there, should question him for the Navigation Act, and that for the Encourage∣ment of Trade in England by King Charles the Second. Which lays Us under such hard Circumstances and Restrictions, the Eng∣lish would certainly very much resent it, and speedily tell us we meddled with what did not belong to us: Then why should they deny us the like Liberty in reerence to their  a∣gainst us, seeing we are a free Nation as well they? They cannot think that Scotland will look upon the English Proclamations in the West Indies, against having any Commerce with our Colony at Darien, to be the Act and Ded of a King of Scotland, sinc it is not only contrary to his own Act o Palia∣ment there, and his Patent under the Great Sel of that Kingdom, but contray to the Interest of that Nation; but being the Act of a person who is really King of Scots, we can look upon it to be no other than the esfect of a orce put upon him by a Nation which in this matter thinks it their Interest he should do so. Now sup∣pose, which GOD forbid, our Colony should be starv'd by vir∣tue of these Proclamations, or that our Ships going and coming from Darien, should by reason thereo be attack'd, and treated as Pirates by the English, French, Dutch, or any other Nation▪ who may take the opportunity to do it, and say ou King has d∣clared against us: to whom should we make application sor re∣dress in this matter? The King of England he is our Enemy, and eitted these Proclamations; the King of Scots is detain'd in Eng∣land, and not Master of himsel, but is forc'd to act thus contra∣ty to the Interest of his own antient Crown and Kingdom; as a former K. William, John Baliol, and James I. were 'd to do, when in the power of the English. n such a ▪ if our inant Colony should by this means bed stroyd, ou  must needs think that we should look or a Compenstion . resume the Government into our own hands, and strengthen our selves by new Alliances; which perhaps might be litle o their
advantage, This is not suggested as a thing that is ever likely to be practis'd, or to which the Kingdom of Scotland is any way in∣clin'd: Our whole Conduct since the Union is a continu'd evidence of the uprightness of Our Intentions towards England; and the Offers we did make, and do still continue to make, of admitting 'em as Partners and Sharers in our Settlement, are enough to stop the mouth of Calumny it self. But if in return for our kindness we meet with Neglect and Contempt, have our Soveraignty trampled under foot, our Settlement in America by an Act of Parliament in Scotland reflected upon as unjust by Proclamations from England, the World cannot blame us to complain of the Violence done to our Independency and Honour, which is not to be salv'd by any politick Considerations whatever, that our Neighbours pretend for this Treatment. Nor can any thing less than joining with us, and protecting that Settlement against all opposition in case of Attacks by the French, or others, sufficiently atone for what is already done, or heal the Wound those Proclamations have giv'n to the common Interest and Honour of the Island. WE Come in the next place to give a Description of the Isthmus of Darien. It lies betwixt the 8th and the 10th Degrees of Northern Latitude▪ and in the Narrowest place is betwixt 60 and 80 Italian Miles over. We shall not trouble our selves with the Description of any more of it than is in the Possession of the Natives, which is in length from E. to W. on the North side from the Mouth of the River Darien to Port Scrivan, above 140 Italian Miles; From Caret Bay to the River of Cheapo on the South side▪ it is about 160 in length. It is sup∣posed to take its Name from the great River of Darien, that bounds its Northern Coast to the Eastward. It is bounded on the North and South with the vast Oceans that carry the Names of
the North and South Seas. Its Situation is very pleasant and a∣greeable, and very commodious for a speedy and short Commu∣nication of Trade betwixt the North and South Seas, and pre∣venting that vast Compass that must otherwise be fetch'd round either of the Extremes of North and Sout America. By this means also it lies convenient for a speedier Communication of Trade betwixt Europe and the East-Indies than any that hath hitherto been found out. Mr. Dampier says, that from Cheapo, or Santa Maria River, a Man may pass from Sea to Sea in three days, and that the Indians do it in a day and half. There are abundance of valuable Islands on both sides the Isthmus, which prevent the breaking in of the Ocean upon it at once; and besides the Conveniencies of Wood, Fish, Foul, and Water, afford good and safe Riding in all Weathers, to any number of Ships, especially those call'd the Sambaloes, that lie along the Northern Coast. The Continent is ageably intermix'd with Hills and Vallys of great variety, for height, depth, and extent. The Valleys are watered with Rivers, Books and Springs, which take their rise from a great Ridg of Hills that run along the Isthmus, but nearest to the Northern Shore, from which it is sel∣dom above 15 miles distant, and from whence the Sambaloes Islands, and the various makings of the Shore, and the con∣tinued Forest all along the Country gratiy the Eye with a very fine prospect. The Rivers of te Northern Coast are generally small. because their Course from the abovementioned Ridg of Hills is but short; yet the River of Darien is very large but the depth of its entrance not An∣swerable to its width▪ yet further in it is deep enough, and hath a good Harour in Caret By wich is some Leagues up the River, hath two Islands of pretty high Land, Cloath▪d with a variey of Trees lying before it and two or three slreams of resh Water falling into it. From this Bay to the Promotory near Goden-Island, the Shoare is indiferent fruitful: and the Sil   Northern Coast is generally good, but swamp here and there to the Sea.
To the West ward of the Promontary, at the Etrance of the River. is a fine sandy Bay with three Islands, one of them Golden Islands lying beore it, which make it an extraordinary good Harbour. Golden Island is rocky and steep all round. except at the lading place on the South side. so that it is naturally for∣tiy'd. Te Land o the Isthmus over against it to the S. E. is an excellent ruitful Soil. West of this Island lyes the largest of the three, bing swamy and covered with Maingroves. To the North of these lyes the  of Pines, cover'd with tall Trees, sit for any use. From the point against these Islands for three Lagues Wstward, the Shoare is guarded with Rocks, so that a Boat cannot Lad; but at the N W. end of the Rocks, there's a very good Harbour, and good Riding, as has been faid, in all Winds, by some or other of those Islands, which with the ad∣jacent Shore, make a lovely Landskip off at Sea. The Channel betwixt them and the Isthmus is two, three and four miles Broad, and navigable from end to end; and the Ground opposite to them with∣in Land an Excellent Soil, and a continued Forrest of stately Tiber trees. On the South side there's the River Sambo, that falls into the Sea by point Garachina. This is a large River. Thn there's the Gulph of St. Michael, made by the Outlet of several consi∣derable Rivers, as those of Santa Maria and Congo and the Gold∣River, so call'd because of the great plenty of Gold Dust it af∣fors to the Spaniards. The River Congo may be entred at high Water, and affors a good Harbour. The Gulph has several Islands in it, and afforcs good Riding in many places. The Country on this  as one the other, is one continued Forrcst; and forms a Bay call'd the Bay of Panama, abounding with fine ▪ and afording good Riding for Ship. The Soil os the Inland Country, is for the most part a black  Mold. The Wether is much the same as in other places of the Tor∣rid  in this Latitude, but inclining to the wet Extreme, for two thirs o the year, the Rains beginning in April.
The most remarkable of their Trees are the Cotton Tree, which bears a Cod as big as a Nutmeg fuil of short Wool or Down, and affords Timber for Canoes and Periagoes: they abound with stately Cedars and Macaw Trees-, which bear Fruit as big as a smal Pear, of a tart but not unpleasant Taste; Bibby Tree, the Wood hard and black as Ink, and being tapp'd, affords a Li∣quor call▪d Bibby, of a pleasant tart taste which the Indians drink. They have abundance of Plantains set in Walks, which make ve∣ry delightful Groves, and yield an excellent Fruit, and being green and sappy, are cut down with one stroke of an Ax. They have also plenty of Bonanoes another sort of Plantain, which eats best raw as the Plantain does boil'd. They have great store of that excellent Fruit call'd Pine-Apples, which tastes like a Mixture of all delicious Fruites, and ripens at all times of the Year. They have also Prickle-pear, which is a very good Fruit; and Sugar▪ Canes. of which they make no other use but to suck out the juice. The Maho Tree, of which they make Ropes, Cables for Ships, and Nets for Fishing. The Calabash whose Shells serve for Cups and other occasions, is curiously painted; the sweet sort of 'em is eat∣able, and the bitter sort Medicinal. They have also Gourds of the like nature. There is a plant calld Silk Grass, which resem∣bles ou Flaggs: this they beat nto strings like fine Flax, much stronger than our Flax or Hemp; of these they make Ropes, Cor∣dage of all sorts, Nets or small Fish; and the Spaniards and o∣thers use it for Shoemakers Thread, Stockins, and a sort o Lace. They have a Tree called Lightwood, as large as an Elm, but so light, that a Man may carry a great quantity of it on his back. It is in substance like Cork, and made use of bv the Indians for Rasters to go to Sea, or pass Rivers. They have a Tree call'd Whitewood, of a finer Grain, and whiter than any European Wood and fit for inlaying. They have Tamarind, Locust-Tree, Bastard Cinnamon, Bamboes, and Maingrove Trees in plenty. They have
Shrubs that bear store of Pepper, of two sorts, called bell ppper, and bird Pepper. Mr. Wafer, to whom we owe this Description, takes notice of a Redwood, whereof there grow great quantities on the Northern Coast; the Indians make use of it for dying, and mix a kind of Earth they have with it. It makes a bright gloy ively Red, which no washing can etch out again This we suppose to be the Ni∣ragua Wood. Their Roots are Potatoes. Yams, and Cassava; of the last of which they make Bread. They have likewise Tobac∣co, but don't understand the planting and manuring of it; it is not so strong as that of Virginia. Their Beasts are the Peccary, and Warce a kind of wild Hogs, which are very good Meat. They have considerable store of Deer, and Rabbits, and great Droves of Monkeys, which are ex∣traordinary fat and good to eat. They have an Insect call'd a Soldier, somewhat resembling a Crab, which feeds upon what falls from the Tree, is a delicious Meat, and yeelds an Oyl that is an excellent Salve. They have no European Cattle. Their Birds are the Chicaly Chicaly, which makes a noise some∣what like a Cuccoo, is a large Bird, has Feathers of divers Co∣lours very beautiful and lively, whereof the Natives sometimes make Aprons. This Bird keeps mostly on the Trees, feeds on Fruit, and is pretty good Meat. The Quam feeds in the same manner, his Wings are dun, his tail dark. short, he is much pre∣ferable to the other for Meat. There's a Ruet-colour'd Bird, resem∣bling a Partridg, runs most on the ground, and is excellent Meat. The Corroou is a large Fowl as big as a Turky, and of a black co∣lour. The Cock has a Fine Crown of yellow Feathers on his Head, and Gills like a Turkey, they live on Trees, and eat Fruit. They sing very delightully, and are so well imitated by the Indians, that they discover their haunts by it. They are very good Meat, but their Bones make the Dogs run mad, and are therefore hid from them by the Indians. They have abundance of Parrots, for
size and shape much like those of Jamaica, they are very good Meat; their Parakites are most of them green, and go in large flights by themselves. They have Macaw Birds; which are as big again as Parrots, and resemble them in shape, they have a Bill like a Hawk, and a bushy tail wi h two or three stragling feathers, either red or blue; but those of the Body, are of a lovely blue, green and red; the Indians tame those Birds, and teach them to speak, and then letting them go into the Woods amongst the wild∣ones, they will return of their own accord to the Houses: they exactly imitate the Voice and singing of the Indians, and call the Chicaly in its own Note. It is one of the pleasantest Birds in the World, and it's Flesh sweet and well tasted. They have also Woodpeckers which are pied like our Magpies, and have long Claws that they climb up Trees with; they are not pleasant to eat. They have plenty of Dunghil foul resembling those of Europe, and their flesh and Eggs as well tasted as ours. About the Samhaloes they have great store of Sea foul, and particularlv Pelicans, which are large Birds, having Legs and feet like a Goose, and a Neck like a Swan, the feathers are grey. It has a bag under its throat, which when fill'd, is as large as a Man's two fists; and when dry, will hold a pound of Tobacco; they feed upon Fish. and the Young ones are good Meat. They have Cormorants resembling Ducks for size and shape, are of a black colour, have a white spot on the Breast, and pitch sometimes on Trees and Shrubs by the Water they are too rank to be eaten. They have aundance of Sea▪ gulls and Pyes, which are pretty good Meat, but eat fishy, which is cur'd by burying 'em eight or ten hours in the Sand with their feathers on. They have flying Insects too, and among others Bees, which form their Hives on trees; and its observed, that they never sting any Body: the Natives mix the Honey with Water, and so drink it, but know not the use of the Wax. They have shining ies, which in the night time resemble Glow-worms.
Their fish are the Tarpum, which ears like Salmon; some of 'm weigh 50 or 60 pound, they affod good Oyl. They have Sharks and another Fish that resembles a Shark, but much better Meat. The Cavally is much of the size of a Maccarel, and very good meat. They have a fih called Old Wives, which is also very good  eat Their Paracods are as large as a well grown Pike, and very good Meat, but in some places poisonous, which ae distinguish'd by the Liver. Their Gar fish is good Meat, they have a long bone on their Snour, with which they will sometimes pierce the side of a Canoe. They have also Sulpins, a prickly fish, which when strip'd, is very good Meat. They have likewise String-rays, Parrot-fish, Snooks, Conger-eels, Conchs, Perrwinkles, Limpis, Sa-crabs, and Craw-fish, and other sorts whose names we know not, that eat very well. The inhabitants are most numerous on the North of the Isthmus; the Men usually five or six Foot hight, clean Lim'd, Big-bon'd, handsomely shap'd, nimble, Active, and Run well. The Wo∣men are short and thick, and not so lively as the Men, the young Women Plump, well shap'd, and have a brisk Eye: both Sexes have a round Visage, short Bottle Noses, large and grey Eyes, high forehead, whie even Teeth, thin Lips, pretty large Mouths, well proportion'd Cheeks and Chins, and in gnerall Handsome, but the Men exceed the Women. Both Sexes have stre ght long lank black Hair, which they generally wear down to the middle of their Back. All other Hair but that of their Eye∣brows and Eye-lids they pull up by the Roots, cut off the Hair, of their Heads, and paint themselves black by way of Triumph, when they kill a Spaniard. Their natural Complexion is a Cop∣per Colour, and their Eye-brows black as jet. There are some among them of both Sexes, which bear the Proportion of two or three to a Hundred, who are milk white, and have all their Bodies cover'd over with a milk white Down; their Hair is of the same Colour, and very fine, about six o Eght Inches long,
and inclining to Curl. They are less in stature than the other Indians, and their Eye lids point downwards in form of a Cres∣cent: they don't see well in the Sun, their eyes being weak and running with water if the Sun shine upon them, therefore they are called Moon ey'd. They are weak and sluggish in the day▪ time, but in Moon shiny nights all life and activity, and run as fast thro the Woods by night, as the other Indians do by day. They are not so much respected as the other Indians, but look'd upon as monstruous. The Natives go naked both Men and Wo∣men, only the Men have a thing like an Extinguisher of Silver or gold plate tyed round their middle to cover their. Yard, and the Women tye a piece of Cloath before them, which comes as low as their Knee; but they use none of these Precautions till they come to the years of puberty: the Members that have not those Extinguishers, make use of a piece of Plaintain Leaf of a Conick Figure. They are in general a modest and cleanly People, and have a value for Cloaths if they had them. The better sort have long Ctton Garments shap'd like Carmens Frocks, which they use on solemn Occasions, as attending the King or Chief, & c for an Ornament to the face, besides their general painting and daubing, the Men wear a piece of Plate hanging over their Mouths, and the Chief of them have it of Gold. It is of an Oval form, and gently pinching the Bridle of the Nose with its points, hangs dangling from thence as low as the under Lip; and instead of this the Woman wear a Ring thro the Bridle of the Nose: they lay them aside at their Feasts. They likewise wear Chains of teeth, Shells, Beads, or the like; the heavier they be, they rec∣kon them the more ornamental. Their Houses ly mostly scattering, and always by a River side. but in some places they are so many as to form a Town or Village. Their Walls are made up of Sticks, and daub∣ed over with Earth: The Fire is in the middle of the House, and the Smoke goes out at a hole in the Roof, they are not divided into Stories or Rooms, but into Hovels; every one has a Hammock for a
Bed in one of these Hovels. They have no Doors, shelves, or eats, other than Logs of Wood. Every Neighbourhood has a Warehouse of 130 foot long, the sides and ends full of Holes, wnce they shoot their Arrows on the approach of the Spaniards. In their Plantations they set so much Plantain, Maiz, &c, as serves their occasions: They likewise make Drink of Maiz. which they forment by Grains of the same chewed in their Mouths. They have also another sort of Dink, which they make of Plantains. Most of the Drudgery is perormed by the Women with great cheerfulness, being very well condition'd and dtiful to their Husbands, who are otherways very indulgent to them▪ and their Chil∣dren The VVomen wash the Mother and Child in a River within an hour after their Delivery. The Boys are bred to the Bow, Hunting, and Fishing, &c, in which they are mighty dexterous; and the Girls help the Women in dressing their Victuals, weaving, mking Cotton Cloth, Cordage, Nets, &c. and the Men make Baskets very neat, dying the Materials first with lively Colours. They allow Poligamy, but punish Adultery with Death of both Parties: They punish Theft also with death; and Fornication with thrusting a Briar up the Man's Tard, whereof they commonly die; the Facts must be proven by Oath, which is a swear∣ing by their Tooth. When they Marry, the Father or nearest Kinsman keeps the Bride privatly in his own Appartments the first seven Nigbts, and then she is deliver'd to her Husband: All the Neighbours for some M les round, are Invited to a great Feast, and bring Provisions with them, The Fathers o the young Couple bring them forth in their hands, and the Bridegrooms Father makes a Speech; then he dances about in Antick Gestures, till all on a sweat, when he kneels down, and gives his Son to the Bride, her Father also having danc'd himself into a sweat, and presenting her to the Bridegroom in the same manner; then they take each other by the Hand, and so the Ceremonie Concludes. After this all the Men take up their Axes, and run shouting to a Tract of Wod-land to prepare a Plantation for the new Couple. That being done,
they have their Feast, and afterwards Drink hard, all their  being first put out of the way, to prevent danger in case of Quar∣relling. They divert themselves sometimes by dancing, and pip∣ing on a small hollow Bamboe, but without distinction of Notes: The Men and Women never dance nor feast together, but apart. The Women accompany them likewise in their hunting Expediti∣ons, which sometimes last 20 Days: They tie their Hamocks betwixt two Trees cover them with Plantain Leaves, and have Fires all Night by their Hammocks: Such of their Prey as they take a Hunting, and design to keep for Future use, they Barbe∣cue in the Woods; and what they make use of for present Sus∣tainance, they mix with Roots, Plantain, Bonanoes, and Pepper, and stew it together till it be brought to a Pulp; which they take up with the two foremost Fingers of their Right Hand bent hookwise, and put into their Mouths. They travel by directi∣on of the Sun, or the bending of the Trees, according as the Wind is. None of the English Authors take notice of their Wor∣ship or Religion, but give an account that they Pawaw, or con∣sult the Devil to know Futurities; And it would seem they are as ignorant in matters of Physick and Chigery, since when they would set a patient Blood, they set him upon the Bank of a River, and with a little Bow, and small Arrow, gag'd that it may enter no further than our Lancets, they shoot as sast as they can at all parts of the Patient's Body; and if they chance to hit on a Vein, that the Blood spurs out a little, they testify their Joy by antick Dances. WE Come next to give an Account of the Settlement of our Men there; how they were receiv'd by the Natives; wh t Indian Princes there are in their Neighbourhood; in what state they found the Affairs of the Country; and of the Situation of our Colony.
On the 27th of October 1698. our Ships came to an Anchor in a fair sandy Bay, 3 Leagues W. off the Gulf of Darien; upon which two Canoes, with several Indies, came on Board, were very free with our Men, told them they had been long Expected, and were very wel∣come: Our Men gave them some old Hats, Looking▪glasses and Knives, with which they were extremly well pleas'd, and uet off. When our Ships stood further into the Bay, they saw about 20 Indians drawn up on the Shoar, being Arm'd with Bows and Lances; upon which a Boat being sent ahoar, and making a signal of Peace, they unstrung their Bows, talk'd Familiarly, and told our Men that two great Captains would in a little time come on board our Ships. Accodingly on No∣vember 2d in the morning Capt. Andreas, on of their Princes accom∣pained by 12 Men. came on board, and ask'd their bussines; He was Answered, that we came to live among them and Trade with them, and would afford them your European Commodities, Cheaper then any other People. He ask'd if we were Friends or Enemies to the Spa∣niards; and was answered that we were at peace with all men, and would make war upon no man, except they injur'd us. He took us for Buccaneers, and told us he knew Capt. Swan and Capt. Davis in the South Sea, and commended them as men of . We heard that part of his Discourse with very much couldness, and told him we came on no such designe as those men did, but had Authority for what we undertook. We treated him civilly, gave him a Hat lac'd with Gold, and some Toys: and so he parted, promising in a little time to come again; which he accordingly did, and brought Don Pedro, another of their Princes or Captains, with him. Captain Andreas was freer with us than at first, plainly own'd that he took us for Buccaneers, and complain'd that some English men of that sort, had after great pre∣tences of Friendship, carried off some of their People, and therefore Don Pedro would not come aboard us, till he had further assurance of us. Captain Andreas is a person of small stature; he affects the Spanish Gravity, as having been often among them at the Mines of
Santa Maria, Panama, &c. and formerly had a Commission under them as a Captain, upon which he values himself above others. The French hate him Mortally, because of something he did a∣gainst some of their Nation formerly. When he came on board us, he had a sort of a Coat of red loose Stuff, an old Hat, a pair Drawers, but no Stockings nor Shoes; and the rest that came with him were all naked, excepting their Penis, which was co∣vered by Extinguishers, as formerly mention'd. Upon further communing, Capt. Andreas was very well pleas'd with us, offered us what part of the Country we would chuse, and accepted a Commission from us; and at the same time we gave him a Basket hilt∣ted Sword, and a pair of Pisols: upon which he promised to defend us to the last of his Blood. Some of the Princes on this side the Isthmus had been in Peace with the Spaniards for several years, and suffered a few of them to reside a∣mongst them, to give notice to Panama of what Ships came upon these Coasts; but upon some fresh disgust, about two months before we arriv'd, Capt. Ambrosio, who is the most noted Prince among'st 'em, had o∣blig'd them to enter into a common Alliance against Spain, and cut off ten Spaniards, who liv'd upon Golden-Island. The Place where we are setled is 4 Miles East of Golden-Island, within a great Bay. We have  excellent Harbour, surrounded with high Mountains, capable of holding a Thousand Sail Land∣lock'd, and safe from all  and Tempests. The Mouth of the Harbour is about  Cannon-shot over, form'd by a Pe∣ninsula on the one side, and a point of Land on the other. In the middle of the Entrance there is a Rock three foot above water, upon which the Sea breaks most terribly when the Wind blows hard; and within the Points there is a small Rock that lies a little under water. On both sides these Rocks there's a very good wide Channel for Ships to come in: That on the South-side is three Cables lon, and seven Fathom depth; and that on the North two Cables long. From the two outermost points the Harbour runs
away East a Mile and an half; and near the midle, on the Right hand, a point of Land shoots out into the Bay: so that by rais∣ing Forts on the said Point, on the Rock in the midle of the En∣trance, and the two outermost Points, it will be the Strongest Habour, both by Art and Nature, that's in the known World. The Bay within is for the most part 6 Fathom Water, and till you come within a Cable's length of the shoar, three Fathom and an half: So that a Key may be built, to which great Ships may lay their Sides, and Unload. The Peninsula lies on the left hand, is a mile and an half in length, very sleep, and high towards the Sea: so that it would be very difficult for any Body to land, till you come to the Isthmus where there's a small sandy Bay that little Ships may put into, but is easie to be secued by a Ditch and a Fort. There are several little Rivers of very good Water that fail into the Bay; and it abounds so with excellent Fish▪ that we can with ease take more than it's possible for us to destroy, having sometimes caught 140 at a Draught: amongst others there be Tor∣toises, which are excellent Meat, and some of them above 600 Weight. The Peninsula was never inhabited, and is cover'd all over with Trees of various sorts, as stately Cedrs, Brasil-wood, Lig∣num Vitae, Box-wood, Fustick-wood, Yellow Sanders, Man∣shinel, &c. and the like sorts, besides others whose Names we know not. grow on the Continent; and we doubt not of finding out the Nicaragua Wood: We have found Cabbage trees, the Fruit of which eats like Collyflowers. The Natives have no Plan∣tation witin to Miles of u. We have a Watch Tower upon an high Hill adjoining to our Plantation, about a mile South of the Bay, from whence we can see the Ships in the Bay, the Fort we have raised on the Mouth of the Bay, and as far as the Mouth of the River Darien: We can see above thirty Miles Southward, and have a fine Prospect of Golden-Island, and the Isle of Pines, Westward towards Porto∣bello,
and Northward towards Jamaica. The Hill is about a Mile in height; so that we can see any Ships before they come within some Leagues of the Harbour. We Compute our selves to be about 50 Leagues North of Cathagena, and as muc South of Portobello. The four Indian Kings or Captains on this Coast, visit us frequently in their Canoes: and the Ntives are very kind to us, and sell us Plantains, Fowls, &c. or Toys or old Shift A French man who hath married one of the Natives, informs us, that the Spaniards have Silver and Gold Mines on the Ithmus which we might make our selves Masters of with a 100 Men; So that if they commit Hostilities upon us, as we hear thy threaten to do, it's not unlikely that we may visit them. We found some French Refugee in the Country, who are willing to settle under us, and having been several Years in these Parts, and un∣derstanding the Language of the Natives, are very useful to us. We have seen some Sand in the Rivers, which looks as if it were mixt with Gold, and in some places the Earth seems to be very much mixt with it: So that it's concluded, there's more Gold-dust here, than in any part of Guinea. The Indian Princes or Captains on this Coast, do somewhat resemble our Heads of Clans in Scotland; and by their Converse at times with the Spaniards, and other European Nations, affect Christian Names. The first of these Princes we shall Name, is Captain Diego; he commands fom the bottom of the Gulph of Uraba on this fide Caret Bay, and has 3000 Men under him; he has been at War with the Spaniards several Years, occasion'd by an Insult his People had receiv'd from them, when they came to de∣mand their share in the Mines, which they had discover'd to the Spaniards in their Country, on condition of being Partners with them: But when they came to demand it, the Spaniards treated them Villanously, beat and abus'd them, upon which they attack'd the Spaniards, cut of 20 of their Men, and three Priests that belong'd to the Mines.
The next is Capt. Pousigo. He is an Indian Clergy-man, and Brother-in-law to Capt. Andreas. The Peninsula that we possess, lies betwixt his Territory and that of Capt. Andreas, who to∣gether with his Brother, commands from Golden Island to the Ri∣ve Pinas. Their Command is greater than that of Pousigo▪ but not so great as that of Diego. These Princes are very useful to us, because of their Neighbourhood and Consaguinity to one another. Capt. Ambrosio commands from the River Pinas to the Sam∣ballos: He is a man of about 60 years of age, but strong and vigorous, well limb'd and of a stern Countenance: he is a mor∣tal Enemy to the Spaniards, with whom he hath had a long War▪ he is esteemed the bravest of all the Indian Captains. His Son▪ in▪law Don Pedro having been taken by the Spaniards, and kept by them as a Slave at Panama, he can never forget no forgive it them: This young man is a great Friend to the French, who they are made to believe design to come and settle among them. Ambrosio and his Son in Law prest us much to come and settle in their Dominions, and join with them to make war on the Spa∣niards: We gave them fair Words, and promis'd to come and view their Coasts; which we accordingly did, and in our Way thither, four Leagues Westward of our Settlement, we found an excellent Harbour, capable of 10000 Sail; but it cannot be de∣fended without many Forts: Here the Privateers used to come and careen. Capt. Ambroio's House lyes about a Lague from the Water side, on the bank of a River, having 12 lesser houses about it: When we drew near it, he advanced 50 paces to meet us, being attended by 20 men in white loose Frocks with Fringes round te bottom, and arm'd with Lances. He saluted us kindly, and gave us a Calabash of Liquor almost like Lambs-wool, made of Indian Corn and Potatoes. His house is 90 foot long, 35 broad, and 30 in height, curiously thatch'd with Palmetto Royal, and over
that Cotton leaves, the floor is of firm Earth like Tarras, very smooth and clean the sides are compos'd of large Canes, as thick as a Man's Leg. In this House live Ambrosio and his Son in Law Don Pedro, with both their Families, consisting of about 40 Per∣sons. We saw Ambrosio's Grandmother there, who is 120 years old, and yet was very active in getting things ready for our En∣tertainment, she has 6 Generations deseended from her now in the House with her, the People live here to 150 and 160 years of age; but those that converse much with Europeans, and drink strong Drink, don't live so long. From the Samballoes to the River of Conception, the Countrey is commanded by one Corbet; who is altogether in the French inte∣rest, he having contracted a Friendship with heir Privateers seven years ago, and done them many good Offices. They promised to reward him f he would go to Petit Guavus, and in his way thither he was taken by an English Privateer, & carried to Jamaica, whence the Governor of Petit Guavus got him releas'd. He was with Pointi at the taking of Cartagena▪ and has a Commission from the French to be General of all the French and Indian For∣ces on that Coast, and to take, sink, and destroy Spaniards or any other Enemies. Yet the French themselves, and the sensible part of the Indians, don't put any Confidence in him; and Ambrosio who is the bravest of all those Indian Captains, keeps him in aw and within bounds. Next to Corbet, there's another of their Captains call'd Nicola, who is said to be a wise, brave and good natur'd Prince, insomuch that the Indians had a mind to have st him up instead of Ambro∣sio, who is of a rugged military temper: But Ambrosio's Authori∣ty and Power is so great, that they did not find it practicable. Ni∣cola is a mortal Enemy to the Spaniards, and can never entertain a good thought of them▪ since the Governor of Porto Bello rob'd him of a curious Fusee that had been presented him by some of the Buccaneers; and being out of Order, he sent it thither to be mend∣ed;
upon which the Governor taking a liking to it, kept it to himself; and sent Nicola another sorry piece instead of it. Since we came hither, there have been an English, a Dutch, and a French Ship in our Bay. The English Shp was Capt. Long in the Rupert Prize; he had been in the Gulf of Uraba, but he him∣self and his Men own'd, that they had not then been ashore there. He hath some way or other disoblig'd the Captains Ambrosio and Diego. Tho we treated him with all possible Civility, yet we are since inform'd that he hath been a days Journy into the Gulf, and endeavour'd to incense the Indians against us, telling them that we were Privateers, and that the King of England would not protect us. He left some Men in the Bay, who have since kill'd some Spanirds, and came to us for Arms and Ammunition, but we told them we could not grant them any, and that they had done what they could not justify. We gave them however what was necessary for fitting up a Boat; and as a reward. they  away the Carpenter and Mate of one of our Ships call'd the Unicorn. The Dutch Ship that came hither was afraid of the Spanish Bar∣lavento. Fleet, and put in here for protection, that Fleet having made prize of another Dutch Ship of 32 Guns, and of two En∣glish Sloops for Trading on those Coasts. The French Ship that put in here, was that which was order'd to carry back the Church-plate, &c. to Carthagena, did after∣wards bulge on a Rock, and was cast away in our Harbour. We sav'd all their lives, and Capt. Pennicook our Commodore endan∣ger'd his own Life to save that of the French Captain. He in∣form'd us, that the French had 4 Men of War of 50 Guns each, who thinking we had a design on the River Mississipi, were gone to the Gulf of Mexico in quest of us. The French have been very industrious in cultivating their Interest, both with the Natives and Spaniards in this part of America, and doubt not of having a good share in those Countries after the King of Spain's Death.
They have got a great Interest with Captain Ambrosio. by means of his Son-in Law Don Pedro, whom they Carress extrem∣ly, and design'd to have carried him to Petit Guavus, and from thence into France, to aquaint the French King with the favour∣able Sentiments the Indians have enertain'd of the French, and of their design to surrender themselves into his Majesty. This has been projected by the French a long time, but the King of Spains indispositio, and their pretences to that Crown, made them refer it; and its no doubt but our Settlement will quicken those Resolutions. Captain Andreas Capt Pedro his Bro∣ther, Capt. Diego, and Capt. Pouigo. our Neighbours, have no manner of Correspondence with the French. The Letter hath ac∣quainted us, that there are several Gold Mines within two Miles of our Settlement, which he hath promised to shew us; and he hath actually let us see several Samples o fine Gold. This being the Substance of several Journals, that were sent from our Colony in Daien, upon their first Settlement there, we hope its sufficient of it self to satisfie our Neighbours in Eng∣land, of the Justice of our Cause, of the equity of our Proceed∣ings, of the true Reason why the French are so much our Ene∣mies in this matter, of the greatness of the providence that has put us in Possession of that post, and that it is Englands Interest to join with and protect us, by which the Designs of the French against Europe in general, and Grèat Britain̄ in particular, may be Defeated, and the English West-Indies Trade secur'd. But since by the Proclamations before mentioned, which treat us as Re∣bels and Pirats in America▪ for what we have done according to Act of Parliament in Scotland, our Ships may be in danger of be∣ing attack'd by other Ntions as Pirates, and our Colony discoun∣tenanc'd and oppos'd on that account by the Natives; there's no reason that our Neighbours should think strange i we complain of that unkind usage, and endeavour to lay before them what may Probably be the Consequences of such Proceedings, without
being Construed either to threaten or to wish, that any uch thing should happen. It being evident that by offering to admit the English as joint. sharers in our Trade, we entertain no Sentiments but what are Friendly towards that Nation, being satisfied that all those who wish well to the Protestant Religion and true Liberty, are Ene∣mies to any thing that may occasion a breach of the Union and good understanding betwixt us. Yet it must be own'd that we have but too great reason to complain of the Hardships we suffer by the Union of the Crowns, which it is in the power of England to remedy, by complying with the gracious Proposals of uniting the Nations, repeated in Paliament by his Majesty, who-like a true Father of his Country. has expos'd himself to the greatest of dangers to procure the Welfare and Peace of his Subjects, by which he has made an absolute Conquet of the Hearts of all good men who are unanimous to join in the like Prayer for him, that the Israelites of old put up for their Kings, viz. That he may live for ever. FINIS.
