F863 R29523 11164741 46474
A DEFENCE OF AN APOLOGY For the People called QUAKERS Being in Answer to a Book, Entituled, Quakerism Exposed: OR, Some Papers deliver'd to the King & Parliament. By JOHN FEILD. He that hideth Hatred with lying Lips, and he that uttereth a Slander is a Fool, Prov. 10 18. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.
TO THE Christian Reader. I Here present thee with a Defence of an Apo∣logy for that abused and misrepresented Peo∣ple, called Quakers, and earnestly desire thy seri∣ous Perusal, and submit it to thy Impartial Judg∣ment. Not Doubting thy Acceptance, if a true Lover of him, in whom Peace and Acceptance with God is known. Because, whatever Prejudices there may be in some Men, one to another, there's none in him; neither can it be entertained in any that sincerely Love and Live in Jesus Christ, the dear Son of the Father's Love, whom God hath sent a Light into the World; and is come to destroy the Works of the Devil, and all Envy and Malice in those that truly Receive him: And to Preserve and Deliver those that are truly his, from the Hands of unreasonable Men, who are in Confederacy against a People, he hath ga∣thered to be the Sheep of his Pasture. Remember, it was the Chief Priests and Pha∣risees,
that gathered together in Council against our Saviour, and said, What do we, if we let him alone, all Men will believe in him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our Place and Nation? And when Satan entered into Judas, he went his way, and communed with the Chief Priests and Captains, how he might betray him; and they were glad, and covenanted to give him Money. And it was Demetrius that cried out, and made no small Stir against that Way Paul taught; being sensibly touched with an Apprehension, the Craft he got his Gain by was in danger. And it was proud Haman that informed the King, That there was a certain People scattered abroad, and dispersed among the People, and their Laws were diverse from all People; neither keep they the Kings Law's; see Esther 3.8. But the Lord, that in every Age was mindful of his Suffering People; and in all their Afflictions, that by wicked Instruments he suffered to come upon them, he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them; for he knew their Innocency, however they were Misrepresented and Reproached by his and their Enemies: And therefore he then, as now, hath supported, and been with them, in and
under all the Reproaches, Cruel Mockings, and great Sufferings, they have hitherto met withal: Of which I have in Brief given some Account. And it's the Lord that hath been and is their Light and Salvation, whom then shall they fear? And he hath been the Strength of their Life, of whom then shall they be afraid? Surely I may say, these have no cause of Fear, be∣cause they are Innocent: And therefore I pray they may be preserved therein, and that will be their Defence, as it is mine. And then the Government, under which they Live, will have just Cause more to Credit what their Eyes see of their Peaceable Conversations, and what they, with Thousands, have been and are Witnesses of, than the false Suggestions and Insinuations of those Men; whose Interest and Prejudice is against this People, that truly Fear God, Honour the King, Love all Men, Live Honestly, Do Justly, are Peaceable and Inoffensive to those that do not Offend God: And if those that Offend God, are offended with them or me, I pray God forgive them; keep me, and incline them to the Practice of that Holy Religion Christ was the Founder of; and in that Christian Charity, which is the most Excellent Gift; and in that Spirit, which all that are the Sons of God are led by.
In which Christian Spirit, I desire thou may'st be found, and therein duly Weigh, and seriously Con∣sider, how greatly this Despised People have Suffered in Body, Estate, Good Name, and Christian Reputation, by Severity on their Bodies, Havock on their Estates, Revilings on their Holy Profession, false Accusation and Misrepresentations of their Chri∣stian Doctrine and Principles. All which, as they have abode in the Faith and Patience of the Lamb of God, they have been enabled to endure, and go through, hitherto; for which they, in Humility, give Holy Praise to him, that hath supported them, and have Faith and Confidence in him, that he will never leave nor forsake them, as they con∣tinue in their Christian Duty, and abide in Faith, Hope, and Charity: In which, I pray, that all who Profess that worthy Name, may be found; then will Pride be abated, Envy rooted out, Humility spring, and Love encrease. So be it, saith, Thy Sincere and Cordial Friend, J. F.
A DEFENCE OF AN APOLOGY, &c. THE Peaceable Christians, in Days that are past, were accounted Hereticks, called Movers of Se∣dition, and their Holy Religion was almost every where spoken Evil against: Nor could they ex∣pect any better Treatment from an untoward Generation, than what their Lord and Master Jesus Christ met with; who was render'd a Blasphemer, by those that pretended great Loyalty to, and would own no other King but Caesar: And yet, it was not long after, but they rebelled against him, whom they pretended great regard to, that they might get their Revenge executed upon Jesus; in whom no Cause of Death, or any Fault was found, as Pilate the Ro∣man Governour, who examined him, declared. And when the Exclaimers against, and false Accusers of Christ, had their wicked Ends answered; they themselves were found to be Rebels to Caesar, and the true Disciples and Followers of Christ, Peaceable Christians. But what related to their Holy Religion, their Way and Worship of the great God of Heaven and Earth, was then accounted as New, Strange, and as much spoken against, as 'tis now; and their Testimony and Doctrine struck as much at the High Priests, Learned Rabbies, and Great Doctors Hie∣rarchy,
in that Day, as many esteem, the Quakers Testimony and Doctrine do at those of this Day. Nor were the Apostles, whom Christ made Choice of, and sent forth, Men that were brought up in Academical Learning; but were for the most part Illiterate Persons; of whom the Pharisees contemptuously said, John 7.49. This People, who knoweth not the Law, are cursed. And for that reason, among others; they were then as much Despised, Vilified, and Ridiculed, as those now are; whom Christ hath Called, Commissionated, and Sent forth in his Work and Service, in this Day of his Blessed and Glorious Appearance. Against whom, some that esteem themselves Learned, have lately appeared in Print, with a Pretended Brief Dis∣covery, of some of the Blasphemous and Seditious Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers; taken (as they say) out of their most noted and approved Authors, and said to be Humbly Offered to the King, and both Houses of Parlia∣ment. See G. W's Brief Examination, in Answer there∣unto. Now, I having written a Brief Apology on the behalf of the said People, and an Appeal to the Inhabitants of Nor∣folk and Suffolk, &c. One Francis Bugg hath taken Occasion to carp at some Passages therein, which he hath pick'd out, and patch'd together; for after mentioning part of the Title, he takes a Sentence out of the 9th Page, then he goes back to the 5th, then forward to the 7th, and back again to the 1st. And therefore I shall cite the Paragraphs as they lie in the Apology, and put the words he hath pick'd out in Black; that the Reader may be the better capable to make a Judg∣ment of his Disingenuous Dealing by me, beginning with the last first; because it's in the 1st Page, and is as followeth, Suffer me to Expostulate with you, on behalf of these Abused People in your Counties, that have of late been render'd Blasphemers; and to Apologize a little for
them; whom, some among you have lately often Assem∣bled and Consulted together, how they might (by Sub∣tilty and Misrepresentation) Incense you (and by you, those in Authority) against these Innocent People, and your Peaceable Country-Men and Neighbours, that the Monster of Persecution might be again raised, and let loose on them, to suppress them. Reply. Now, what just Occasion hath this Man to be angry with me, for terming this People, for whom I Apo∣logize, an Innocent People, and Peaceable Neighbours? Have they not in their Lives and Conversations, in and under the various Sorts of Government, wherein they have lived, so demeaned themselves? I leave this to the Just Principle which God hath placed in every Man, that hath known them, to answer. Why is this Man so an∣gry? Had he rather they should be Nocent than Innocent? If they were indeed a People that Fired Houses, and Poison∣ed Rivers, as he mentions, and were duely convicted there∣of; though they should pretend, they followed the Light of Christ within (which Light never leads any into such Practices) then the Law, which is made for Transgres∣sors; and Magistrates, which should not bear the Sword in vain, might justly punish them for their Evil Doings: But surely, it doth not therefore follow, that those who truly Believe in Christ Jesus, and follow the True Light, that lighteth every Man that cometh into the World, must Suf∣fer for their Faith in him, and abiding in his Doctrine: For this, under what pretence so ever it may be, would be Persecution; which surely I might as well term, the Mon∣ster of Persecution, as F. Bugg a Badge of a False Church, for he declares in his Postscript thus: I do profess my self a Member of the Church of England, I have often and do now again tell you, that I am against Persecution and will add, that Persecution for Righteousness sake is a Badge of a false Church.
And yet in the latter part of King Charles the 2d's Reign, there were 1460 of these People Prisoners; only for their Abi∣ding in the Doctrine of Christ, and peaceably Meeting to∣gether to Worship him, in Spirit and in Truth; and great Spoil and Havock were also made upon the Goods and Estates of these Innocent People for the same. And many were Prosecuted for not going to their Parish Churches, so called, when they were Prisoners upon other Accounts, as well as for Meeting, viz. on Writs De Excommunicato capiendo, and as Popish Recusants, for 20 l. per Month, and ⅔ of their Estates: And by Law many of these People might have been Burnt at the Stake, if the Writ De Haeretico Com∣burendo had not been Repealed. I do heartily wish, that no People, professing Christia∣nity, may ever wear this Badge more, nor raise the Mon∣ster of Persecution in this Nation again: But that Liberty of Conscience may for ever be continued to all that Live Peaceably under the Government: It being most agree∣able to the Nature of True Christianity, and to the whole Tenor of the Doctrine and Practice of Christ, and his Apostles. Apology. p. 9. And if these People must be accounted Blasphemers, if they disown not those Books, or their Friends that writ them, without seeing the Books, or what's in them; how can they be either Just to their Friends, or True to Themselves? For, ought any Man to condemn another, without full Hearing, and due Exa∣mination? Or would those Clergy-Men account it Just, that any should Charge them as the highest of Criminals, and Condemn and Sentence them (but he hath put Censure) 'as such, for what some of their Bre∣thren have Writ in Books, which they never saw, nor read, nor knew? If not, why should the Quakers, with∣out seeing the Books, and examining the Contents, be obliged to condemn their Friends, for Publishers of
Blasphemy, or be esteemed Blasphemers? Consider this I beseech you, and examine whether it agrees with Christ's Doctrine, All things, whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets? Or whe∣ther there is any ground to conclude, that the Chargers would ever have refused to have given the account de∣sired by the Quakers; if they had been well assured, that by the express words of these Books, out of which they pretend to prove their Charge, it would be clearly and evidently proved. Now to the words that are in Black, F. Bugg saith, they are both Charged and Condemned, just or unjust, at the Quakers Bar; and therein the Quakers are Gross Hypocrites and Dissemblers with God and Man. Reply. An high Charge, but not proved, That the Quakers, just or unjust, have Condemned and Sentenced those Clergy-Men, so called; without full Hearing, and due Examination, for what some of their Brethren have writ in Books, which they never saw, or read, or knew the Con∣tents of. Oh Injurious Man! To suggest such a Gross Falshood, and then call the Quakers Gross Hypocrites and Dissemblers, and render them such as do not, as they would be done by: But what other can we expect from such an Ʋnfair Adversary? Apology. p. 5. Out of this Paragraph, which I shall re∣cite at large, F. Bugg hath pick'd a few words, which I shall distinguish again by Black Characters. But these People, for whom I Apologize and Appeal to you, how ever they are or may be Rendered and Repre∣sented, by Men of Evil Designs and Persecuting Spirits, Have, Do, and by the Lord's Assistance, are Resolved to Continue Quiet in the Land; and in their Christian Duty and Pra∣ctice, of making Supplications, Prayers (he saith Pray) Intercessions, and giving of Thanks for all Men, for
Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty: for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour, who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth. This, F. Bugg saith, is so false and fallacious, that I Challenge the whole World to prove one Instance of your Praying for King William, or any King. A Bold Challenge, but as False as Bold: For our Prin∣ciple leads us, and our Practice is as I have before affirm∣ed, to Pray for all Men; for Kings, and those in Autho∣rity, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty; and if we do not in our Prayers to Almighty God, recite the Names of Kings, or of the King of the Nation wherein we live, he cannot prove that such an Omission is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and the Example of the Apostles. Besides our peaceable Lives and due Subjection unto those in Authority, evidently manifest to them, who have impartially observed us, that we own the Powers that are to be ordained of God. Apology, p. 7. And although in some things they have seemed to differ from those of other Perswasions; yet who can convict them of Error in any Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Religion? Or, of their not holding that which is truly Essential to Salvation, and agreeable to the Holy Scriptures? Which Holy Records (however they have been Misrepresented, or falsly Ac∣cused, as Slighters and Contemners of them) I do de∣clare on their behalf, they have always had, and still have a high Esteem and true Value for them, above all other Writings or Books: And their frequent use of them, and pressing their Children and Servants to the reading therein, may sufficiently Demonstrate to those that know them, the Innocency of this abused People.
This, F. Bugg, saith, is false with a Witness; and so you must give me leave to whip this John Field, for his deep Hypocrisie and Deceit; and I wish it may do him good. What, to pretend that the Quakers value the Bible above all Books; then consequently above their own? This is such a Lye, that it stabs it self. Reply. This I am a Witness is true, although F. Bugg saith it is false with a Witness; for which confident As∣sertion, he hath produced no other proof, but his own Ipse dixit, which with sober and moderate Men, is of no Moment or Validity; seeing he hath assumed to himself that Extravagant Liberty, of writing what Malice and En∣vy prompt him to. And therefore I do affirm, that the Quakers always had, and still have, an high Esteem of, and true Value for the Holy Scriptures; as they contain the Revealed Will of God, speaking to us either through his Holy Prophets, or Apostles, or by Jesus Christ his only Begotten Son, our Lord and Saviour: In this Sense we do, and ever did, va∣lue them above all other Writings and Books, &c. yet as they consist of Ink, Paper, and various Characters, they are Corruptible, and will return to Dust, from whence they came: And if F. Bugg can deny it, let him. And when I said, that I esteemed them (viz. the Holy Scriptures) above all other Writings or Books, &c. I spake of them, with respect to the Holy Doctrines contained therein. Now what cause F. B. hath to call me Lyar and Hy∣pocrite, &c. let the impartial Reader judge. And, if where G. F. or any of our Friends, speak of them in the same Sense that I did, our Adversaries will pervert their Meaning, and wrest it to another, quite contrary to what they intended; thereby rendering them as Persons that undervalue their Evidence, it is their own Fault; for it's evident from our Friends quoting them in their Writings, and bringing them as Evidences, for Proof of
their Doctrines, that they have an high Esteem and Va∣lue for them; for who can be supposed to undervalue that, which they bring for Evidence and Confirmation of what they deliver? And for my own part, I can truly say, that ever since I knew the difference of Writings, and was capable to Judge between them, I preferred the Holy Scriptures to all other extant; and that I wrote not this to serve a Pre∣sent Turn, as F. B. falsly suggests: For I have done it many Years since in my Friendly Advice, p. 12. wherein is a Chapter, in which I exhort Children to avoid telling Idle Tales, and to read and learn the Holy Scriptures, ac∣cording to the Examples of Ancient Protestants, and Quoted Instances. And therefore I may justly revert his own Words upon him, and say, This is such a Ly, that it stabs it self; or rather him that told it, F. B. But as he quotes G. White∣head, who long before, on behalf of the People called Quakers, declared to the King, We are free to Vindicate any Principle we hold according to Scripture; So it shews, we give it the Preference to all other Books. Again, F. B's Quotation out of Edw. Burroughs's Works, (but not mentioning the Page) is as little to his purpose, as his Citing G. W. viz. And so gladly would we be made manifest to all the World, that if any, especially the Heads and Rulers, have any doubt concerning us, for that End, let any Propound, that we with Consent of Authority [mark, E. B. had Regard to Authority] meet, &c. Reply. For this Proposal was made by E. B. to shew how ready they were, with Submission to Authority, to sa∣tisfie the Doubts of those Rulers and Heads in Authority, or any else, to whom by some prejudiced Priests and otherr, this Innocent People were then, as much Misrepresented, as they are now.
And this Proposal of E. B's was Impertinently Urged by Doctor Beckham at West-Dereham in Norfolk, to settle the Preliminaries of that Particular Conference, (with re∣spect to which our Friends were then met, pursuant to the time prefixt by those very Priests in Norfolk, that with F. Bugg had Challenged and Charged them with many Blasphemies;) upon which our Friends perceiving their Deceit, in pretending by that which was written above 35 Years since, to settle the Preliminaries of that Particular Conference, said; How should that which was written so long since, answer the End it's urged to be read for? Or what's this to a Copy of your Charge, or to an Account of Books, Titles and Pages, out of which ye pretend to Charge us. Give us that, and let us mutually Agree to Time and Place, and then settle Preliminaries. But this we could not get them to, tho' we proffered to pay for it; and now F. B's offended, and saith, These were no Argu∣ments, since you pretend to write from the Lord, moved there∣to by the Holy Ghost. Reply. If it be a Fault to write from the Mouth of the Lord, moved thereto by the Holy Ghost, I conclude F. B. is not guilty: But if none (as is falsly suggested) are mo∣ved by the Holy Ghost, to write from the Mouth of the Lord, what are they moved by? Or, from whose Mouth do they write, who Scribble against us, and Trouble the King and Parliament with their Lies and Slanders? Let him tell in his next. But this your Shuffle, saith F. B. shewed the Justices of Peace, the Gentry and Clergy, as well as the Protestant Dis∣senters, that your Principles are so destructive to Common Christianity. — And this; yea, only this, so far as I know, put them upon a Petition to the House of Commons. Reply. I deny (and let him prove if he can) that this, yea, only this, shewed the Justices of Peace, Gentry, and Cler∣gy (so called) and Protestant Dissenters, that the Quakers
Principles are so destructive to Common Christianity; for then the Discovery is but of late Date, if this only put them upon a Petition to the Honourable House of Commons. Pray let F. Bugg, who asserts this as above, make it appear to the King, and both Houses of Parliament, That this only put them upon it; and that they are, as he confidently tells the King, and both Houses of Parlia∣ment, Unanimous herein: For if so, there is not one of all the Sorts, but what's consenting thereto, or hath been actually concerned in a Petition to the Honourable House of Commons, against the Quakers; for this, yea, only this, viz. the Quaker's Shuffle, as he falsly says, at West-Dereham: When they met there, some Clergy, so called, that with F. Bugg had Challenged the Quakers, and Charged them with Blasphemy against God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Scriptures. But if it be not so, as many besides my self can Testifie it is not; then the Parliament may be hereby informed, that he hath not truly Represented themselves: For they are in∣cluded in his General Words, viz. the Unanimous Consent of all Protestants, as he affirms, in his false and envious Sheet delivered to the Parliament. Now, what Credit is to be given to such a false Asserter as this? And let him tell, if he can, what he means by that Common Christianity which the Quakers Principles are so destructive to; and whether he means thereby some Common and Base Professors of it, or the Loosness, Pride, Swearing, Cozening, Cheating, and Debauched Practices; or the Lying, Envy, and Hatred, which such Professors are found in, that the Quakers Principles are so destructive to; or what else it is he intends thereby? But F. B. pro∣ceeds thus: One John Field (whom he calls the Quakers Tool) com∣pared some, called Clergy-Men, and one or two Presbyterian Preachers, to Herod and Pilate; and some Body else he
compared to Haman and Judas; and said, Field, Do not blame till you examine. Reply. Passing by his Scoffing Reflection of the Quakers Tool, I grant the Substance of this is true; and they that will peruse my Apology, p. 4, 5, and 7. and not Blame till they have Examined, may find these words therein. But I did not say, that F. Bugg was like Judas; or that Haman and Judas's End might be his; for I pray God it may not: But that he may come, if it be the Lord's Will, to see his Out-goings, Repent of his Evil, and Bely∣ing of an Innocent People, that I am perswaded never de∣signed him any Harm, and may find Mercy with God to his poor and never-dying Soul. But F. Bugg saith, 'This you are deeply sensible of, else you would not be so startled and affrighted, because of the Petition, which nther incites to Persecution, nor any Alteration of the Act of Toleration of Protestant Dissenters. Answ. We are neither sensible of it, nor so startled and affrighted, as he suggests; for we well know what it is to Suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake, and have found to our great Comfort, that the Lord hath been our Sup∣port, in and under all our Sufferings, Cruel Mockings, Spoiling of Goods, Sore and Long Imprisonments, Evil Treatments and Misrepresentations by our Adversaries; who have done what they can to render us Frightful and Dangerous, and to ac∣count us (as they did our blessed Lord and Saviour) Blas∣phemous Enemies to Caesar, Dangerous to the Common-Wealth, Deceivers, Cheats, and Impostors: In which wick∣ed Work some few Hot and Angry Priests, that had more Passion than Prudence; in Conjunction with some Envious Deserters and Renegades, that have been filled more with Rage than Reason, and with Clamours than Solid Argu∣ments, have endeavoured to Stir up the Magistrates, to be the Executioners of their Wrath and Fury; they wanting Power, tho not will, in themselves to Execute them upon us.
Yet so seemingly tender is Francis Bugg, as to say, the Petition neither incites to Persecution, nor any Alteration of the Act of Toleration of Protestant Dissenters: But only that the Quakers Principles and Practices may be strictly examin∣ed, and Censured or Suppressed. Reply. What then! may new Rome, as he falsly accounts the Quakers; and Popish Emissaries, which the Petitioners suggest are among them, be tolerated and esteemed Prote∣stant Dissenters? What a Change is here! But, saith F. B. the Petition neither incites to Persecution, nor any Alteration of the Act of Toleration, &c. Reply. Here he endeavours to put a fair Gloss upon a foul Design, and to make his Readers believe, that no Per∣secution was intended by the Petitioners. But can any thing be more plain and obvious, than that Persecution, was the main Purport of that Petition, since the Suppressing of the Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers, is the concluding Part of their Prayer to the Parliament? And is this possible to be effected, without exercising great Cruel∣ty on the Persons or Estates of the said People? And what is such Cruelty, but Persecution? Yet, This, saith F. Bugg, is the Substance of what is desired in the Petition which doth so startle you, which is a great Sign that you are convicted of Errors in Fundamentals. Reply. Then it seems the Substance is, that under a Pre∣tence they are not for Persecution, they pray to have our Principles Examined, or Suppressed: And because we inform the People of what their Words and Petition import, F. Bugg suggests; that it startles us, and is a great Sign that we are convicted of Errors in Fundamentals. But this to me is rather a Sign that his Words are short of Proof, when he said, I can, I have convicted them of Errors in Fundamen∣tals. But let not F. B. or any else think, his Words are of that Credit to be believed without Proof; which he hath not yet made of what he confidently and falsly asserts.
Again, he saith (the Clergy of Norfolk, which joyned with him to Challenge the Quakers) do not go behind your Backs to try, judge, and condemn you; they met you, and would have proved their Charge upon you. Reply. It may be rather said, we met them: For those Priests declared, their Measures were fix'd, and we might choose whether we would meet them or not; and no Doubt, but that would have pleased them better, than our meet∣ing of them did: And why did not they try, judge, and condemn us then behind our Backs? Was it not because we Appeared to their Faces? And so they could not then prove their Charge, tho they would, if they could: But since be∣hind our Backs, by Picking Sentences, Breaking them in Pieces, and Abusing us and the Authors, they have assayed towards it: Yet how far, or fairly they have done it, viz. prov'd the People called Quakers, Blasphemers, I shall leave to the impartial Peruser to enquire and judge by the Brief Examination before referred to. Next, He quotes Edward Burroughs's Works, page 223. being a Book printed 1657, entituled A just and lawful Tryal of the Teachers and professed Ministers of that Age, &c. And then F. Bugg saith, Now Friends, do you think, this was fair deal∣ing in you to condemn the Clergy of all Ranks at once? How can you have the Face to go to the Bishops for Favour? Reply. If F. Bugg accounts those God's Heritage, and Christ's Ministers, that turned and kept the Bishops out of their Bishopricks; how can he have the Face to own himself a Member of the Church of England, and Receive Money from them and their Clergy so called? But if not, why should he blame Edward Burroughs for writing against those, whom neither he, nor the Bishops esteemed Ministers of Christ, nor truly called to their Office? Let him read what Edward Bur∣roughs writes, and refute it if he can; and consider whe∣ther this be fair Dealing in him, and whether the Quakers may not with a better Face, go to the Bishops for Favour, or
rather Justice, than Francis Bugg for Money? Seeing they did not esteem those, that drove and kept the Bishops and their Company out of their Rich Bishopricks, Large Parsonages, and Vicarages, to be Ministers of Christ; nor were they found in their Spirit and Practice; altho F. B. is offended with the Quakers for it, and would have them Retract, and calls what the Quakers writ against them, the Quakers abominable ancient Testimony. Now let F. B. consider whether he must not retract this, before he gets another Letter from a Bishop in his Com∣mendation, to carry about with him to get Money. As to what he carps at in Edward Burroughs's Works, p. 273. about the Quakers Sufferings, it being brought by the Priests, and replyed to in the Brief Examination before mentioned, and answered at other Times, I refer thereunto. Only this I may query, is a Book to be condemned, and the whole Society to which the Author belonged, for some Difficulty in it, or seeming Inconsistency? Seeing Bishop Kidder, in the Preface to his Second Volume against the Jews, saith, in such a Case; I hope the Jews do not think that Book [meaning the Bible] is to be rejected, because there is some Difficulty in it, for seeming Inconsisten∣cies: For then they must reject the Law and the Holy Pro∣phets, unless they are able to account for all the difficult Places to be found in them. Thus far the Bishop. But to proceed, F. B. saith, Indeed, if it be as Edward Burroughs said in the recited Tryal and Condemnation of the Clergy in his Works, p. 223, 227, 234. viz. That they Agree and Concur with all the false Prophets and Decei∣vers in former Ages; that they are Ministers of Antichrist, yet have 1500000 l. a Year for their Antichristian Service, as his ancient Testimony sets forth, printed 1655. then 3 d. a Day is enough, nay, too much. Reply. If F. Bugg will insist upon it, that those Teach∣ers and Professed Ministers in 1657. (for that was the
Date of Edward Burroughs's Book, not 1655.) were (what he terms them) the Clergy, or Heritage of God (as that Word signifies;) I then propose to the impartial Judgment of all Men, whether F. B. ought not to prove; that the Teachers and professed Ministers of that Age did Agree, were according to all the Ministers of Christ in former Ages, and did not Concur with any of the false Prophets and Deceivers, either in Call, Maintenance, Doctrine, Conversation, or Pra∣ctice? And when he goes about to prove this, let him con∣sider what Gratuity and Applause he will gain from his new Lords and Masters. Now, if he prove, that those of that Age, who entred in∣to a Solemn League and Covenant against Prelacy, were God's Heritage, and what they did was according to all the Mini∣sters of Christ in former Ages, and also that those Sort of Men of that Age,Bak. Chron. p. 588. which de∣clared the Kingly Office to be unnecessary and burdensome, and that the Lord's House was dangerous and useless, and therefore to be laid aside, were the Ministers of Christ rightly called of God, truly ordain∣ed, and in their Call, Ministry, Maintenance, Doctrine, Con∣versation, and Practice, agreeable and according to Scripture, altho' they positively declared against the Clergy (to use F. B's Phrase) in these Words: 1. We will, to the uttermost of our Powers, in our several Capacities, oppose the Interest and pretended Right of Charles Stuart,Bak. Chron. p. 671. in and to the Government of these Nations, or any other Person or Persons, pleading or pretending Right or Title by Vertue of his or their De∣scent from the same Line with him. 2. We will not give our Consent unto, but will oppose to our utmost Power, the setting up of any Single Person whatsoever, in the Place of, and for the chief Magistrate of these Nations, without a Single Person or House of Lords.
Now I say, if those Men, who so did, and joyn'd therein, were the Clergy (or Heritage of God) the Ministers of Christ rightly Called, truly Ordained, and in their Call, Ministry, Main∣tenance, Doctrine, Conversation and Practice, were not Anti∣christian; nor did act any thing in Agreement with any of the false Prophets and Deceivers in former Ages: What then doth F. B. render those that he now pre∣tends to be one of, or that Church of which he now declares himself to be a Member? For they have made Laws against such Professed Ministers, that Edward Burroughs wrote against in 1657. Enacting, about three Years after, That every Ecclesiastical Person or Ministers, or∣dained by any Ecclesiastical Persons,Bak. Cron. p. 724. before December 25. last past, being 24 Years of Age; having not renounced his Ordination, who hath been since January 1642. placed in, and in actual Possession of any Ecclesiastical Benefice with Cure of Souls, &c. is declared Lawful Incumbent. By which it seems plain to me, they did not esteem any Person or Minister, that was 24 Years of Age, and was ordained from 1642. to 1660. and had Renounced his Ordination, to be rightly Ordained, or Lawful Incombent; so that it appears, they were not truly Ordained; and by Edward Burroughs's Examination it also appears, they were not rightly Called. Again, if they were Ministers of Christ, and rightly Called and Ordain∣dained to that Work, why were they Silenced Preaching, Turned out of their Parsonages, Prohibited Living within five Miles of any Corporation, and Laws made to suppress their Meetings? And if now F. B. shall confess, they are not the True Ministers of Christ, nor Right in their Call or Ordination, &c. and that 3d. a day is indeed too much for them; how comes he, and all those of his Church, so called, to joyn in an Unanimous Consent with them, to have the Quakers Suppressed, if what he writes be true? Is it from
any Consciousness to themselves, or Doubt that what Ed∣ward Burroughs said of those Teachers, or Professed Ministers, might as truly be said of some of those he is now joyned with, upon due Examination, and by Scripture Proof, both with respect to their Call, Maintenance, Doctrine, Conversation and Practice? Which some of them have de∣clared, by being very severe upon some, who for Con∣science sake cannot put into their Mouths, that for 35 s. pretended Dues, have seized more than 80 l. and when they had an easier Way to have Compelled it, viz. by Distress, have seized and sold to the value of 87 l. 16 s. 11 d. for 6 l. 15 s. 11 d. Demanded. And since F. Bugg ridicules our Sufferings in the Postscript of that Book to the King and both Houses of Parliament, I shall briefly hint, that of the People called Quakers, there suf∣fered in the Year 1660. by Imprisonments, Stockings, Whip∣ings, Loss of Goods, and other Abuses 3179. and 79 lay in Prison when King Charles the 2d came in; and 32 Died there. Now many of these suffered by those Teachers, Mi∣nisters, &c. that F. Bugg calls the Clergy (or Heritage of God) which were gotten into the Fat Parsonages, Rich Vicarages, and other Profitable Places, of those that were turned out. In the Time of King Charles the Second, many Thou∣sands suffered by Qui Tam's, two thirds of their Estates; and 20 l. per Month for not going to Church (as they called it) by Sequestrations for Tythes, and by Imprisonments on Writs De Excommunicato capiendo, and Justices Warrants, and for their Religious Meetings, as Rioters, and Tumultu∣ous Persons, when they were Quiet and Peaceable. At Horselydown there was more Blood shed than a Bloody Nose (as F. Bugg scoffingly writes) by Troopers and Soldiers. And 1660 were left Prisoners, when King Charles the Second died, besides the Fines, Estreats out of the Exchequer, that were against many, which the late King James relieved them from, and for which they were thankful to God and
the King; and from hence some that caused us to Suffer, when they could not have their Ends answered to continue our Sufferings, would insinuate, that we were Popish∣ly Aflected: So that when they could not Afflict us with their Hands, they would Lash and Persecute us with their Virulent Tongues and Pens. Let F. Bagg in his next (seeing he scribbles Books so fast) tell how many of those that kept the Bishops, and their Com∣pany out, turned with the Times to save their Benifices. It's very like old Henry Meriton, Rector of Oxborough, in Norfolk may inform him herein; and who it was that was Excluded or Suspended from Preaching in any Corpora∣tion in England, and what it was for. Again, that woful Cry against Ʋnjust Persecutions and Grievous Oppressions, writ by Edward Burroughs, which F. B. quotes, as I have hinted before, was against those that turned, and kept the Bishops, and their Company, out of Possession; and that cried against them as Popish. Did not they call the Common-Prayer, Porrage, the Surplice, the Whores Smock? And did they not cry, Down with the Whore of Babylon; Down, Down with Her? And did not the Trumpets sound when they so Cried, and the Cross in Cheapside was pulled down, and the Images defa∣ced, and the Organs called their Bag, or Grumbling Pipes, and turned out also? And was there not a great Cry then made against the Bishops? And the Church-Lands sold also? Yet F. Bugg will Cry and Exclaim against the Quakers, who Cried against those that turned the Pre∣decessors of his New Lords and Masters, out of Possession: Is it for the Reasons before-mentioned? Or because the Quakers testified against those Teachers, and their Persecu∣ting Spirit and Practices? How will he then Reconcile this Persecution, which he saith is, a Badge of a false Church? And if these Men in that Age were found in it, why then doth F. Bugg call them the Clergy (or, Heritage of God?)
Why doth he say they are one with the Church of Eng∣land, and that there is the Ʋnanimous Consent of all Prote∣stants, both Conformists and Nonconformists, to have the Quakers Principles Examined or Suppressed; and that they, i. e. the Nonconformists, are sorrowfully affected, that they are joyned with them in the Act of Toleration, to see Christianity suffer so deeply by their Anti-scriptural Doctrine? And not only so, saith F. Bugg, but I have a Testimony well attested of their Abhorrence of their Blasphemous Tenets. O how busie is this Agent, to insinuate, that all other Dissenters were sorry they were joyned with us in the Act of Toleration; and that Christianity deeply suffered by the Quakers Blasphemous Tenets! O wicked and false In∣sinuations! But this is our Comfort, that we are made Partakers of the Blessing which Christ pronounced, when he said; Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you, and Per∣secute you, and shall say all manner of Evil falsly (or as 'tis in the Greek, lying) for my Name sake: We therefore Re∣joyce, and are exceeding Glad, knowing our Reward is great in Heaven; and while we are here, we are resolved through the Grace of God, to Love our Enemies, Bless them that Curse us, do Good unto them that Hate us, and Pray for them who Despightfully use us, and Persecute us, that we may be the Children of our Father which is in Heaven: For he maketh his Son to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sendeth Rain on the Just and on the Ʋnjust, Mat. 5.44, 45. And therefore I tenderly propose to the Serious Consi∣deration of all Christian People, Whether to dwell in Love, abide in Charity, walk in Humility, fear God, and live Peaceably with all Men, will not render us more like God and Christ, than to dwell in Hatred and Enmity, to walk in Pride and High-mindedness, and to be Turbulent and Quarrel∣some? For, are not they the best Christians Subjects and Neighbours, that truly Believe in God, and Jesus Christ his
Son, and in the Holy Spirit; and take the Holy Scriptures, which were given forth by Divine Inspiration for their Creed, the Holy Spirit for their Guide, Christ for their Example, and God for their Teacher; and are rather careful to live well, and love all Men, than to contend about School Distinctions, and meer Speculative Notions, as too many do? For such commonly are more Earnest for their Interpretations, than for the Text; and Hate and Kill one another, falsly pretending it is for God's sake: Who, while they would be counted Members of the true Church of Christ, by their Fruits are known to be of the contrary; for if Persecution is a Badge of a false Church, and the Protestants generally account it so in the Papists; then ought it not diligently to be by all them avoided, and to account it their Interest to Unite in Love and Affection, in Charity and good Will? For what is that Man's Religion worth who wants Charity, and his Pretence of Zeal for God, who dwells in Envy and Malice to his Neighbour, whom he ought to Love as himself? So desiring heartily that the Lord may Incline the Minds of all to follow Him, and his Son Christ Jesus our alone Sa∣viour, who came not to Destroy Mens lives, but to save them; who would not have the Tares pulled up, lest the Wheat should be pluck'd up also; and told his Disciples, who desired Fire to come down from Heaven, to consume those that would not receive him, That they knew not what Spirit they were of, Luke 9.55. And thus in the Sensible Feeling of the Love of God, I rest in this Hope and Faith, That he will in his own appointed Time, perswade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, ga∣ther the Gentiles, who are yet afar off, unto Shiloh; and frustrate all the Attempts of Gog and Magog, who are in Hellish Confederacy against the Accomplishment of so Glo∣rious, so Blessed, and so Desirable a Work.
A Brief Abstract of some Sufferings of the People called Qua∣kers, given to Confront F. B's diminutive Account, and not for Ostentation, nor to Reflect upon any of the Church of England, or others, who are Principled against Persecution. BY printed Accounts to the King and both Houses of Parlia∣ment, there suffered of the People of God in Scorn called Quakers, in the Days of the Common-wealth, and of Oliver and Richard Cromwell, for bearing a Faithful Testimony to the Truth, as it is in Jesus; as followeth. In England. There have suffer'd Imprisonments, Stockings, Whippings, Loss of Goods, and other Abuses to the Year, 1660. 3179 Persons. Remained then Prisoners, 79 Persons. There died in Prison, in the Common-Wealth, in Oliver and Richard Cromwell's Days, 32 Persons. Imprisoned in King Charles the Second's Name in 1660, after his Return and of which died, 77 Persons. Then Prisoners, 317 Persons. For 706 l. 8 s. 11 d. demanded, had taken 3000 l. 03 s. 08 d. In 1661. There have suffered of the said People, by Im∣prisonments, for refusing to swear, and for meeting together, and refusing to go to the publick Wor∣ship, since King Charles II. came into England. 5400 Persons. Died, through hard and cruel Usage 14 1661. In Ireland. There suffered for not swearing, by Imprisonments, Stock∣ings, Whippings, and Loss of their Goods. 200. Present Prisoners being taken out of a peacable Meeting in Cork, and one Meeting more. 14 1661. In Scotland. For not swearing, &c. have been imprisoned, stockt, whipt, and some banished. 91 And many then in Prison there, had Necessaries denied them, and their Friends visiting of them. Besides, there remained Prisoners in 1661, in England, for good Conscience. 552
1661. In Forreign Plantations. New England. BAnished on pain of Death, 26 Martyred, 4 Ears cut off, 3 Burned in the Hand with the Letter H, 1 650 Stripes given to 31 Beat till his Body was like a Jelly, 1 Five Appeals made to England, were denyed by Boston Rulers. Taken from them in New England, in Goods, to the Value of 1045l. Cyrinam. Some imprisoned and after banished into Woods amongst wild Beasts, to be devoured, but the Lord preserved them. In Maryland. Suffered by the Loss of Goods taken for wor∣shiping God. l. s. d. 299 12 4 In Virginia. Imprisoned for meeting to worship God 12 Persons And fined and whip'd for having Meetings, and not pulling off the Hat, and had taken from them 2000 Pound Weight of Tobacco, and from one a 100 l. Sterling. Besides several others, some whereof kept so close in Prison, in a close Place, that they were not suffered to go forth to ease themselves. Nevis, Banished thence, 15 Persons. And 2 of them whipt, and one had a Wife and Children that were banish'd. Christophers. Banished, 1. Besides what's mentioned, some have been beat with Clubs, shot at with Pistols and Guns, cut with Swords, knockt down into Pools: Armed Men came among Men, Women, and Chil∣dren, when peaceably Met together, only to Wait upon, and Worship Almighty God, in a peaceable and innocent Manner, and have been thrown down, and trod upon, till the very Blood gush'd out of them: Yet these were, and the said People still are,
an innocent and peaceable People, clear from all Rebellion, Plots, or Actions and Intentions of Evil: And that then desired, as they now do, to live a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty under the King. Note, In this printed Account, they offered the King and Parlia∣ment, if they would not set their Friends at Liberty, which lay in Holes and Dungeons, some without Straw, some wanted Air, ma∣ny could hardly get Meat, and several have died through cruel Sufferings and Abuses by Goalers and others, viz. ☞ That they, who were out of Prison, were free, as many of them, to lie in Prison in their room, and to go into those Holes, Dungeons, stinking Vaults, and Places, where some of their Friends had lain 2, 3, 4, and 5, Years: But it would not be granted. In 1685. By a Printed Account to the Bishops and Clergy, it appears, that from the Time aforementioned, to 1680, there died in Prison, and Prisoners for the Exercise of their Faith and Conscience in Matters of Religion and Worship towards Al∣mighty God, some of whom being knock'd down, bea∣ten and bruised in their Meetings, died of their Wounds. 243 Remained then in Prison, in the several Goals, 276 The Number of those that had suffered Imprisonment, for Meeting, refusing, for Conscience Sake, to Swear, some of them having had Sentence of Praemunire, and Goods and Chattels seized. 9437 Excommunicated and imprisoned for Nonconformity, besides many more so prosecuted. 624 Sentenc'd to Banishment, for Meeting to worship God, 198 And in the same Year, There was presented to King James II. that were then Prisoners for their Religious Worship and Meeting for that End. 1460 There died since 1680, to 1685, Prisoners for their Faith and Worship. 78 And the Number of all amounting to 12316 Note, some of the present Prisoners were still continued upon the abovesaid Account in 1680. And farther Account of more sent to Prison, and some more died Prisoners.
Besides, many that have suffered Imprisonment, since 1680, and a great Number distrained upon, and Havock made by Inform∣ers (and some Informers were Priests) for their religious peace∣able Meetings, and not coming to the Parish Church-Worship, so call'd, to the Ruine, of many, both in their Husbandry and Trade, some not having a Bed left to lye upon, nor Stool to sit on, nor Cow to give Milk for their poor Children, nor Corn for Bread, or Seed, or Drink, nor Tools to work withal, &c. The Value of which Goods taken, is considerable, as well as the Number of Sufferers, upon the said Accounts; and by Imprisonments (not here inserted) as saith the printed Account. And since 1685, there have suffered of the said People, upon Account of their tender Consciences, as for not paying Tythes, bearing Armes, Swearing, &c. to 1697. 2322 There have been imprison'd for the Causes afore∣said, &c. 622 Since 1685, to 1697, they have had Goods distrained, in England, Wales, and the Isle of Man, for not swearing, and not paying Tythes, and not bearing Arms, &c. to the Value of l. s. d. q. 27875 10 5 ½ Not accounting the great Havock, Spoil, and Loss of Goods they sustained from 1661, to 1685, for their peaceable and reli∣gious meetings, which would amount to a vast Sum. From 1685, to 1697, there died Prisoners 17 Persons. And in Barbados, from 1658, to 1694, as ap∣pears by a printed Account, the said People have suffered great Loss, mostly for not sending out to the Militia, to the Value of l. s. d. 11805 11 6 Of which Sum was taken contrary to Law 1817 l. 15 s. 6 d. And a great deal more they have suffered, of which no Ac∣count hath been yet given, besides Imprisonments. And in Maryland, Jamaica, Virginia, Nevis, Ireland, and Scot∣land: They have been Sufferers by Imprisonments, and Loss of Goods, only for their Religious Meetings, and for not Swearing, and upon other Accounts of their tender Consciences, to the Va∣lue following, viz.   l. s. d. In Maryland, from 1638, to 1668. 552 17 6
Thus, by what I have hinted, their Loss ap∣pears to have been above the Value of 43702 00 00 And that which hath caused their Sufferings to amount so high, hath been the Excess in the Distresses, the distrainers often taking, in Barbados, much more than would satisfie; by which, some of them, notwithstanding all their Providence and Industry are scarcely able to subsist and maintain their Families. Which surely is far more than the Loss of a 1000 of Pins, o 2 double Bibs, as Fra. Bugg scoffingly and slanderously writes: And yet hereby they declare, that they believe the King's Reve∣nue (in Barbadoes) is nothing increased, nor he or the Country benefited. In Nevis. Several suffered on other Accounts, besides those that suf∣ered for their Testimonies against the Priests Worship, Do∣ctrine, &c. for which they underwent great Fines and Impri∣sonments, and Persecutions, and Three had about 17 l. sterling de∣manded for Fees; unto which Imprisonment no Fees belonged, by any Law in being; and yet Friends were distrain∣ed, and had taken from them, by Order of Court, in a Negro, and Sugar 4000 l. weight and for the Marshal's Fees, for which only there was granted but   858 l. of Sugar So that they took more than due by their own Law, to the worth of above after 3 Months Imprisonment, for writing a Paper. 3142 of Sugar. 19 l. And another had 45 17 06 sterling taken for 20 00 00 impos'd For a Fine on the Meeting-House; and several others fined and Distrained. And were indicted by John Lawson, Priest, for Slanders pre∣tended against him, by base Libels, in terming him an Anti∣christian Priest, and he declared against them, that he had su∣stained 100000 l. of Sugar, Damage. And one banished to Burmudos, for writing a Warning to the Inhabitants of that Island. Ireland. And since 1661, the said People have been exposed to Suffer∣ings, for not having their Children Baptized, and for working on Days called Holy Days, and not going to the publick Worship;
and for not paying Smoak-Penny, &c. but in that Year, an Or∣der was granted by Maurice Eustace, Chancellor, and Orrery Mon∣troth, dated Dublin the 17th August 1661. Signifying, that they, commonly called Quakers, who for a long time had indured Imprisonment, and were in Prison in divers Places, in that Nation, only for Conscience sake, should be released from their hard Imprisonments. And after this, they Suffered again in 1669. But about 1686, they injoyed their Liberty, and were mostly quiet in that Nation, from those Persecutions they before had gone under, upon the Account of their tender Consciences. Scotland. Many times they were Dragged, Stoned, Reproached and Mocked, with cruel Mockings, and often Imprisoned, as appears by Account of Geo. Keith from thence in 1669. Some were Fined, according to the Act of Nonconformists, and committed to Prison, and continued for Fines; and Distress was made on their Goods. Those that Preached or Prayed in these Meetings were re∣quired to pay 5000 Marks, Scotch, or to subscribe to their own Banishment, as appears by another Letter from George Keith. In 1677. the Prisons were so thronged, that they were in danger of their Lives: A Doctor declared, That a Plague might be feared, if they had not more room to Breath in. And Application being made to the King, there being about 24 Prisoners; most of which had been six Months. It was referred to the King's Council, who ordered their Release, upon Condition they would pay their Fines; which they for Conscience sake could not do, and so were continued Prisoners. Maryland. In 1681. the Assembly passed an Act, that their Solemn Promise should be taken, as if they had been Sworn in any Matter, Cause, or Thing, or before any Court, Judge, or Magistrate, within that Province; by which means they were somewhat eased from those Sufferings, that were occa∣sioned for their not Swearing, and enjoyed the Liberty of their Consciences till 1692. but since that have remained, and
still are, Sufferers on other Accounts; particularly on that Act made there, on which the Royal Assent hath not yet passed here, Entituled, An Act for the Worship of Almighty God; which is esteemed to be contrary to the Fundamental Laws of that Province; and the like Law was by the King and Council here disallowed in 1695/6. but that by which they now Suffer was made in 1696. and is strictly Executed upon them by Charga∣ble Levies. And being kept here, and not presented to the King and Council, is in force there, till it is Disallowed, as that of the same Title and Tendency was by them in 1695/6. In the Isle of Man. The said People have been great Sufferers several times, by Imprisonments there, and Banished thence by direction of the Reverend Ordinary, so called; they having refused several Charges and Publications to go to Church, and continuing their Meeting, were therefore Censured to Prison, and Order given by Robert Parr and John Harrison, two Priests, that if they refused to be Committed by them, to call for the Assistance of a Souldier, and let the Sumner put this in Execution immediately. And by Vertue of this Order, the Quakers were taken into Custody, and Imprisoned, without bringing before the Magi∣strate, or these two Priests themselves, without any Ceremony of Excommunication. Oh what Power did these Priests take upon them, by Order from their Reverend Ordinary, so called, to admonish the Quakers, and without having them before them; cause them to be Im∣prisoned and Banished: Is this the way of the Bishops Courts? And when the Sufferers met the Bishop at the Earl of Darby's House, they told him what was done, and how they and their Ancestors had had Possessions there in that Island, for several Hundred Years, and that they had their Wives and Families; some of which consisted of many little Children: And yet they were Banished by the direction of the two Priests, that pretended their Orders from the Reverend Ordinary, so called: The Bishop told them plainly, that if he might perswade the Earl against them, they should not go to the Isle again. Let all that Read this observe, how unlike a Christian Bishop he appeared, and what little Regard he had to these Men, or
their Distressed Families, their Wives, or tender Children, from whom by his Priests and Orders, they were Banished. And when they returned by order of the Magistrates in Cum∣berland, to the Island, they were not suffered to Land, but had back to England. In the mean while, the Magistrates of the Island sent and seized their Estates, Real and Personal; and when one of the Sufferers, viz. William Callow made Application to the Earl, for Relief, he was rejected. So his Wife and others were sent to Prison, and the said William Callow being Banished; his Children and Family, Fou∣teen in Number, were left without any to take care of them; and this was what the Bishop's Court did. ☞ Note, It happened, that after the chief Sumner or Apparitor, viz. Robert Chiefton, who thus Prosecuted them, being drink∣ing in a Priest's House, that kept Ale to sell, on a 7th day night, with John Harrison, Priest aforesaid, and others of the Per∣secutors was found dead next Morning, being the 20th Day of the 7th Month, 1670. All, both Men and Women by the Governour Henry Nowell, had orders to prepare to be brought by Capt. Ascough, the 3d of the 8th Month next following, to Douglas, to be Transported to Barbados; and accordingly all the Quakers were brought to the House of William Callow, and two of the Women that were brought had each a young Child, one of which was six Weeks old, and the other but three. The next Morning they were had to Douglas, several of their Neighbours and Relations accompanying them, with many Tears and Cries, some part of the way, and many to Douglas. And deliver'd to the Custody of one Capt. Quail, and a List of their Names taken, for to deliver to Capt. Ingram, Master of the Ship that came from London, Bound for Barbadoes, who would have perswaded them to Transport themselves; which they refused, and had a long Discourse with them. He asked Quail, How many there were? He said six, viz. William Callow and Wife, Edwin Christian and Wife, Jane Chri∣stian, and Mary Callow, and three Children. Ingram said, I'll have neither Mother nor Child.
Then Quail swore at Ascough for bringing the Children; so the Childrens Names were put out of the List, and the List al∣tered. And Quail swore, none of the Children should go into Pri∣son, and called for a Souldier to take them to Prison. Then William Callow desired, that seeing they had been Travelling all day with those small Children, they might refresh themselves before they went into Prison, but were denied. And Quail said, he would find them a House, where they should see nei∣ther Sun nor Moon: They pressed to Refresh themselves first for their Money, but were denied, and the Children taken from them, and Quail said, Let them lie and die, It's no Sin to knock them on the Head, and dash out their Brains. And added, I think I do God good service to kill them, rather than they should live in your Foolish Fancy. So they were all brought to Prison, and near the Door Quail said, I'll tell you the Truth of my Heart, I could find in my Heart to Kill you both: Indeed I could find in my Heart to Hang you both, and would be hanged my self. Some of their Relations were then with them at the Prison-door. Then he opened a Stable-door, and laid hold on W. C. and put him in, and the two Women, his Wife and Jane Christian, commanding their Children to be taken from them, and to be laid in the Street; which the Souldiers that were commanded re∣fusing to do, Quail took the Child of six Weeks old from W. C's Wife, and threw it down, and pitch'd his Wife into the Stable; And he took the other Child also of three Weeks old, and left it in the Street. Upon which William Callow desired to let the Mothers have the Children that were lying in the Street. Then he turned about, and with his Rapier in the Sheath, broke W. C's Head; and struck him again, and broke it in another place: This was in the Prison. So that the Blood run down his Face on both sides, which caused the People on both sides to weep, and cry'd out, Shame to strike a Man in Prison, and the Chil∣dren lay crying in the Street. The Relations, not medling with them, being desired to let them alone, to see what they would do with them. And the Prisoner told him, He as freely forgave him, as he gave him those Blows; and then he suffered the Mothers to have the Children again.
☞ And the next Morning, being the 5th of the 8th Month, 1670. the Night having been so Fair and Calm, one might have carri∣ed a Candle in ones Hand through the Streets; yet that great Ship, in which they were to be carried, was broke in the Ri∣ver, and the Drum beat for People to go and take the Goods out of her; and presently after some of the Rigging was put in the same place, the said People were Prisoners in. Then Capt. Quail sent for William Callow, and said, Your Curse is come on the great Ship; to which he replied, We Curse not; but if any deserved God's Curse, it was enough to overturn them. And to the said Captain Ingram, Master of this Ship, it was told that Captain Harwood, who before had carryed William Callow off that Island, being banished to Virginia; that he, going into Ire∣land, had his Ship fired; and the 8th Day of the 8th Month, 1670, Captain Quaile sent for William Callow, and told him he, might go home, and tell Captain Ascough, to take care of them; and next Day sent for their Children: That Day they were all at home, Praising God with Soul and Spirit. ☞ Note, This was the 5th Ship that was broken, besides that which was fired, and some of the People scorched, and the fore∣going was the 8th Time of their Banishment. This Brief Account of some of the Sufferings of this abused People, I have given to shew, altho they fall greatly short of what those Christians suffered by the Heathen in former Days. Yet they have been far greater than what F. B. represents them, and these Sufferings have been from Christians and Ministers of Christ, and reverend Fathers in God, so called. And this I hope, will not, by those that are truly wise and considerate, be esteemed wicked with a Witness, as F. B. falsly saith, to record such as Persecutors who execute the Laws: If so, let me query; was it wicked with a Witness, to record those that executed the Law, De Heretico Comburendo, &c. upon the Mar∣tyr's Persecutors; let this be consider'd in Coolness, and also how Ill Will and Envy never speaks well; and whether F. B's being too much filled therewith, against this People he hath left, and hating that Light they profess and believe in, as he once did, or pretended to do, is not the cause of his thus Writing?
But, it's no new thing for evil Doers, to hate the Light, nor Men to depart from the Faith. There was a Judas in early Days, an Alexander and a Demas in the primitive Times, and those that Apostatiz'd from the Christian Faith, and that made Shipwreck thereof, and a good Conscience, and in this Day, to the true Christians Grief, there are too many, over whom the same degenerated Spirit, and Power of him that kept not his first Habitation, nor abode in the Truth, hath prevailed, and thereby they are become like the great Red Dragon, that stood ready to cast forth his Flood to destroy the Man-Child, assoon as he was born; but in vain proved all his Rage, and fruitless were his Attempts, and so hath, and will the Lord make all the At∣tempts, secret Contrivances, and Combinations of such, against those who abide in the Faith and Patience of the Lamb of God; for Behold, said the Lord, he who hath, and will perform his Word, they shall truly gather together, but not by me: Whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy Sake. No Weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper; and every Tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment, thou shalt condemn. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of me, saith the Lord▪ Isai. 54.15, 17. A shorter Abstract of the Sufferings before hinted. THere have suffered of the said People called Quakers above, 14638 Persons. Sentenced to be, and Banished     240 Died Prisoners     141 The Loss sustained by this Suffering Peo∣ple, amounts to above the Value of l. s. d 43702 00 00 Besides vast Sums not reckoned herein, which would amount to more than 27321 00 00 And makes in all above 71023 00 00 And this is not done in any wise, to boast of their Sufferings, but rather to shew they have been more than they are falsly re∣presented by F. Bugg; who, with those few hot and angry Men, that joyned with him, have not been wanting in their endeavours to Incense the Government against this People, by falsly Charging them with many Horrid Blasphemies, and their
Principles to be Bloody, Treasonable, and Destructive to Government; which is an evident Token, that it's the same old Persecuting Spirit, which once prevailed against this People, that now works in these Men: But as the Lord preserved them under all their Sufferings, so he hath disappointed these Men in their Evil De∣signs; for which they are truly thankful to God, that he hath so preserved them, and they did and do, pray for those that de∣spitefully use them and persecute them; and bless Almighty God for his Mercy and Providence towards them; and grate∣fully acknowledge the favour of the Government, under which they live, for their present Liberty in the free Exercise of their tender Consciences, and peaceable Enjoyment of their Religious Meetings therein. Which are not for any of those ill Ends, nor of such dangerous Consequence, or tending to Sedition, &c, as hath been falsly and maliciously Suggested to the Parliament against them. But are held in the Name, Love, and Spirit of our Lord Je∣sus Christ; and to no other end, but to serve God, and one ano∣ther, in Love; and to counsel each other to keep and perse∣vere in the Doctrine of Christ, and in the Practice of that Re∣ligion he is the Author of: Notwithstanding the Enmity of their Adversaries, and malicious Insinuations of such who have left them; and, Judas-like, seek to make them Suffer; as Ex∣perience hath shewn. And they hope their peaceable Demeanour, under all Go∣vernments, hath been, and shall be, a better Evidence to their Su∣periours for them, than the groundless and malicious Suggestions, or false Charges of their Adversaries against them. And as by Law they have been indulged, and no ill Conse∣quences ensued therefrom; and the Reasons remaining, that in∣duced the King and Parliament thereto, viz. The Uniting the Hearts of the King's Subjects in Interest and Affection. It's Humbly Hoped they will, in their Great Wisdom and Counsel, continue it; that every one, that lives Peaceably and Honestly, may en∣joy his Undoubted Right, viz. A free Liberty of Conscence, to serve the God that made him, in that way he is persuaded is most agreeable to his Mind and Will. FINIS.
