G1306 12600090 64158
An incorruptible Key Composed of the CX. PSALME, WHEREWITH You may open the rest of the holy Scriptures: Turning it selfe onely according to the composure and art of that lock, of the closure and secrecie of that great mystery of God manifest in the flesh, but justified only by the spirit, which it evidently openeth and revealeth, out of Fall and resurrection, Sin and righteousnesse, Ascension and descension, Heighth and depth, First and last, Beginning and ending, Flesh and spirit Wisdome and foolishnesse, Strength and weaknesse, Mortality and immortality, Iew and Gentile, Light and darknesse, Unity and multiplication, Fruitfulness & barrenness, Curse and blessing, Man and woman, Kingdome and Priesthood, Heaven and earth, Life and death, All sufficiency and deficiency, God and man. And out of every unity made up of twaine, it openeth that great two∣leafed gate, which is the sole entrie into the City of God, or new Ierusalem, into which none but the king of glory can enter: and as that porter openeth the doore of the sheepfold, by which whosoever entreth is the shepherd of the sheep, See Isa. 45. 1. Psal. 24. 7, 8, 9, 10. Iohn 10. 1, 2, 3. Or (according to the signification of the word translated Psalme) it is a pruning-knife, to lop off from the Church of Christ all superfluous twigs of earthly and carnall commandements, Levticall services or Ministery, and fading and va∣nishing Priests, or Ministers, who are taken away and cease, and are not established and confirmed by death, as holding no crrespondency with the princely dignity, office, and ministery of our Melchisidek, who is the onely Minister and Ministery of the Sanctua∣ry, and of that true Tabernacle which the Lord pitcht, and not man. For, it supplants the old man, and implants the new: abrogates the old Testment or Covenant, and confirmes the new, unto a thousand generations, or in generatins for ever. By Samuel Gorton, Gent. and at the time of the penning hereof, in the place of Iudicature (upon Aquethneck, aliàs Road Island) of Providence Plan∣tations in the Nanhyganset Bay New England. Printed in the Yeere 1647.
To the worthiesActs 5. 41 Ruth 4. 11. Mat. 10. 13 Rev. 3. 4. & much honoured in the GospelRev. 5. 9, 10. 2 Sam. 17. 10. Can. 3. 7. Eph. 4. 20, 21. Heb. 11. 34. 1 King. 18. 7, those who occasioned the penning of this Treatise, by Letters out of the MassachusetsIohn 7. 41., together with all our indeered and longed-after society, that love and have learned the truth as it is in JESUS, in Providence Plantations in the Nanhyganset Bay, New England: Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied to you1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. Jude 2. ver. Psal. 69. 35. 36. Psal. 102. 28. Psal. 89. 29 and your off∣spring for evere. Dearely beloved in the Lord, THough in the eye of the world you seeme to be strangers, scattered abroad throughout Pontus, Ga∣latia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia1 Pet. 1. 1., yet are you as those twelve Tribes scattered abroad, unto whom our great Apostle and high PriestHeb. 3. 1. daily sends greetingIames 1. 1, whereby you are with those twleve Tribes (under hope of the promise) incouraged instantly to serve God day and nightAct. 22. 7., and for which hopes sake, though you be often drawn be∣fore the rulers of this world, and accused by such as say they are Iewes but are notRev. 2. 9. Rev. 3 9., yet is it for no other end, but that the Lord, by leading you through Heathenish Nations, may thereby in∣struct you in the signification of all voices that are in the world, that so you may utter in them all the praises of him that hath cal∣led you out of darknesse into his marvellous light1 Pet. 2. 9.; for there are so many kinds of voices in the world, and none is without its proper signification; so that if we knew not the meaning of thē voice, we should be as Barbarians one to another, in our expressions, and receptions of the things of God1 Cor. 14. 10, 11.. Observe therefore, that the changes the Saints passe through in this life, is onely to give them the knowledge of all voices and sounds, that so they may speake by revelation, by knowledge,
by prophecying, and by Doctrine1 Cor, 13. 6. for things without life give a sound unto us whether pipe or harp1 Cor. 14. 7., even the courses the world holds with us in this life, who are dead in sinnes and tres∣passes Ephe. 2. 1, 2, and have no life of Christ in them at allRom. 1. 12. 12. Iohn 6. 53., yet even these give a certaine and distinct sound unto us, that wee stand in readinesse prepared for the battell, and know very well what is piped and harped1 Cor. 14. 7, 8.. So that when the world thinks it is confounding us by their Babilonish conference and courses held with us, they are then contrarie to their owne nature, ability and intentions, instructing and teaching us in the high things of GodRom. 8. 28, and howsoever they are in a babilonish con∣fusion Gen. 11. 7, 8, 9., yet doth their voice or voices give a certaine and di∣stinct sound unto us1 Cor. 14. 7, 8., so that wee are not terrified by our adversa∣ries in these their practises, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to us of salvation and that of GodPhil. 1. 28.; for it is e∣vident and apparent, that God is our salvation, and not the pow∣er and policy of the world which doth nothing else but seek our ruinPsal. 137. 7, 8, 9.. But you know the hand of the Lord upon our adversaries, amongst whom hee hath brought us in every placeAct. 20. 21, 22., who have sought our hurtPsal. 38. 12. Psal. 41. 7., and wrested our words to effect their endsPsal. 56. 5, the more they have struck at us, the more they have broke themselves in pieces in the waies of their Covenants and Combinations, in the wayes of their Assemblies and Associations in which they delighted to put such confidence and trust, which appeare in the eyes of all to bee but as that broken reed of AEgypt, whereon if a man lean it will go into his hand and pierce itIsa. 36. 6.. So that you may sing with the Psalmist a hymne of praise, wherever the Lord hath led you, saying, there brake hee the ar∣rowes of the bow, the shield and the sword, and the battell, Se∣lah: thou art more glorious and excellent then the Moun∣taines of prey, the stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep and none of the men of might have found their handsPsal. 76. 3 4, 5.. Freely therefore can I make choice of you to patronize this small Treatise or Epistolium, if now were the time that na∣turall breath should no longer preserve this present lifeGen. 46. 33.; for there
are two things necessary in the patronage, defence, or Protecti∣on of any thing. First, that the Patron be wise and able to judge of the state and condition of the thing patronized to give it its due respect, worth and usefulnesse, according to its nature and relation. Secondly, he must be furnished with ability to answer all obje∣ctions that may bee made to invalid, weaken or innervate that which is committed unto him to bee patronaged, defended and spoken for: in both which respects it is joyfully presented unto you, being very sensible and willingly acknowledging that God hath made you instruments not onely to consent unto and conclude upon, but also to teach and instruct mee in these or such like principles from the Word of the Lord unto my edification and comfort, therefore cannot but bee able (through God) to discerne the nature, benefit, and use of them. And for the answering of objections that might be made by any Adversarie, I doubt not, knowing very well, that when you have been in your solemne exercises, gaine-say∣ers being present, and when you have beene brought to answer before worldly Governours, Church-Assemblies, and Jewish Senedrions, there hath not appeared a spirit able to resist or gaine-say that wisdome and spirit by which you have spokenAct. 6. 10, which spirit uttereth it selfe freely with∣out respect of PersonsRom. 2. 11. Acts 10. 34 35. in all the Congregations and Assem∣blies of Saints, giving words for edification and comfort of the Church sometimes in one, and sometimes in ano∣ther, that all flesh may bee silent before himZach. 2. 12, 13., and onely listen unto the Oracle of God by whom bee is pleased to utter it1 Pet. 4. 11.; for yee may all prophecy one by one for the edification of the Church, but if any thing bee revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31., and that is the order of the Churches of the Saints, or of that great Saint or holy one of Israel, for God is not of confusion like that way of BabelTo speak e∣verie one a several lan∣guage., but of peace, or as the word signifies, of unity, for every Saint is one with, and hath a like share in every particular grace utte∣red or exercised in the Church; in case the lamps in the Temple be trimedExod. 27. 20., and the boules of the golden candlesticks rightly filled
by those two pipes that empty themselves into themZech. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14., otherwise if we find the Ministery of the Word so monopolized, that it is tyed unto one in the Church, more then to any other, or all the rest, (which one cannot be justified to be the head of the Church, which is the prerogative royall of the Son of God, that great heards-man, shepheard, and feeder of IsraelPsal. 80. 1. Psal. 23. 1. Ioh. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. Gen. 49. 24.) then may we know that in that place vision failesIsa. 28. 7. Ezek. 7. 26. Ezek. 13. 6, 7., yea the light of the Sanctuary is gone out, for they have hewen out unto themselves a Ministery, divination, and vision, by the art, wisdome, and will of man, prostrating themselves thereunto, depending upon man, and not on the Son of God, who utters himselfe in whom he pleaseth, choo∣sing the foolish things of the world to confound the wise1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, so that we may plainely discerne, that in such waies of Ministery the people sits in darknesse, and under the shadow and regiment of deathIer. 6. 4. Mat. 4. 15. 16. Isa. 9. 1, 2., and are in that condition the Prophet speakes of, behold the peo∣ple borrow much, but they never pay againe, whereas the righteous is mercifull and giveth liberallyPsal. 37. 21. like unto the two daughters of the Horse-leech, they cry give, giveProv. 30. 15., are alwaies in want and necessity of hearing, but never bring forth any thing to give againe in publishing the riches of the Gospell to their brethren, they never pay againe, as though the word were not to bee put forth unto the exchangersMat. 25. 27, 28, 29, and binds them over to returne it with increase and advantage. Of that sort are these (that tie the Ministration of the Gospell to any particular man in the Congregation) which our Apo∣stle speakes of, that are ever learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth2 Tim. 3. 6, 7, 8., ever borrowing, but never found pay∣ing againPsal. 37. 21.. These think and boast, they receive the Word with great joy, and cheerfulnesse, and with no small ingagements for the maintenance of him that brings it, that he may live upon the Gospell that preacheth it; but if it should bee brought by such as looke to live on it indeed1 Cor. 9. 13, 14., that is, when they preach unto a people, they expect that fruit, crop and harvest of the grace of God to arise amongst them, and appeare in that glo∣rious manifestation of that abundant and rich grace of God in Christ in every of the Saints, which is the very life, comfort, and sole satisfaction of him that speakes it, and the onely tie and
cause of his abode and stay amongst them: if the Gospell from a spirit that looks only for livelihood in such things (in the mat∣ters of God) appeare, then will these carnall framers and ere∣cters of Ministers and Ministries prove Jannes and Jambres to resist the truth, for then is the time to manifest and shew them∣selves 2 Tim. 3. 8, 9., as of old men of the same mind did in AEgypt, and al∣so in the wildernesseExod. 7. 11, 12, 13. Numb. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. in their wresting of it. But, Oh how happie a thing it is (as you know, for I appeale unto you herein) for brethren to live together in unityPsal. 13 3. 1.! for so the word is, that is, to see themselves so united in the Sonship of God, as to have an equall share, right and interest in every par∣ticular grace of the Gospell, be it what it is or may be, other∣wise they can never acknowledge themselves to be equall sha∣rers of death, and in every particular misery thereof through the fall, which is to deny that by nature we are all alikeEph. 2. 1, 2, 3. and so o∣verthrowes the grace and blessing of the Gospell: for, the one sets forth the truth of Christs death, and the other the glory of his resurrection, and if we give not each of these its due, we spoile the Sonship that is of God, both unto our selves and those that heare us1 Cor. 8 11. Rom. 14. 15. But the unity of the Saints is through that holy uncti∣on upon the head, even our spirituall AaronPsal. 45. 7, and also upon his beardPsal. 133. 1. 2., that is, it multiplies its self as the haires upon the headPsal. 40. 12. Mat. 10. 30., yea, upon the border or coller of the garment, viz. strongly bin∣ding and uniting the whole vestment together, that no rent nor schism can befall it, or he found in it, else do we not hold the head which by joynts and bonds tieth and coupleth the whole body together to bee one, and so it increaseth with the augmentations of GodCol. 2. 19.; that word translated increase or augmentation, signi∣fies to advance or to grow together, so that we are increased, or advanced together with the Son of God, and according to that fulnesse, growth, or advancement of the Son of God; such doth our Apostle reckon and account ours to be, for according to the advancement and fulnesse of his death, such is ours2 Cor. 1. 5, and we know that hee was lifted up, and triumphed upon the CrosseIoh. 3. 14. Col. 2. 15., which death admits of no increase or diminution, for it is full according to the fulnesse of him that filleth all thingsEph. 1. 2. 3, so also according to the fulnesse of the advancement of his re∣surrection and ascention, such is oursRom. 8. 17, and wee know, that
our Mediatour is made higher then the heavensHeb. 7 26, so that they that teach degrees in the house of God, and in the grace of the Gos∣pell from such Scriptures as these, they teach perfection by the Law, by which no flesh can be justifiedGal. 2. 16., for if righteousnesse were by the Law then Christ died in vainGal. 2. 21., such kind of Ministers nei∣ther know how sin is taken away by the Son of God, nor how the righteousnesse of the Son of God is made that righteous∣nesse that justifies sorry man; for he takes away our sin by be∣coming that in us that is miserable unto the uttermostHeb. 7, 25., and not in way of any gradation at all, and we are blessed in him by beco∣ming one with that righteousnesse that is perfection in the height thereofHeb. 7. 26, which knowes nor can admit of any graduall distinction at all, being the righteousnesse of him who is God over all, blessed from eternity to eternityRom. 9. 5., and such righteousnesse and perfecti∣on can onely give the spirit of man content, for if he can com∣prehend it and go beyond either in looking forward or backward, he makes an and of his happinesse and is at a losse in himselfe. So that the weights and measures of the SanctuaryDeut. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16. Exod. 16, 36, Prov. 20. 10, name∣ly of that Sanctuarie the Lord pitcheth and not manHeb. 8. 2., are upon termes of certainty for the truth of them, as also of fulnesse for the perfection of themJoh. 1. 14. 16. Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9, 10, for there is in the house of God stone and stone, Epha and Epha, as the words are in the places quoted, that is, one bigger and heavier then another, and one lesse and lighter then another, for there is not a greater measure of hu∣miliation and a lesser in this house, for there is but one humiliati∣on of one Son of God; so also there is not a greater and a lesser exaltation in this house, for there is but one exaltation of that one Son of sorry man, there is not a greater and lesser sanctity and holinesse in this house, for it is but one sanctity or holinesse of that one Saint or holy one of IsraelPsal. 71. 22. Psal. 89. 18, there is not a larger and more specious wisdome, and one of a narrower scantling to be mentioned in this house, for it is that one onely wisdome of him that is onely wise1 Tim. 1. 17., that is to be the only word1 Cor. 12. 8., and only to be justified in the house of the LordMat. 11. 19.; there is not a more famous redemption and deliverance and one of a lesser and more in∣feriour nature to be heard of in this Assembly, for it is a ran∣some not by any corruptible thing, but by the precious blood of that undefiled Son of God1 Pet. 1. 18 19, 20., for it is hee who of God is made unto us
or as the word is in us all these things1 Cor. 1. 30., that according as it is written, he that rejoyceth let him rejoyce in the Lord, or as the words are, hee that praiseth himselfe, let him praise himselfe in the Lord1 Cor. 1. 31., that so the glory may be given to him and not unto our selvesPsal. 115. 1.; if then the vision doe appeare unto us as to our spirituall Jacob, we see it extended from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven, from the highest excellency of the Son of God to the lowest and deepest misery of the Sons of men, and from the lowest mise∣ry of the sons of men to the highest glory and dignity of that Son of GodGen. 28. 12, 13.; such is theIoh. 1. 51. ascention and descention of the Angells upon that son of man, that is, the message or Ministery of the Gospell is such in all the Revelation and Embassage thereof, as descends from the highest to the lowest, and ascends from the lowest unto the highest, and then onely doe wee anoint the head stone as a pillar, or stable and firme state and condition of holinesse unto the LordGen. 28. 18, and give it the name of Bethell, even the house and dwelling place of the Lord for everGen. 28. 19., of such sub∣stance and certainty as to become pillars in the house of GodRevel. 3. 12., and to be made an habitation for God for everEph. 2. 21. 22. are the matters of this KingdomeRom. 14. 17.. And in this point is the world much deceived, in our seem∣ing high-flown Professors or Phanaticks of these times, who think the Revelation of Christ stands in some strange appariti∣on, which is such a new thing unto the Spirit of God in that man, that others that have the SpiritRom. 8. 9. may not attaine thereunto: But whatsoever is revealed unto the Saints of the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, it is a thing familiarly knowne unto the Spi∣rit, who is acquainted with the deep things of God1 Cor. 2. 10. Rom. 8. 27., and in that respect all things in the Word of God are old Commandements given unto us, which we have knowne from the beginning, and so there is no newnesse in it at all1 Ioh. 2. 7., neither is there any thing in the Word of God but to the spirit of manRom. 8. 16 is a new thing, strange and wonderfull as though it had never appeared before1 Cor. 2. 9, 10., and in that respect the whole Word of God in every particu∣lar thereof, is a new Commandement given or written unto us, and so it is true in him, and also in us1 Ioh. 2. 8., for if darknesse in us do not passe away, the light cannot be made manifest, and so the truth consisteth in God and man, in light and darknesse, the one
passing away that the other may appeare and bee made manifest. Of such grace, truth, and certainty is the Gospell, that it is not without man, which is the ballancing and setting the soule upon its true base and sure foundation for ever1 Cor. 3. 11.; so that the Revelation of Christ in the Church is not as a phantasma or uncertaine vision that comes and goes upon dubious termes, lifting up to heaven whilst it abides, but when it is gone no such matter, but the visions of God are the manifestations of the Son of God upon grounds and termes of infallability and certainty, as when we see the light to be light, and know it to be so from the nature and operation of darknesse, all the world cannot make us thinke it is some other thing, nor can wee approve of him that goes about to perswade us thereunto; of such like cer∣tainty are the visions and revelations of the Gospell, there∣fore do the Saints of God bear witnesse unto the things of God as of that which was from the beginning, which wee have heard, which wee have seen with these our eyes, which we have looked up∣on, and these hands of ours have handled of that word of life1 Joh. 1. 1., for that light was made manifest, and we have seen it, and beare witnesse, and shew unto you that eternall life which is with the Father, and is made manifest unto us, or as the word is, in us1 Ioh. 1. 2 Gal. 1. 16.. So that the goings up, the departures or going away of the visions of God is not a leaving of the soules of the Saints at a losse for a time, or vacant and destitute of his presence, it is but a distinct and gracious change of the vision, administration, or apparition from one glory unto another2 Cor. 3. 18., for the perpetuall delight and re∣freshing of the Saints, so that when vision seems to cease in one distinct and particular respect, the soule is filled in another par∣ticular and distinct respect, which alwaies keeps the heart of a Christian in its approach unto and familliarity with his maker, and every distinct way of Gods manifestation having the weight of heaven in it he finds a glorious entrance into the Kingdome, and Regiment of a dear or onely son2 Pet. 1. 11. Col. 1. 13., and cannot be at a losse of the love of the Father, nor laid waste and emptied of the bles∣sing of his presenceIsai. 63. 9. Isai. 43 2., no more then the Son of God can lose (for a moment) the light and lustre of that continuance which is one and the same with himselfeIoh. 17. 22. Ioh. 14. 9. 10. Ioh. 15, 19, 20, 21..
These things I make bold to put you in remembrance of not as to informe you, knowing you have them in that shore-house and treasurie which is your owne, which the world knowes not of, neither doth it know you, nor can it acknowledge the one, nor the other, for the abundant riches of this treasurie is Christ, in you the hope of gloryCol. 7. 27. 2 Cor. 4: 6, 7:, and we know that as he is so are we even in this world1 Ioh. 11. 4. 17.. For we know that the Son of God is come, or sprung up, as the word signifies, in his Saints, and hath given us a mind to know him which is true, that is, hath set up a light1 Cor. 4. 5 in our minds to acknow∣ledge him only that is truth and substance and no vaine shadow nor ceremony at allIoh. 1. 17., and we are in him that is true in that his Son Jesus Christ, that is, we are of him that is truth, and of that his Son Jesus Christ, that is, of that lineage, race, and off-spring of himAct. 17. 28, 29., and so it answers to the former Verse, the whole world is of that wicked one, for so the word is1 Ioh. 5. 19., this is the true God or this is the verity of God, and everlasting life, in that way of multiplying of himselfe by Jesus Christ, without whom no verity, truth, nor certainty of God appears unto the creatureIoh. 14. 6. Mat. 11. 27, little chil∣dren, babes, or Idiots, as the word signifies, that is, children in respect of any estimation or dependance you have of the things of this present life; Idiots in regard of any knowledge or skill you have of the things of God and matters of eternal life; (as of your selves) keep your selves from Idolls, that is, look diligently unto your selves that you esteem not of, nor depend upon those false ChristsMar. 13. 22. Ma. 24. 24. and carnall worships which the world hath vainely formed and moulded up unto themselvesIoh. 4. 22. 2 King. 17, 28, to 34.; so are you hence forth no more children but are met together in the u∣nity of faith, and acknowledgement of the Son of God, in a perfect man, in the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ, in whom all the body being coupled and knit together in every joynt for the furnishing of it selfe, according to that effectuall power in the mea∣sure of every part, receiveth increase of the body in the edifying of it selfe in love1 Joh. 5. 19, 20. Ephe. 4. 13, 14, 16., AMEN. Yours in that onely and alone bond that lasteth for ever in all services of love, in life and death according to the faith of the Gospel. Samuel Gorton.
To the Reader. Courteous Reader, MY request is that two things may be observed in thy pursu∣ing of this insuing Treatise. First, the occasion of the penning of it. Secondly, some cautions in the reading of it. For the first, the Author having had to do with the men of the Massachusets, and other peoples and Collonies united in New-England (as a small Treatise intituled, Simplicities Defence, doth faithfully declare) shortly after his returne unto his family, in the Nanhyganset Bay, some of the most eminent and approved Church-members among them of the Massachusets, writ Letters to the Authour to this effect: SIR, SInce your departure from amongst us, M. John Cotton, Tea∣cher of the Church of Boston, hath taken occasion to expound the hundred and tenth Psalme, in the reading of it, wee thought there were divers glimpses of that light which shineth in our Lord Jesus, appeared unto us. But in his handling of it, and glosses which he gave upon it, we thought the light and truth of Christ was rather darkned and obscured by him, then any wayes cleared and brought forth in the Church. We intreat you therefore, that as the Lord gave us no little satisfaction and comfort in your opening of the Scriptures unto us both by word and writing, whilst he was pleased, to keep you here a∣mongst us, so you will now be pleased, to take the paines to write unto us (with what speed you can) what your thoughts may be of that Psalme, as God shall manifest unto you the sense and meaning thereof; in the meane time we waite in a continued expectation, earnestly desiring our hopes in this particular may
not be deferred, blessing the Lord that his good hand of provi∣dence brought you amongst us, though men propounded other ends unto themselves, which God hath prevented in the issue, and beauti∣fied you through deliverance, blesse we the Lord, Amen. Your unfeigned friends, much indeered. Their names are concealed of purpose to quench, or at the least keep under heart-burnings, which otherwise might break out, for the divisions of Ruben, that elder brother after the flesh, that alwaies goes up unto his fathers bed and defiles his couch, are great thoughts of heartIug. 5. 15, 16. Gen. 49. 3. 4. When ever Deborah, and Barack doe appeareJudg. 4. 6., that is, according to the signification of their names, when ever that VVord that comes as lightningMat. 24. 26, 27., is revealed and made manifest in the world. Upon the reading of the Letter above said, the Authour took pen and paper and immediately went about to answer the de∣sires and expectations of his friends, and when it was writ, it was much desired to be put in print, for ease in reading, and view of all in those parts who had so lately proceeded against the Authour in point of conscience and worship of God, and laid things to his charge which never man heard from himPsal. 5. 11. Psal. 56. 5., but in many things directly contrarie to that which they affirmed, and therefore was perswaded beyond his own thoughts in the writing of it, to let it go to the presse, being that he never de∣sires to write any thing privately to any in the matters of God, that he would not freely publish before any in the world, knowing that the Word of God is as free, supereminent, and void of all dan∣ger, to take hold of everie heart in the world, as the Sun in the firmament is in its course to take hold of every creature here below on the earth, and manifest its operation upon the samePsal. 19 4, 5 6. Rom. 10. 18 Rom. 13. 1, 2, therefore the Apostle saith, let every soule bee subject to the supereminent power, for so the word is rightly rendred, im∣plying a power that depends upon nothing for support, but hath prerogative and priviledge over and above all, which is pro∣per to that Word or Son of God, whom that Scripture teacheth
as all others do, though applyed according to the Letter2 Cor. 3 6 to the Civill Magistrate, yet according to the life and spirit of the Scripture it cannot have its proper scope and end in him, for Christ is the end of all Law of relations in point of that righteousnesse that indures for ever, which is in every one that believesRom. 10. 4, so that the translators sometimes wrong the Text in that word translated Magistrate, as in Titus the 3. Chap. Ver. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to o∣bey Magistrates, the word there translated Magistrate, is tru∣ly read the Ruler in submission, which is properly appliable un∣to Christ, of whose Kingdome and Rule there shall be no endDan. 4 3. in way of supereminency and submission, for as he is God he ruleth o∣ver all thingsPsal. 8 6, 7, 8, 9., and as he is man, he submits unto the will of the Father in all thingsLuke 22. 42., so that rule and submission is founded in one and the same substance and being, and shall continue and abide so for ever in Christ: So that where ever the Word of God is revealed, there is not onely submission in the messenger unto the will of God. in whatever befalls him for the name of ChristLuk. 622, 23., but there is also in the Word of God a supereminency and authori∣ty to rule, succeed well, and have dominion in whatsoever he sub∣mits and subjects himselfe unto the Will of the FatherProv. 17 8. Psal, 1. 3. Psal. 122. 6, 7, 8.; so that the worke of the men of this world in dealing with the peo∣ple of God in matters of the Worship of God, is nothing els but to knock themselves in pieces, and the faster they strive to stand, the more they stumble and fall upon that stone of stumbling, and rock of offenceEsa. 8. 14, 15. Rom. 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8.; for whosoever takes upon him to redresse things between God and the conscience any otherwise but by re∣vealing of that light of the knowledge of God, in the face of Jesus Christ2 Cor. 4. 6, 7., even as the Sun lendeth his beames unto the earth for the well ordering and growth of all things here below, he may as well interpose his owne wisdome, power and authority between the humane nature and divine in Christ, and ascribe unto himselfe the glory of the worke in the unity of them both, which glory God will not give unto anotherEsa. 42. 8. Esa. 48. 11., therefore must it be irreligious and An∣tichristian, once to attribute it unto the Sons of men; so long then as we know and hold the supereminency and subjection in the things of God, yea that ruler in submission to be one, so long we feare not to publish and proclaime unto the world
what ever is revealed unto us in the Word of God, which is ac∣cording to godlinesse, and carries in it the mind of the Lord, who knowes how to maintaine his owne cause, and justifie wis∣domes words in whomsoever spoken and made knowneMat. 11. 19 The occasion then of penning of this Treatise, was M. John Cotton his preaching, not giving satisfaction to all that heard him upon this Psalme: the ground of the printing of it is an indifferent eye in the Authour unto all men in the things of God, who desires to manifest God to be true, and every man a lyarRom. 3. 4., not having mens persons in admiration for advantageIud. 16. knowing that there is not one that doth good, no not oneRom. 3. 8., nor fearing any that is not a lover of truth, for it is God that justifies, who then shall condemneRom. 8. 33? For, truth makes free in the publicati∣on of itIoh. 8. 32, 34., for when the Sonship is declared, it makes free, and if the Son makes us free, then are we free indeedIoh. 8. 36.: Therefore doth this present it selfe unto thy view, and lookes upon thee with an eye that shall judge the secrets of thy heart, and duly observe thy re∣jection or acceptation of it, according to the motions of thy mind, in all the out-goings and operations thereof; and thus much for the occasion of penning, and ground of printing of this ensuing Treatise. Now for the cautions to be observed in reading of this Trea∣tise, First, consider of that great mistake in the Ministery of the world, in judging of the state and differing condition of mankind in this world, teaching the workes of the Law for the righteousnesse of faith, and imbracing the workes and operations of men in point of Religion accordingly, and so preferre the first-borne af∣ter the flesh to be the onely acceptable one in their societies and Churches, &c. judging of all they receive and rejoyce in, even as they thinke of that elder brother after the flesh in that Histo∣ry, or rather Parable of the prodigallLuk. 15.; for they think the el∣der brother kept himselfe in an excellent condition, in compa∣rison of the prodigall, whereas the truth is, the descention and humiliation, as also the ascention and exaltation of Jesus Christ are taught in the prodigall, and that pharisaicall righteousnesse of the Justiciaries of this world, is set forth unto us in the condition and carriage of that elder brother, and the imployments of the Churches in these daies so acceptable unto many, according as
they have composed themselves in severall formes, is nothing else but that honoured field-labour of that first-borne after the flesh, which ever ends in murmuring and grudging at the bounty of the Father, unto him that hath made himselfe of no reputation, to re∣turne in our nature into the wealth and glory of the fatherPhil. 6. 7, 8, 9., which kind of Sonship that ends in the flesh, alwaies keeps it selfe at home in its owne righteousnesse and performances, through his vain opinionated keeping of the Commandements of the fatherLuk. 15. 29., and that by his vilifying and disgracing of othersLuk. 15, 30., still being upon the termes of stand by thy selfe, I am holier then thouEsa. 65. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6., who cannot endure the returne of him who was dead but is alive, that was lost but is foundLuk. 15. 24. Revel. 1. 18 Rev. 2. 8. Mat. 18. 11., they being alwaies such as anger and fill themselves with wrathLuk. 15. 28., from that bounty and goodnesse of the Father, to him who hath so descended out of the bosome of the Father into that base and servile condition, which the rich Citizens and farmers of this world put him untoLuk. 15, 15.; for hee made his grave with the wicked and with the rich in his deathEsa. 53 9., and therefore hath bee a portion with the great, and divides the spoile with the strongEsa. 53. 12, because he powred out his soule unto death in his returne unto life in the bosome of the FatherLu. 15. 17, 18, 19, 20.: So that the el∣der brother is angry when he hears of that melody and dancing in the house, and habitation of the Father and the SonLuk. 15. 15., upon that joyfull returne of the Son or happy translation of death into life, not being able to behold that rich robe of righteousnesse to be put upon him, that hath wasted and consumed that whole patrimony of mans owne righteousnesse, which that elder bro∣ther ever delights in and depends uponLuk. 15. 29, 30. Mat. 5. 20, and thinks there is no righteousnesse that can exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and PhariseesLuk. 15. 9 10, 11, 12., and therefore will not put on the Lord Jesus ChristRom. 13. 14., that righteousnesse which is by faith in the Son of GodPhil. 3. 9., onely is wrath and irefull at them that have it, and takes care onely how to make provisions for the fleshRom. 13. 14., nor can they indure that upon that hand, or Ministery of the SonPsal. 77. 20, there should appeare that Ring or ornament which is of such forme as no end thereof can be foundLuk. 15 22. Rev. 14. 6, and for those shooes put upon his feet which is the preparation of the Gospel of peaceEph: 6: 15:, namely that courage and for∣titude of the Sons of God, it is an offence unto all such as wait for superiority in the way of the flesh, who are ever offended if
smooth and soft words bee not spoken, and much crouching and cringing to any thing that seems eminent to the flesh, or in the way of mans judgementCol. 2. 16. 17. 18., and therefore will needs set it up in the worship of their GodCol. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23.. Neither can they abide the fat Calfe which is killed, the onely refreshing and mirth both of Father and SonneLuke 15. 23, 24, 25., which is killed and crucified concerning the flesh1 Pet. 3. 18. So that nothing of the Spirit and livelihood of that is left at all. But so full, lively, and fat of the life, spirit and power of God, that it gives plenary satisfactio∣on, fulnesse of delight, mirth, and consolation to all those that once have a true taste, and enjoyment thereofJoh. 1. 16. Eph. 3. 10. Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9. Psal. 19. 10. Psal. 119. 103.. Now the Churches of New England, with all such as stand upon the like foundation, and are in like relation unto the Father, as that elder brother was, and ever is; labouring in the field of their own home-made covenants, and performances, cannot endure to come into the house where such mirth, melody, and fulnesse is; Nor can they communicate with a∣ny who keep such Festivities: For it blasphemes, or strikes through their Pharisaical keeping of the commandementsLuke 18. 21 Luke 15. 29, pierce∣ing through all the glory and goodlinesse of manIsa. 40. 6. 7.: That so the glo∣ry and grace of our God may spring up and appeareEph. 3. 19.. And they can no more leave their own naturall propensity, in desiring the glory of a creature to be their excellency and dignity, nor desire or incline after the other, then the earth can forsake its own na∣turall and ponderous condition to incline after, or lift up it self in such sort as to become one of those glorious lights, and heaven∣ly bodies. Therefore it is their proper and naturall delight to hold their feast with the leven of maliciousnesse2 Cor. 5.: scandalizing and crying downe all those that cannot hold that unjust length and bredth together with themselves, as persons not onely unworthy of their society, in their hewn-out, formed, moulded and self-po∣lished covenants and ordinances; but also doe looke upon them and act in their utmost endeavours towards them, as such per∣sons whom they cannot (in their hearts) afford a place of residencie and aboad upon the face of the earthPsal. 83. 4. Psal. 83. 4..
Observe therefore, that the whole scope of this Treatise de∣clines the setting of the crown and dignity, in the matters of God, upon the head of that brother, who beautifies and enricheth himself with the things of man, such excellencies which man by his skil and industry may attain unto, who will not only murmure at the glory of anotherLuke 15. 28. Luke 15. 2. Matt. 20., but shed the blood of his innocent brother, in case he once get power and authority into his hand, if he can but draw him aside into the field, where his own superiority according to the things of man, appeares, and the face of our heavenly Father shines not, which is alwayes in such a field, where the fruit of the ground is offered in sacrifice; namely, earthly, momentany, corruptble and fading thingsGen. 4. 8. Gen. 4. 3. Gen. 4. 1 4 Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23.. But the drift of this Treatise is, to set the Diadem upon the head of that contemned and dispised one in the eyes of all fleshIsa. 53. 3., (in all the wayes of their carnal worships, contracts, and practises, which are spotted with the fleshJude 23.:) but the chiefest of ten thousand in the eyes of the Father, the onely begotten of the Father, yea his delight and solace for everCant. 5. 10 John 1. 14. 18. John 3. 16. 18. Prov. 8. 30. 31.. Secondly, in perusing of this Book, walk by it as by a river, or fountain running; in what poynt it pitcheth upon, and comprehend, and gather up together in thy mind, both the beginning and con∣clusion of the matter it treateth of, as a silfull Mathematician brings the Heaven and the earth together, when he useth his Art to know the height and latitude he is then in, by his observation; for it is not Bucketted up in such particulars, as the Art of man u∣seth to bring things into, to take with the naturall and artificiall spirit of the reader and auditor: which no doubt hath been a great reason of dividing of Histories, prophesies, & Epistles in the word of God, into so many chapters; whereas indeed the whole matter of the History, Prophesies, or Epistle, ought to be gathered up, and looked upon together, else the scope and drift, root and branch, doe not appeare unto us as a true and infallible vision, and so wee become not Seers with the Prophet Samuel1 Sam. 9. 9. 11. 18, 19., and the rest of the holy men of God1 Chron. 33. 18. 19. Isai. 30. 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21., But rather utter that Spirit of Saul in that condi∣tion, when vision faileth, when he saith, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar Spirit1 Sam. 28. 7.. The words translated, woman having a fami∣liar Spirit, are in the Originall, Baal Oboth, as if hee should say, bring me hither Baal Oboth, that is, bring me hither the Lord in a
Bottle, or the Lord bottled up, that is, such a Ministery as is not as a fountaine of lifePsal. 6. 9., or as a well springing up unto, or (in) or by an e∣verlasting lifeJohn 4. 14., declaring hereby what that Ministry of the Law is, or that artificiall worship that is acquired by that art and ability, the principles whereof man naturaly hath implanted in himself, which always buckets, or bottles up the things of God; so as he can bring them forth at his pleasure, and so stores up Ser∣mons and prayers, to fitt persons, times and seasons, so as to please and give content to naturall understanding and reasonIsai. 5. 20. 21, 22. 23. Mich. 3. 11., which al∣wayes hath an high estimation of the Traditions of its fathersMat. 15. 3. 6 Col. 2. 8. Mark 7. 8. 9 Gal. 11. 14.; and vilifies the command, streams and riveret of the Citie of GodPsal. 46. 4., and from this bottled up spirit, or bottled up she Lord; for the word is of the feminine gender, noting the wayes and workes of the flesh; and hence ariseth all your pocketed up Sermons, and compo∣sed & treasured up Academical Comodies and Tragedies, which can be kept in store to bring out at their pleasure, as though they could Lord it over the holy word and Spirit of God, in its incommings and out-goings in the revelation of the mind of the Father1 Ioh. 5. 7. 2 Tim. 2. 9. Mat. 10. 19. 20., through Jesus Christ. Whereas the Saints of God changed from the Spirit of SaulActs 9. 4., to the spirit of PaulGal. 1. 11. 12, 15, 16, 17., which alwayes forgets the things that are behind, and reacheth out to those things which are beforePhil. 3. 13., that is, the things that have passed through my heart and hand, in way of the ministery of the Gospel, they are forgotten, that is, they are to me as though they had never been, in regard of any skill or ability that is in me to gather them up, call them in, and bring them into use again, either for my own profit and comfort, or for the fruit and benefit of the Church, but am wholly at the good will and pleasure of him that gave them [in] at the first, to bring them again, and to give them their proper measure, weight, opera∣tion and glory in their return, according as they have their being in that way of Christ, without which they are as things forgotten and as though they had never beenPhil. 2. 12. 13. Iames 1. 18. Heb. 2. 4. Heb. 2. 4. Iohn 5. 30., further then he as a continued fountain of life feedeth themPsal. 36. 9.. They also reach out, or stretch out themselves to those things that are before, or stand on tip-toe, to look at the furthest distance that possibly can be, for that which is their present help and supply; yea, so far as God and man are by na∣ture separated one from the otherPsal. 346. 1, who are in that way of Christ become oneEphes. 2. 13, 14, 15. 16.; and they know that no more then they can fetch
things out of the bosome of the father, at such a distance (which ne∣ver yet appeared unto them) no more can they of themselves call again any thing into present use, which hath formerly passed their hands. Whence it is that the comforter hath that two-fold office, not onely to teach and lead forth into all truth, but also to bring to our remembrance the things that have been taught unto usIoh, 14, 26. which the common Ministery of the world is ignorant of, and loves that so it should beIerem. 5. 31.. Thirdly, observe diligently in this Treatise, that as it gives all power and dominion unto the Son of God, both in heaven and in earth: so it also gives (notwithstanding) due authority to all civill Magistrates, without which their right cannot be given unto them, if their place and office be not bounded within the compasse and lists of ci∣vill things. For Christs power and authority is spiritualIoh. 18. 36; so that if once the Magistrate be ingaged, by vertue of that his office, to deale in the things of God, and to intermeddle between God and the consciences of men; he is then also bound over in conscience, to subdue to the uttermost of his power, all other civill States unto himselfe, and to engage them to serve and worship the same God he serves, what ever Idoll he hath set up unto himselfe, or his Leviticall Preists have framed and fashioned for himDan. 3. Exod. 32. and so must of necessi∣ty greed and endevour after the subjecting of all civill States unto himselfe, else doth he not deale faithfully with his God, which is the very spirit that suggested the like temptation unto our LordMat. 4. 8. 9., which spirit Antichrist ever goeth forth in, and so sets himselfe in the seat of God, and proves opposite to our Lord Christ, in all things2 Thess. 2. 3, 4.. But keep the office of the Magistracie, (according to so∣briety) within the compasse of civill things, that is to have relation to what ever concernes the relation between creature and creature simply as they stand in reference one unto another in that respect; and then in that way onely, it is the preservation and honour of all States in their severall wayes of Rule and Government: other∣wise there could but one government in the world, and all the rest must be cried own and ruinated; or if more stand, they must be altogether dishonorable. For where God is concined to appear in the Magistracie, there the glory must be, and all other Government un∣der shame and contempt. Yea the glory of that Prince that should subject all others to himselfe, is made more dishonorable then o∣therwise
it would be: For if he have not honorable Princes and States, to converse and commerce and negotiate with, his owne Crown, Kingdome and People, cannot possibly beare that glory and luster which otherwise it would doePsal. 72, 10, 11. Isa. 43. 3, 4. Psal. 45. 9.. And wee know, that in respect of outward priviledges and glory that come by tempo∣rary deliverances, the Lord hath done to wicked and Heathenish Nations the like things he did of old to Israel the people of God, and therefore convinceth them thereof by the Prophet Amos, when they would have the glory of Religion to arise from such thingsAmos 9, 7., saying, Are yee not as the AEthyopian unto me, O chil∣dren of Israel? Have not I brought up Israel out of the Land of AEgypt, saith the Lord, and the Philistines from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir? So that by how much the civil Magistrate interests his office into the Gospel, as an order thereof, by so much hee doth arrogate unto himself the glory of God, if things succeed wel: for unto Christ it cannot be given, but as a generall hand of providence, which reacheth to all Creatures: For his Kingdome, Rule, and Au∣thority is not of this WorldIoh. 18. 36.; but is Spirituall, as he himselfe is spirituallIoh. Ioh. 4.. Fourthly, if any thing in this Book seeme dark, or doubtfull, read it over and over, and peruse the Scriptures alluded unto in the Margent; and the oftner thou readest it, (if thy eye be single) the more light shall break forthMat. 6. 22., and the more shall the fruit appeareHos. 14. 9.. Conferre the matter propounded, and the Scrip∣tures alluded unto, together, and the more thou soundest the waters, the more they will arise, and the depth of them appeareEzek. 47., to be waters of swimming, that none can passe over, but they shall slow either in the way of life or death, in his conscience, even as the waters of Noah didIsai. 11. 9.; and shall appeare to bee strong and a∣ble to beare up the Ark of our spirituall Noah, for the saving of that righteous one in every particular of his FamilyGen. 7. 17. to 24. 1 Pet. 3. 20,. Fifthly, again my advice unto thee is, that thou never goe about to peruse this, Booke, but when thy spirit is retired, and drunk up by the grace of God1 Cor. 12. 13., from the cares and imployments of this lifeMat. 13. 22. Luke 5. 14., as though thou hadst nothing else to doe but attend upon him that speaks peace to his people, and to his Saints, that they return not again to the folly of the things
of this pressent lifePsal. 85. 8.. And when thou sees the hand of God upon thee so, as though thou wert to converse with him in prayer, thy heart being disposed to deale for the present with nothing, but in an immediate and familiar conversing with himExod. 33. 11., and the hand of his providence also making way thereunto, by setting the creatures apart from being any interruption or obstruction in this present work and imployment: so shall the distillings of Him appeare, who is as Deaw unto Israel, and causeth him to grow as a Lilly, casting forth his root and branches abundantlyHos. 14. 6. 7: and thy smell shall be as Lebanon, and others shall return and delight to dwell under thy shadow; yea they, (through this meanes and Mi∣nistery that is by Christ) shall revive as the corn, and flourish as the vine, and the sent thereof shall bee as the wine of Lebanon,Hos. 14. 8., and if this fruit be found upon theeHos. 14. 9., my reward is given into my handMat. 10. 42. Mark 9. 41.. For in desiring I have desired to see the life of the Lord Jesus in his elect, in all the wayes of his own administrati∣on, and how am I pained till it be observedLuke 12. 50.! For that (as I have respect unto this world) shall be the renewing of my strength, before I goe hence, and be no morePsa. 39. 13.. Thine in Christ Jesus, Samuel Gorton.
Here followeth a Table of what particular poynts are handled in this Treatise, or briefly touched upon, to give occasion to the Reader of further consideration, with the particular page allu∣ded unto by letters, according to the order of the English Al∣phabet. 1. VVHat the proper ground and reason is, why men doe inter∣pret some places of Scripture, not to bee properly meant of Christ, but of some other, page 1. at A. 2. The Title or first verse in the Psalme opened, and expounded, pag. 1. at B. 3. What the proper summe, scope, and subject matter of the Psalm is, together with the nature of that question which Christ propounded to the Pharisees in his time, from the words in the beginning of this Psalme. p. 4. at C 4. How this Psalm manifests it selfe to be indeed the Oracle of God, and cannot be the word of a meere man, nor appliable to any earthly state and condition whatsoever. p. 5. at D. 5. The manner how the word of God takes our nature into unity with it selfe. p. 6. at E 6 Of what continuation and duration the death and humiliation of Iesus Christ is according to the true life, spirit, vertue, intent and meaning of it. p. 7. 7. What operation the death and humiliation of Christ hath upon the men of the world. p. 9. 8 What the proper enemies of the Priesthood of the Sonne of God are. p. 9 9 What the two Cherubims are that cover the Mercy-seat, in the true signification of them. p. 16. at E 10 What is the onely root and rise of the manifestation and exercise of Gods power in the Church. p. 17. F.
11 What are the onely enemies of Christs Kingly Office in the Church, and how overcome. p. 18. G 12 How men may be said to deny the resurrection, authority or King∣ly power of Iesus Christ. p. 20. at H 13 What those Cherubims placed at the East of Eden, in their true intent and meaning, are, and what their Office is to such as are in the way of sin, and of the fall. p. 21. at I 14 The time and manner of the Saints assembling together, when and what it is, according to the authority and operation of Gods call in the Assembly. p. 28. at K 15 What the proper Ornaments of the Saints are in the time of their holy assemblies. p. 30. at K 16 How John and Jesus are both truly sayd to be fore-runners, be∣ing so far different in office and quality. p. 30. at L 17 The proper Rise, Nature, and Number of the Oblations and Offerings of the Saints, according to the plenteous grace of the Gospel. p. 31. at M 18 What the Oath of God is, by which our high Priest Iesus Christ was consecrated and installed into his office. p. 38. at N 19 How the work of God though in it selfe a creature compirsed in time and place, may truly be said to be insinit, as God himselfe is infinite, and yet there is but one infinite. See p. 48. above the letter O. 20 What that Plurality properly is, which is comprehended in these words, Let [us] make man in [our] own Image. p. 49. at O 21 What is meant by the Angels not keeping their first estate, ope∣ned and discovered. p. 52. at P. 22 What the Keyes of the Kingdome of heaven are, or that Key of David that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth, explained and discovered. p. 56. at Q 23. What the life of man, (as he excells all other creatures) properly is, and of what correspondency the life of Christ springing out of death, and the death of Antichrist fading or consuming out of life, are, in way of Antithesis, or opposition, p. 60. at R 24 What the sound of the last Trumpet is, and how the change is made in the twinkling of an eye. p. 60. at S
25 Severall verses opened and interpreted out of that first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 15. Chapter, to declare the nature and cer∣tainty of that oath of God, whereby our high Priest is installed in∣to his office. p. 62. at T 26 What the difference is between the Spirit of God in its interpre∣tation of the Scriptures, and that which is truly called a private interpretation. p. 70. at V 27 The nature of the fall of Man, what it is in eating of the forbid∣den tree, and how both the Tree of life, and the Tree of the knowledge both of Good and Evill, are sayd to bee in the midst of the Garden, and what it is to eate of the one, and of the other, p. 71. at W 29 What it is to bee under the oath of the Curse, and how it is brought to passe to be in force, and exercised in man, who was made blessed. p. 75. at X 29 What is the ground of the translation, imputation, or reckoning of the sinne of man upon that holy and innocent Sonne of God, p. 79. at Y 30 The time of the womans being in the Wildernesse, what it is, Rev. 12. and how a true forme cannot be given unto the Church of Christ, without the knowledge of it, p. 80. at Z 31 What it is to fight with Beasts at Ephesus after the manner of Men, expounded and opened. p. 88 32 How we are to understand that body celestiall, and that body ter∣restriall, which the Apostle speakes of, and what is the true glory of the one, and of the other, p. 95. at B 33 What that patern is which Moses saw in the Mount, according to the mystery, truth, and substance of it, and of what use and necessity the knowledge of it is unto us, in case wee ever intend to goe up to re-edifie the house of God. p. 96. at C 34 How wee are to judge of the mortality and immortality of the soule of man, and of the truth and verity both of the one and of the other. p. 98. 35 That the resurrection spoken of, and principallly intended in the Scriptures, is spirituall, perfected at once in one act through Je∣sus Christ, and yet denies not, but confirmes the resurrection of the body out of the grave in due time. p. 102. at E
36 That the word of God is to be held and maintained as absolute and glorious in the unity of it, as it is in its multiplication, as in the whole circumference, so also in the center of it, p. 108. at F. 37 What the Crosse of Christ is, and how men dishonour the Gos∣pel, by teaching it to be that which it is not; in giving that to be the share and portion of the sonnes of Adam, which the Sonne of GOD hath taken as his owne proper share and portion, p. 110. 38 How we are to conceive and judge of an Eldership in the Church and House of God, in case it bee according to the order of that Pristhood of our Melchisedec. p. 113. 39 How we are to understand the Sacrifices, or that one Sacrifice, or Lamb, offered for, and in the Church of Christ, p. 119. at I Here followeth a Table containing the heads of such poynts as are handled in the second part of this Treatise, accor∣ding to the order of the English Al∣phabet. 40. WHAT the Baptisme, or washing of the Church is, as it is the Laver of Regeneration, and washing away of sinne; without which a vanity in all Baptismes. p. 10. at K 41 A difference most needfull to bee observed between that which is properly the Crosse of Christ, and that which Doctrinally tea∣cheth what it is, without the knowledge where of true Baptisme cannot be understood. p. 15. at L 42 What agreement there is between the taking up of any one act of Baptisme, and making it the ordinance of washing in the Church, and to tak up one of the ten words, or Commandements, and
making it to be our onely Rule of obedience in the Church, with the nature of that Spirit which leads to the one and to the other, p. 15. at M 43 How those manifold gifts and operations of the Spirit, are right∣ly to be considered in the distribution and exercise of them, in and among the Saints of God. p. 19. at N 44 What it is for the seed of the woman to bruise the head of tho Serpent, as also what it is for the Serpent to bruise his Heele. p. 23. at O 45 What wee are to thinke of those that seem to acknowledge things to bee true, and that they see them to bee excellent in Christ, but want the peace, glory and comfort of them in them∣selves. p. 25 at P 46 What it is for God to repent, or not to repent, p. 30. at Q 47 What is the peculiarity and universality of the Priesthood of Christ in the Church, p. 34. at R. 48 How Christ our High Priest, as also his Office are truly sayd to be without Father, and without Mother, and discent, without beginning of dayes, or end of life. p. 37. at S 49 Who those Kings are that are wounded in the day of Gods wrath, and the way and manner how it is to be accomplished, p. 45. at T 50 What the crosse of Chist is, further explicated, opened, and made manifest. p. 52. at V. 51 How the word LORD is to be understood, as it is used and brought in in the the fift vers. of this Psalm p. 55. at W 52 What it is to be at the rigt hand, opened and explained, p. 57 at X 53 What it is to wound or strike through Kings at the right hand, opened and explained. p. 58. at Y 54 What is meant by blaspheming the Sonne of Man, as also what it is to blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and how the one is forgiven, and the other can never be forgiven. p. 63. at Z 55 When the day of the Manifestation of Gods wrath is, and how it comes to be exercised in the sonnes of men, seeing that G is love even in the abstract. p. 66. t A 56 How we are mystically to undestand the two great Parents of all the world, taught and set out unto us story of the Creation of the fist man and woman, the birth and bringing forth of Cain and Abel. p. 70 at
57 The cause and ground of mans Alienation and Estrangement from God, and how it is extended and continued still in the wic∣ked, p. 72. at C 58 How men are mistaken in the fall of Angels, yea such as hold themselves Doctors of the Law, and Teachers of others; what it is, made manifest, and how we are to come to the know∣ledge of them, as also what necessity & use the knowledge there∣of is unto us. p. 74. at D 59 How the Lord is truly sayd to rule among the Heathen, or such as are alienated, yea, even in his Saints. p. 76. 60 What the calling of the Jewes is, and the bringing in of the ful∣nesse of the Gentiles, when and in what mnaner it shall be, pag. 78. at F 60 How the fall of man, which is the very woe and destruction of the wicked, comes to be the very in-let of the grace of God unto salvation in the Saints by Jesus Christ p. 84. at G 62 What is the proper ground of mans breach of covenant with God, and of all those disasters and breaches that are betwixt man and man in the world, as also what is the onely proper and direct way of healing of them, p. 87. at H 63 How the man and the woman are sayd to be naked in the begin∣ning, & are not ashamed; as also how it comes to passe, that they afterwards are sayd to see themsedves naked, & are ashamed, ac∣cording to the true mystery and intent both of the one and the other, p. 89 at I 64 The sinne and fall of man cannot be seen and looked upon with an eye of faith, but salvation must appeare in it; as also that the righteousnesse and resurrection of Jesus Christ cannot be seen and looked upon with a carnall and unbeleeving eye, but death and destruction appeares in it. p 91. at K 65 How sin and the righteousnesse of faith are neither of them hoth a∣ny created thing, and how each of them comes (properly to be) by generation and not else to bee heard of, found or felt by the creature. p. 93 at L 66 What that root is, of which the soune of perdition springeth and groweth up, as also how it is caused to rot and wither, when Christ is made manifest in the Gospel. p. 97. at M 67 What is the branch or top of that man of sin, and how Christ cau∣seth
that to decay and wither also, as well as the root, p. 98 at N 68 The the triall of Gideons soldiers by drinking of water out of the river, opened and interpreted, and how it agrees with, and teacheth how the Sonne of God drinkes of the Brook in the way, in those onely approved by him, that lap up the water out of their hand, as a Dogge laps it up with his tongue. p. 106. at O 69 That in the very act of the humiliation of Jesus Christ, is his exaltation also in the true Mystery of his incarnation, and how it comes to passe, that of necessity so it must be, and cannot possibly be otherwise. p. 109. at P. 70 That as the Gospel is divulged, and commeth from one that, is not simply and onely a creature: so ought it not to bee preached unto any as beeing simply and meerly in the state and condition of a creature. p. 111. at Q 71 In what the humiliation and exaltation of Iesus Christ doe pro∣perly consist, and that it must bee so, and cannot bee otherwise, p. 11 3. 72 How Death is truly sayd to bee the last enemy that is destroyed, p. 115. 73 Of what use the death and resurrection of Iesus Christ are pag. 116. at T 74 How the Sonne of God is subiect unto, and delivers up the King∣dome to the Father, and yet rules and governes himselfe also eternally, for of his Kingdome and Dominion there is no end: for hee shall reigne for evermore. Amen. p. 118
Errours escaped in Printing in the first part of this Treatise. PAg. 6. line 14. for beynod, read beyond, p. 9. l. 36. for hoest read holiest, p. 14. l. 18. for all alike, read we are all alike, p. 15. l. 25 for ny read any, p. 19. l. 24. for emencities read immensitie, l. 25. for seemes, read gives, l. 30. for righteous read righteousnesse, p. 21. l. 7. for no read not, p. 22. l. 7. for shuttings read shutting. l. 22. for diving read divining, p. 23. l. 26. for head read heart, p. 25. l. 36. for crufied read crucified, p. 29. l. 12. for tion read nation, the first syllable being misplaced in the former line, p. 33. l. 9. for fo read for, p. 39. l. 10. for ever read over, p. 49. l. 34, for Serpen read Serpentine, p. 50. l. 33. for become read becomes, p. 51. l. 9. for heavens read the heavens, p. 55. l. 29. for vice read rise, p. 57. l. 9. for pofession read profession, p. 62. l. 9. for least read last. p. 63. 3. for m n read man, l. 15. for charge read change. p. 68. l. 17. for manifest r. manifested, p. 70. l. 4. for a any r. at any, p. 73. l. 32: for iall read fall, pag. 75. l. 3. for conrary read contrary, pag. 77. l. 21. for if he shall, read if they shall, p. 88. line the last, for fighting, read fightings, p. 99. l. 12. for intermssion, read intermis∣sion, l. 21. for dety r Deity, l. 23. for n. ts, r. in its, p. 100. l. 3. for and viour, read, and alone Saviour, p. 102. l. 8. for reurection r. resurre∣ction, l. 22. for over me read overcome 106. l. 11. for cure read curse, p. 110. l. 13. for governs read concernes, p. 111. l. 25. for sit at read sets at, line 27. the word him used the second time, is superfluous, p. 113. l. 30. for any read an, p. 116. l. 15. for mystery read Mini∣stery, p. 117. line 23. for therewith read wherewith, l. 32. for other read either, p. 118. l. 10. for i read it. p. 119. line 1. for duy, read duly. line 16. for was read goes, line 22. for 11 read all. p. 120. line 14. for t read to, line 15,. for git read gilt, l. 18, for Lawes read Law, line 27, for Lamb spottle, read Lamb spotlesse.
Errours escaped in printing in the second part of this Treatise. Pag. 6 line 21 of the Epist. Dedicatory, for there is in, read there is not in, p. 10 line 3, for misery read mystery, p. 21 line 10, for not Spirit, read not the Spirit, p. 23. line 14. for read read Head, p. 28 line 27, for Lord Hosts, read Lord of Hosts, p. 40 line 7, for ministery read mystery, p. 49 line 30, for spake read speakes, p: 61 line 1, for acts read act, line 8, for prosperity, read and prospe∣rity, line 19, for truth read tenth, p. 67. line 19. for apoares read appeares, p. 69 line 30, for life, read of life, p. 70 line 14, for acting read a thing, line 22, for you and goodnesse, read joy and gladnesse, p. 91 line 36, for blood read bloody.
AN INCORRVPTIBLE KEY, Composed of the hundred and tenth Psalme. Wherewith you may open the rest of the ho∣ly Scriptures. HOwsoever men seek to evade and put off other Scriptures,  as though Christ himselfe were not the proper and onely subject and matter of them (it standing them upon so to doe, other∣wise man could not lift up himselfe, and set up his own glory and excellency, if Christ himselfe should have all) yet this is too strong for them to deale with, to falsify in that point, either in respect of his Priest-hood, which is for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, or his kingly power and authority, which is of that force and vertue, as to in∣terest into an office of such rise and duration as that is of the Priesthood. Now that It concernes the Sonne of God, and setteth forth him onely,  as all other holy writ doth, appeares, not onely in the
Title or first clause of it, being said or affirmed to be a Psalme of David, which name or title is given to our Lord himselfe, Hos. 3. 5. Esek. 34. 23. But also by the testimony of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 12, 13. yea, our Lord assumeth it to convince the Pha∣rises, as being spoken of himselfe, Matth. 22. 42, 43, 44. And whereas it is said to be a Psalme of David, it is evident that the Scripture intends him onely, and none other, in what ever it uttereth in way of Kingdome or Priesthood, in Masculine or Feminine gender; in Singular or plurall number, in way of subsistance or anihilation, in preter, present, or future tense: & for the originall word Mizmor translated Psalme, it signifies a cut∣ting off of superfluous Branches or twigs, even as the curiosity, and melodious ditty of a Song, cannot endure any needlesse or su∣perfluous speech or phrase. So that if Christ be a sufficient King, and Ruler in his Church, all other Authority and Government erected therein is superflu∣ous, and as a branch to be cut off, if he be compleat in his Priest∣hood, then all other Priests brought in and set up in his house, are superfluous, & to be, cut off; for so farre: as we aprise & set up such, so sar we vilify, & pul down Christ Jesus from his Thron, & Altar, which is done; by whom, and whensoever some in the Church are professed, to be higher in place, and more noble and holy in office then the rest, or then any other of the Brother∣hood; for either the least of our Brethren, are one with us in the greatest dignity that wee receive by Christ, or else wee are not one with them in the greatest infirmity taken away by Christ: and then in the one, and the other, we destroy that great salvation unto our selves. For if the most honourable in the Church, receive his dignity in Christ, the least in the house hath the same honour, for whether male or female yee, are all one in him; and if they receive it out of the way of Christ, as indeed all doe, who make difference of persons and places, and offices in the things of God, they are then Superfluous, and by all them that will ever, Sing the Psalme of David or song of Christ our Lord, so be lopped and cut off, as wee will clear our selves from sinning more and more, or adding daily to our sins by making Mol∣ten Images and Idols, according to our own understanding, for these things are the worke of the crafts-men, even of old Demetrius and
his fellowes for they that are sacrificers of men, that is, that dedi∣cate men unto God, holding one more holy, or standing neerer unto God, by his Office and place, then another, they Kisse the Calves, that is, willingly submit unto, and communicate with that spirit of Idolatry, that set up a Calfe in the wildernesse, and afterwards, one at Dan and another at Bersheba; even lovingly imbrace Idols and Idolatry, as the glory of all their worship; See, Hos, 13. 2. Read the margent from the Hebrew phrase. Therefore the Apostle Peter having pronounced that all flesh is grasse, and the glory of man as the flower of the field, and that the word of the Lord abideth for ever; presently inferres, that there is no receiving of it, but as Babes freed from the desire of preheminence, not mixing the milke of the word with carnall preferments of men, which shall vanish as the grasse, bidding them lay aside all malice, guile, & hypocrisie, envy, and evill speaking, in advancing men in the things of God; the word translated malice, signifies to visiate or corrupt, to make sick, or to make to dye; even as superfluous branches make a plant (as it were) sick, and unable to beare fruit, So is it with the plant of Israel, where∣ever they, breake forth, that preferre any in the Kingdome of God before another: for they must either professe Christ not compleat, or else themselves so set up superfluous branches. 1 Pet. 2. 1. Col. 2. 10. So the Apostle James, after he hath concluded that every good and perfect gift is from above, and comming down from the Father of lights, in whom is no varying, no not so much as a shadow of change but is the same in one, that he is in another; or else no gift nor light of his: nor is it from above, but from below onely; presently inferres a laying aside of all filthinesse and superfluity of naughtinesse, which is that lust conceived in man, to advance him selfe in the things of God, as that chapter and the whole Epistle declareth, Iam. 1. 21. wherefore he presently addes, receiving with meeknesse or lowninesse the ingrafted word: the word ingraf∣ted signifies an artificiall setting of one thing in another, which by nature are foreigners and strangers, as the holy word of the Lord and all mens nature are, but wee know that difference of persons, offices, places, and degrees in the Churches, are no
strangers nor forreiners unto mans nature; witnesse the practice of all peoples and Nations that are, or ever have been; who have had onely nature to set them a worke, as at this day, we see in these Natives amongst whom wee live. Avoid therefore these things as filthy and unclean, in the things of God, that you can∣not touch but be defiled; and lop and out them off as superfluous bran∣ches, not beseeming the Vineyard of God, nor any plant that is of our heavenly Fathers planting; if ever you intend to utter a Psalm of David, or sing an acceptable Song or Hymne unto Almighty God, who hath made himselfe perfect and durable, in all things by Christ, & so wil remain & abide the same, when these changeable fleeting, deceitfull, and hypocriticall things of that man of sinne, and Son of perdition, shall vanish; and in shame and ignominie goe down unto Sheoll, or that corrupting pit, for ever, Amen. So much for the Title. The summe and scope of the Psalm containes a description of that transcendent and co-equality of dignity that is in the King∣ly and the Priestly offices of the Son of God,  Jesus Christ our Lord, even Jehovah our righteousnesse. Je. 23. 6. By which it evidently appeares, that the Pharisees of our dayes are more ignorantly audacious then those were in the dayes of Christ: For when they professe him to be the Son of David, Christ knowing the blindnesse of their minds in that poynt in respect of the spirit and life of it, asked them from this. Psalm, Matth. 22. If Christ be Davids sonne, how doth David in spirit call him Lord? saying, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand untill I make thy enemies thy. Foot-stoole: which our Pharises can pre∣sently answer and say, He is Davids Lord according to his Divi∣nity, and Davids sonne according to his Humanity. But those Pharisees knew well enough, it was not an answer to Christ his question, nor could it be the intent of that phrase in the Psalem; therefore they have so much modesty as not to answer, though they could not be ignorant of that answer which our Interpre∣ters give; for it was the thing they still looked for; yet they saw his question so farre beyond them; that they durst not ask him ano∣ther question after that. For they saw very well his question was, how he could be Davids Lord as he was his sonne, and descended
out of his loynes, as well as he was his Lord, as he made him to be that which he was, namely a Lord and King himselfe. For they perceived his question about his Son-ship to be spiritual, in that he saith, How doth David in Spirit call him Lord? For Christ as he is Davids son, is his Lord: for he is begotten, produced, and brought forth by David, (or else he could not be) according to his death) which death of his hath Lordship and Domination over all flesh in the glory of it, to bring it to nought, destroy and dis∣comfit it for ever: For the Son of God could not die, but in and by becomming the seed of David, by which death he overcomes him that had the power of death, that is the Devill, Heb. 2. 14, If therefore the Pharisaicall Teachers of our times doe as farre surpasse (those) in cruelty, hardnesse of heart, and hypocrisie, as they doe in blindnesse, audacious boldnesse, and constancy therein: Let those onely that are ignorant of the Lord Jesus, look for com∣fort and benefit by their society and ministery; for to others it yeeldeth none at all, but onely laying of snares, and practising of treachery against the anointed of the Lord. Vers. 1. The Lord sayd unto my Lord, &c. In these words of the Psalm for order sake, note these particulars: 1. The manner of the Speech, or Phrase, The Lord said, or assuredly said. 2. Observe a two-fold Lordship, or an interchangeable Domi∣nation, The Lord said to my Lord. 3. The matter of the Speech, or Sentence, in these words, Sit thou. 4. The place, condition, or state to sit in, noted in these words, At my right hand. 5. The time how long this Royalty shall remain, Till I have made thine enemies thy foot-stoole. For the first, noted in these words, The Lord said, or the Lord avouched, or faithfully and assuredly said; It is a word peculiar to the Oracle or Speech of God, 1 Tim. 1. 15 the like phrase is used, and it is proper unto God onely to utter himselfe in such an affirmation, because the thing uttered cannot comply with any earthly state or condition whatsoever. That the Authority and Lordship of a King, and the Lordly estate
and condition of a Priest, should both consist in one and the same person or subsistence, in such an extent as each of them takes the right hand of allthings what so ever in heaven or in earth. For Christ is Lord as he is Davids sonne, descending out of his loynes, and so becoming one with the nature of man in all points; by which descension the humiliation of his Priestly office is such, that it takes the right hand of all: for it being the humiliation of the sonne of God, it must needs be of an infinite worth and value; and there is but One Infinite: therefore it alone is set aloft and reign∣eth. So that he is a Kingly Priest, as Melchisedec was, Hebr. 7. 1. and thence it is, that the Saints are a Kingdome of Priests, or a Priesthoods of Kings, 1 Pet. 2. For there is not any thing that can get beynod that which is infi∣nite: and therefore his humiliation is eternized and perpe¦tuated; which the men of this world cannot endure to heare of. But that which is of an eternall value, must also be eternall in res∣pect of time, and such is the Priesthood and humiliation of Jesus Christ: and that on this wise. Christ in taking our nature upon him, takes not unto himselfe any thing of excellency whatsoever: For he in no case taketh hold on Angels, in way of our redemption, Heb. 2. 16. that is, on any excellency or dignity; for then he could not be the Son of God (infinite in glory) if any excellency were added unto him. But on the seed of Abraham he taketh hold, that is, of a poore and mean condition, one that had not the bredth of a foot in the holy land, Acts 7. 5. So that Christ in communicating with our Na∣ture, takes unto himselfe onely basenesse, ignominy, and reproach, and can no more receive any jot of glory in us, then we can possi∣bly receive any the least stain or blemish by him: onely that which man counts his honour, and is of highest esteem in his own eyes, is that which is truly base and abominable before God, Luke 16. 15.
and in that doth the humiliation of the Sonne of God consist. For the greatest basenesse before God, is, when man goeth about to make himselfe excellent and honourable by transitory and corrup∣tible things; as by offices, places, gifts, riches and relations to this present world; who by this meanes preferres and brings in the excellencies of the Creature, above, and in stead of the glory and dignity of the Creator, wherewith man was blessed at the first, and through the same vitious desire to exalt the creature, vilifies, and so falls from his Creator: for the dignity and glory of the crea∣ture, and the glory of God the Creator, cannot subsist nor stand toge∣ther. For that which is infinite in it selfe admits not of any o∣ther in co-partnership or fellowship with it selfe; that is, with a∣ny other in way of the same kind, or respect: as, if it be glory, it is but one glory, or the glory of one; if it be shame, it is but one shame, or the shame of one. So that of necessity the Sonne of God assuming our nature, must burn up, waste, cause to wither, destroy, and consume all the glory and goodlinesse of man, Isai. 40. So that as dust and ashes, it falls into the ash-pans of the Altar for ever; and by consuming of that, to wit, all the fat, the sweet, the firstlings, chiefe and livelihood of the creature for ever: He brings in that first begotten of the Father, yea, the Chiefty and Excellency of the Son of God. as a Sacri∣fice, perfumatory, a sweet Savour, and of an eternall acceptation with God, so long therefore as this one onely sa∣crifice, findes acceptation with God, so long is his humliation and discention before God, for if he be exalted in the power and dignity of God as he is the Sunne of man,Joh. 5. 27. so is he also humbled and debased, in regard, of all excellency of man, as he is the Sonne of GodPhil. 26. 7. and so long as the one lasteth, so long shall the other, for as Gods excellencies shall for ever be exalted and set aloft, so shall the arme of flesh (which is mans excellen∣cy) Jer. 17. 5. 6. for ever be abased and kept under,Eze. 30. 21. 22. which is most accep∣table and well pleasing unto faith, to have this glorious ex∣change
change, ratified and confirmed unto, and in the Saints for ever, that Gods glory may appeare and be made manifest in man,Col. 1. 27. and the things of man may be hid and covered in God,Psal. 32. 1. Zep. 2. 3. hence is that interchangeable, translative and relative sentence uttered viz. The Lord said unto my Lord, or as the word will beare, The Lord said in my Lord, that is the Kingly Lordship, and authori∣ty of Christ speakes, and uttereth it selfe, in the Priestly; and the Priestly Lordship, & authority of Christ, speakes and utters it self in the Kingly; so that each of them hath prehemenence, and is at the right hand of the other; for the Kingly Office and digni∣ty, speakes not, nor acts. but in, and by, the Lordship, and au∣thoty of the Priesthood; and the priestly office and dignity speaks not, nor acts, but in, and by, the Lordship, and authority of the Kingdome, or of the Kingly office; for they are the right hand of each other; by which, (and not otherwise) they mutually, and interchangeably worke, and make themselves manifest to be, that which indeed they are, and ever will, for he lives for ever to make intercession for the Saints.Heb: 7. 25. This twofold Lord∣ship and dignity then, is the very summe, substance, and matter of the Gospell (even of all that good newes that comes from Hea∣ven, as out of a farre Country, into our nature in that way of Christ)Pro. 25. 25. And therefore must needs be the whole scope and drift of this Psalme; Yea, the very life and marrow of all the holy Scriptures, so that all the rest of this psalme, is wrapped up in this first verse, even as the sap and life of the Tree in the root, and as the Blossom and fruit in the Bud, which Bud hath vertue in it to produce and bring forth thousands, and ten thou∣sands of Trees of the same kind; which when our Sun of righte∣ousnesse shineth upon it, who hath health and vertue in his wingsMal. 4. drawes out, brings forth, and causeth it to appeare, in such a roy∣all Kingdome, and Priesthood, as is here made manifest in the rest of the Psalme, which is perpetuated, and eternized, both in the one and in the other, for the Kingdom and Priesthood of the Sonne of God, are co-existent in there rise race, and dura∣tion; yea, co-opperate, and co-apparant also, so that the one is not, nor ever can be, without the other; for as he is King of Sa∣lem, Prince of peace, and so rules in righteousnesse for everHeb. 7. 2. Isay. 32. 1. that
of his Kingdome and Doinion there is no endDan. 4. 3.. So also as he is Priest of the most high GodHeb. 7., being made not after the carnall com∣mandement, but according to the power of an endlesse. life, abideth a Priest for ever after the order of MelchisedecHeb. 7. 16, 17, 21, 24. For this man, be∣cause he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable Priesthood, and therefore remaines and abides the same for ever. And this is that also that the men of our dayes, and unbelee∣vers in these times, as well as in the times that are past, cry out against, and cannot endure it, as a doctrine most pernitious and abominable, that the humiliation or death of Christ should be e∣ternall; they would not have that word to be made good, which saith, He was a Lamb slain from the beginningRev. 13. 8.; nor that he should in his death and Priesthood, as well as in any part of his Mediatorship, be Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for everHeb. 13. 8.: For if his death should appeare unto them so, as to dye to the power, wisdome, riches, & preferments of this world, (otherwise they cannot communicate in any grace of GodMatth. 6. 24. James 4. 4.) then is their heaven gone, their God is taken away from themJudg. 17. 5., so that they cannot but cry out against such doctrineHeb. 12. 24, and are necessitated either to hold the death of Christ to be momentany, and so past as that for the present it is not, and so the blood of sprinkling speakes not at allLuke 17. 21. 2 Cor. 1. 5., (but onely a-farre off, as they phan∣tastically and vainly imagine through their traditions; for the Kingdome of God, and the sufferings of Christ, are ever at a like distance to us1 Pet. 1. 24) or else all their glory and power exercised in religion, must prove Antichristian; being they consist of such things, which as the grasse shall fade, wither, and come to noughtLuke 16. 15.: For the death of Christ, as it concernes the elect of God, and the livelihood, operations, and exaltations of men in the things of God, cannot possibly stand together, being in direct opposition the one to the other. And hence it is, that our Pro∣phet addeth these words: Vntill I have made thine enemies the foot stoole of thy feet. Who then are the onely enemies of that Princely dignity that is in the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, by vertue of which Priesthood he entreth within the veile, into the Holy of Ho∣est, or into the Holinesse of Holinesses, as the word isExod. 26. 33.; yea,
into heaven it selfHeb. 1. 3. & 6. 19. 20.: And sits down on the right hand of the Majesty on high: So that none can take place of himHeb. 8. 1. Now the utter and sole enemies of the dignity of this Royall Priesthood of the Son of God, are all manner of vertues, and excellencies whatsoever, attainable by manGal. 1. 11. 12., that have not in them the rise and continu∣ance of MelchisedecHeb. 1. 7. 15, 16, 17.: For such things beseem not the Royalty of this Priesthood1 Pet. 2. 9., that bringeth nothing unto God for accep∣tation, but what holdeth correspondencie with him in, all pointsHeb. 1. 3.. The adversaries therefore of this grace, are all things brought into the worship of God, as things acceptable to God, that are temporary, momentany, and of a fading conditionCol. 2. 21, 22, 23.. In a a word, what ever had beginning, or shall come to an end, is an enemy to this PriesthoodHeb. 7. 3.. For it is not the humane Nature in Christ, that is the acceptable thing or offeringAct. 20. 28., but it is the glo∣rious state and condition of the unity of both Natures, consist∣ing in one eternall Being, which no Man or Angell can ever find out a time of their conjunction, and unity, no more then a time of their dis-uniting, and separation can be foundMark 10. 6, 7, 8, 9.: For if a time of conjunction can be found, without eternity, which hath no beginning; then may a time of their dis-junction be found with∣out eternity that hath no end at all: For, Gods account and rec∣koning admits not so of time in the way of Christ, as to permit a dis-junction in that one pure, simple, single, and eternall act, in that workmanship of Christ. And therefore it is, that when the mystery of God is finished, or perfected; that is, when the per∣fection of it is revealed and made known unto us, then is this gi∣ven in upon oath by the Angel, that Time shall be no moreRev. 10. 6. 7.. Then doe we reckon and account according to God, with whom all times are present, because he is the fulnesse thereof in us. For if he be all in all; then is he all in time, as well as any other thingEph. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 28.. So that we must reckon, and keep the Records of the House of God, according to his account, and not according to the shallow register of a creatureIsai. 55. 8. 9.. With whom things are past, that shall not return again, and also to come, that never yet were. But the account of God is, Yesterday and to day, and the same for everHeb. 13. 8.. And, one day with the Lord is as a thousand yeares, and a thousand yeares as one day2 Pet. 3. 8.. So are we to account, if we keep Re∣cords
according to his wisdome, and not after the wisdome of vain man in any thing, no more then, we are to speak or preach in the enticing words of mans wisdome, but according to the wisdome and power of God1. Cor. 1 17. & 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7.. The enemies therefore of Christs Priesthood, (that keep without the veile, and so from sitting down, or abiding at the right hand of Majesty, hindering our Ministery, that it ta∣keth not place of all, and hath not effect in all, either as a savour of life, or as a savour of death,2 Cor. 2. 15, 16, 17, 18.) are all temporary things brought into the House of God, as things acceptable to God, as places, offices, gifts of learning in Arts, in Tongues; yea, the worlds created gifts of grace, which it propoundeth to it selfe in point of salvation, bearing it selfe in hand, that there are created gifts of grace in a Christian, which, are neither humane, nor yet di∣vine; so as to be properly the holy Spirit of God, which indeed is to annihilate the Sonne of God, by destroying and bringing to nought the grace of his Kingdome, in setting another form up∣on it, then ever the Father of Lights didJames 1. 17., That gives a true forme to every thingJob. 38. 22; 13, 14.. For Christ is the onely paterne and platforme of all ChristianityHeb. 8. 5.. And to hold and teach something to bee in Christ, beyond or besides the reality of God and Man, Humane nature, and Divine, in one individuall subsistance, is no better then to Idolize the Son of God, and to set him up, as a vain and empty thing in the world; and as our Apostle saith, We know that an Idoll is nothing in the world1 Cor. 8. 4.: or to make him to be Belial; For there can be nothing but humane nature and divine in the way of Christ, nor can there be any thing but humane nature and sin in the way of Antichrist: So that to bring in a middle thing in the way of Christ, is to bring in sinne into that holy One of God; and to bring in a middle thing in that way of Antichrist, is to make him to hold some correspondency with the Son of God, whereas, the Scripture concludes there is no agreement at all be∣tween Christ and Belial1 Cor. 6. 1.; But stand in direct termes of opposi∣sition, Antichrist being that wicked One1 John 7. 1 18.. So that if we give Christ his true forme according to the holy Scriptures, there ap∣pears an utter impossibility of finding such kind of grace in him, as the men of the world, or your most refined Priests in the eyes of the world, form unto themselves, and such as heare them. For take
away the body of the Sun from any part of the world, or from any horison, and the beams and raies of it cease to be in that place and are not found at all, to give either heat or light; but the place is in death and grosse darknesse. Moreover if Christ should bt have a sparke, (as they call it) beame or ray, or certain influence of the spirit, or divine nature that being shed forth, or infused into the humane, and not the reallity, and essentiality thereof; then he were not God, as well as man; and then no Saviour; for salvation is of the Lord:Isdi. 12. 2. and there is no other name given whereby men shall be saved, but our Lord Iesus Christ.Acts 4 12.. But to forme a grace in a Christian, otherwise, or besides, that which is in Christ; is to set up another name or authority to be saved by, then him alone, and that is the Antichrist, which hath ever been found conversant amongst those Jewish & Pharasaicall builders, who alwaies set at naught and refuse the truth, and ve∣rity of the chiefe corner stone.:Psal. 118. 22. Acts 4. 11. which notwithstanding, the malice of you builders, (as our Apostle speakes) will be the head stone in the building of that house, not made after the device and handicraft of man, but whose builder is the Lord, that will maintain and uphold it for ever:2 Cor. 5. 1. Heb. 11. 2. Psal. 134. 13, 14. though you have alwaies la∣boured, to pull down, and to demolish Gods building (because it hath another foundation then you can approve of) by haleing (through your doctrine, and hipocriticall and selfe-seeking cla∣mours) the Saints of God, before your Elders, Synods, and judgement seats, for the confession of that rich grace of God; and working that great worke of God, in curing the lame and impotent at the beautifull Gate of the Temple:Acts 3. 6. by speaking a word in such away, as your selves can never find out; nor pur∣chase the glory of such a cure unto your selves: for Christ you cannot indure to have the credit of it:Phil. 2. 21 and that is the reason why Tobya, and Snaballat, play their partes and bring out the same spirit unto this day:Nehem. 4. 1, 2, 3. wee conclude then, of this point, in opposition to the doctrine of all false and pernicious buil∣ders: That there is nothing in Christ Jesus, that is created, which is simply divine, nor is there any thing in him, that is in∣create, which is simply humane: the unity and conjunction there∣fore
of these twain in one, is that workmanship of God, created in Christ Iesus unto good workesEph. 2. 10. or as the word will beare, in a good work; that is, in that good work of God, that remaines and abides firme and stable for ever: being that one eternall and good grace of God; and also that one eternall and good worke of God, which twain, can stand & agree together for ever, with∣out confounding, but gloriously harmonizing the one with the other, so as faith or grace shall ever be made manifest, in this good worke: and this good worke shall ever appeare in that faith of Gods Elect; in whom so ever it is: (the deniall whereof doth sufficiently declare a man to be vain, & empty of any thing that is of God; for faith without works is dead:Iam. 2. 20.) and this one worke, in which consists all saith, or this one grace, in which consists all good workes, and opperations of God; Hath as many distinct favoures or grace in it, as also workes and opperations: as there are varieties of workes, and distinct favours, beauties, and splendant glories; in that infinite and unsearchable word, or mind of God manifested in Christ. If this be the created gift, or these the created graces, which the world intends, then let them discribe, and delineate the Lord Jesus; in whatsoever they speak of, or in what respect they hold him forth unto the souls of men; that is, in what term of relation soever they propound him unto the world: let them do it so, that the grace proposed, may appear to be such, as is ever accompa∣nied with this great work creation and making; that is, with the true spirituall and misticall forming of the Sonne of GodGal. 4. 19. who is made of a woman, made under the Law, and so under the curse: Gal. 4. 4. Gal. 3. 13. that so he might exalt our nature in the blessing and glory: of a Sonne; and man of God:Acts 5. 30. 31. and this is that created gift or those created graces, and only worke of God in Jesus Christ; which the world denies by teaching gifts, and graces of another nature or kind. Yea, furthermore, those that hold and teach a created gift; that is of, and from the spirit; and yet not the spirit, neither dare they affirme that it is humane, lest the bed prove too short, and the covering too narrow:Isai. 28. 20. to rest upon, and to wrap them∣selves in; therefore they are driven to affirme it is a sparke, of
divinity, a beame, or ray, of the nature divine, but not the divini∣ty it selfe; (which they say is in the Saints) But yet wil affirme by their traditions, that the reality of it is in Christ: for other∣wise in the truth of the thing, they know not how it is in him: but education in another way, would have brought them to have spoken other things, especially if preferment, had been intailed or annexed thereunto; these are so faithfull in their doctrine, that they must inevitably hold also, (and that by that undeniable law & rule of contraries, according to the way of the first Adam and the second:Rom. 5. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15. 22.) that all men, save only the first man that fell, have but some beame, ray, or certain spark of corruption in them; and that onely Adam, the first man, he had the whole body of sinne death and corruption in him; so that all other men, much lesse any particular of them; are not so ingaged unto God; for the revelation and manifestation of such an infinite, and unspeak∣able portion of his grace and vertue, of that blood of sprinkling, as the first man was; and by this meanes, they deny the plain testimony of the word of God, which affirmes that by nature we all a like:Eph. 2. 1, 2, 3. So that if the first man had sinne, both in the root and branch, so have wee, and if the second Adam had both the root and branch of righteousnesse in him, so have wee:Rev. 22. 16. 1 Joh. 4. 17. for what wee are unto God, wee are it in him, and not in our selves, So that the doctrine and profession of the world in this point, takes away and destroyes unto men, the very vertue, authoritie, and extent of the royall Priesthood of Jesus Christ our Lord. Yea, all things of this nature are the onely enemies of this Royalty & dignity that is in the Priesthood of Christ; and there∣fore must all be made the footstoole of his feet: otherwise he hath not the honour of the right hand of God given unto him. For so far as we lift up these as helps and furtherances in the House of God; as beautifull and comely in the House of God, considered either in our selves, or among a multitude; so farre we pull this Kingly Priest from the Majesty of his Throne. For he were not a Priest if he were on the earthHeb. 8. 4.: that is, in that way of the order of A∣aron: For no Priest suiting with the wisdome of men, in their administrations, can exercise the authority of this Lord: for so they cannot be Priests, but by maintaining the workes and wis∣dome
of the flesh; & so they are enemies to this sacred order and or∣dinance of God. For every such Priest, though he should not so far carnalize the Cospel, as to uphold the civill Magistrate to be the defence of his Ministery in the Church, by the civill Sword, (as the hypocrites ever doe; for they will take up no Tabernacle but the Tabernacle of Moloch, and beare the Booth of the KingsActs 7) yet he must of necessity maintain his own place, to be a condition and state, separate, and divers from the place, office, and state of the rest of his brethren; which is to maintaine the flesh in up∣holding the dignity of one man above, or beyond another in the House of God, which the Kingdome of God admits not of: for they are either all Kings and Priests unto GodRev. 1. 18, and all heires, co∣heires, and first born in ChristRom. 8. 16, 17 Or else not at all of that Kingly Priesthood: for if Jesus Christ had made himselfe a person or subsistence, separate, or divers in any respect from the rest of his brethrenHebr. 2. 11. 14. & v. 17. 18. Heb. 4. 15., we had never been saved: for to retain in, or to, him∣selfe, any part of his excellency, in to retain and keep back all; even as if we should retain any part of our sin that Christ tooke not upon him, it were enough to lay the whole displeasure of God upon us for ever: for his seamlesse Coat cannot be dividedJoh. 19. 23, 24.. And, he that is guilty of the breach of one of the Commandements, he is guilty of the breach of allJames 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.. No, that single simplicity of his divine Being, cannot be given, or kept back in part. Therefore the more curiously man worketh to adorn himself before God with ny temporary thing whatsoever; the more diligently he labours to draw the veile over the Holy Place, that neither himselfe not others can enter2 Cor. 3. 14, 11.; Whither the fore-runner is gone, and is already entred for usHeb. 6. 9. 10.. And so long as he holds the place into which he is entred, and keeps that Throne of Majesty whereon he is said to sit, (to note unto us the duration of itHeb. 1. 3.:) So long shall all mans abilities and excellencies, be made the footstoole of his feet; that is, the basest things that are, therefore never to be presented before him in any way of his worshipIsa. 66., or in any submission or obedience unto him: For all our righteousnesses are as a menstruous cloathIsa. 64. 6., And as the arly dew that passeth awayHos. 6. 4.; therefore is that word [untill] brought in, to denote the everlasting conditi∣on of mans abasement in respect of any excellencies of his owne before God.
[Vntill.] That is, alwayes, or for ever; as it was said of Micol, that the should not have a child [untill] the day of her death,2 Sam. 6. 23. that is, should be childlesse for everf. Or (as the word will beare) [so long] that is to say, so long as Christ sits upon the throne of Majesty, so long shall mans abilities and excellen∣cies be debased, and brought to nought before him. The dignity and Lordship therefore of our High Priest, can in no case admit of any humane ordinance brought in, as appertai∣ning to his administration and service,Col. 2. 20, 1, 22, 23. in the things of Godg: For that were to diminish the glory and compleat acceptation of the Son of God, what ever it were, or is, that is brought in, that consists not in faithh,1 Rom. 14. 23. which never fades, but is of the race, gene∣ration, confirmation and dignity of that Melchisedec that abides a Priest for everi.Heb. 7. 21. Man therefore is poore, miserable, and na∣ked, stripped of all manner of created excellencies, if hee hold and maintain the vertue and dignity of our high Priest, who is on the right hand of God, having subdued, consumed, and brought under the exaltation of the creature in its own excellencies and vertues in all things, And thence it is that our Prophet addeth, The Lord will send out of Sion the Red of thy Strength, vers. 2. As in the former verse is declared, how Christ as. a Priest by offering up himselfe unto death for our sinnes; rules and reignes as high Priest over all things, that are properly the death and sin of man before God. For, as it was in the beginning, even so it is nowk,Gal. 4. 29. the creature going about to exalt it selfe, by some excellen∣cy in it selfe, Apostatizeth and falleth away from his Crea∣ter, Gen. 2. 6. 7,, and becommeth most wretched and miserable. So in this verse he declares how Christ as King, reignes and rules in righte∣ousnesse Isa. 32. 1., having over come and subdued in usRom. 8. 4., all that basenesse, wretched, and miserable estate and condition that naturally all flesh is captivated in, and lies underIsa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 2. 15., and in these two doth the life and death of the Son of God appeare, yea his Kingly Priest∣hood, and his Priestly Kingdome;  And so the Lord saith to my Lord, Sit thou as a victor at my right hand, interchangeably. In these two doth consist that twofold Lordship, as it is said, The Lord said to my Lord (interchangeably) Sit thou on my right hand.
And these are the two Cherubims of gloryHeb. 9. 5. raised up, and standing on each end of the Mercy-seat,Exod. 25. 18, 19, 20. covering it, and reaching each other with their wings, and are both alike glo∣rious; of which we say with our Apostle, we cannot now parti∣cularly speake, only this, no further then these are set up and maintained amongst us, no further is the Mercy-seat of Jesus Christ set up amongst us: for they are made and beaten out of it, and of no other matter, both the one and the other, of the same pure gold, beaten so with the hammer, as to leave nei∣ther excellencie of a creature, nor misery of a creature to be found in them; nor can the lively Oracle, or that word of life, be uttered, so as to give life, but only from between themExod. 25. 21, 22., that is, from between the life and death, or from within the Priestly Kingdome,Numb 7. 89. and the Kingly Priesthood of our Lord Jesus, the one consuming all the glory of the creature, by the brightnesse and splendent glory of that pure word of God, descending into it: the other destroying all the misery and frailty of the creature, by taking it into the dignity and bles∣sing of that word of God, and out of that infirmity to magni∣fie its power and Princely authority for ever. And this honour have all his Saints. Praise yee the LordPsal. 149. whole Psalm. Therefore it is That the Rod is sent out of Zion;  the Hebrew word Shebet, signifies, Rod, Staffe, Scepter, or Tribe. The signification of the word Zion is in this place to be noted al∣so, which is by interpretation, Dust, or Drinesse; noting the infirmity of mans nature, and impossibility (in respect of a∣ny thing that is in man) to be fruitfull, multiply, or increase in the things of God; yet even out of that doth our Lord spring, and exercise his Scepter, and power of his KingdomeIsa. 53. 2., so that when the Kingdome and Dominion of Christ is prosi∣phesied ofIsa. 11. 10., he is said to be a Root of Jesse, not mentioning the House of David, a King; but the Family of Jesse, out of which it was so unlike that ever a King should come, when as he of whom he came, was but a follower of the Ewes in itPsa. 78. 70, 71., yea the Ewes great with young; whereby hee is subjected to such Offices in their (bringing forth) which are below the spirit of a man; from such a condition is he raised up to be
the feeder of his people Israel, yea to be the head of the Heathen, and Lord of all the earthPsal. 18. 43, 44. Psa. 2. 8, 9. Ier. 10. 7.. And in the exaltation of his Kingdome, when the songs of Salvation are heard in all the earth, it is said, Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Sion: for great is the holy One of Israel in the midst of theeIsa. 12. 6.. The word Inhabitant there used, is in the Feminine Gender, Inhabitresse as being in regard of our nature, but a weak and fraile wo∣man, even then when the Lord appeares so mighty in it, and dwelles in the midst of her, even as a man when he is at home in his own dwelling-place, manifests all his power, wisdome and authority, which he doth not amongst strangers. The Rod or Scepter, therefore of Gods Princely power & au∣thority, springs only out of mans weaknesse and insufficiency, yea this Staffe, or Rod that buddethNum. 17. 8.; and this Stock or Tribe that multiplies it selfe as fishes mulitiply without diminutionGen. 49. 22., hath no other predecessor, or progenitor, but onely mans base∣nesse and infirmity to bring him forth, insomuch that the Ho∣nour, Riches,Gen. 48. 16. or Power, of Man, shall never bring it forth: But arising out of mans debility, and infirmity, so it becomes, a sent Rod, being there is no power nor ability in the crea∣ture to produce it, God must needs be the Authour of it: And it is sent from as great a distance as is between heaven and earthIsa. 55. 8. to 13.: So as God is the Author of it onely, and doth authorize it in its work; therefore it is said to be Thy Rod, im∣plying that he is the owner of it, and will acknowledge it in its work, to be of, and from, him alone; yea, it is said to bee The Rod or Government of his Power: And therefore though many may strive against it, yet none can be, able, to prevaile; yea, though many Archers shoot at him, yet shall his Bow abide in strength, and the Armes of his hands are made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Iacob. And thence is the Feeder, or Shepheard the Stone of IsraelGen. 49. 23, 24.: Therefore he saith, in adding the next words: Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. What then are the onely enemies of the Throne,  Domi∣nion, Dignity, and Glory of a King; But weaknesse being void of strength, shame being yeid of honour and respect,
poverty being void of wealth and riches, and folly being void of wisdome and Councell; and in the midst of these, or as the word signifies in the heart of these, doth our Lord and King Christ Rule and Reigne, for he becomes, or makes himselfe powerfull and able to save to the uttermost, through our weaknesseHeb. 7. 25, in which we come unto God, else can ne∣ver be joyned to the Lord to be one spirit with him1 Cor. 6. 17., for he being a God that heareth Prayer, that is, hath all sufficiencie in himself to supply, therefore, all flesh comes unto him, the meaning is, we bring nothing but weaknesse to him, that he may be all in allPsal. 65. 2 1 Cor. 15. 28., yea, he is made honourable, and re∣nowned, through our shame and nakednesse; he is rich in Salvation through our poverty; and is made wisdome and Councel through our ignorance, and folly: yea, he is made, & puts on immortality through our mortality1 Cor. 15. 53. 54., becomes in∣corruptible, through our Corruptible condition; for whatsoever the Sonne of God is, he is made to be such a one1 Cor. 1. 30., which cannot bee,Gal. 4. 4. but with respect unto man, and that onely, as he in himselfe is miserable, and wretched in all points wha∣soever, otherwise Christ should be made excellent by the glory of a Creature, which the Sonne of God cannot admit, that the Creature should ad unto his Excellency in the least degreeIob. 22. 2. 3. 4., The Creature therefore in this way of Christ, onely gives demention unto emencities, which otherwise could not appeare yea it seemes, height, depth, length, and breadth, unto that which without it, cannot admit of any such thing, and so could not be knowne, admired, or wor∣shipped, by the creature at allRom. 11. 32. to 36. Ephes. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19., and hence he is made mani∣fest to be the Sonne of God, by being life from death, be∣coming the Lord our righteousIer. 23. 6., by being made sin in us2 Cor. 5. 21., yea the blessednesse of the Father to us; by being made a curse in us, or wee the blessed of God in him, by his be∣coming a curse in usRom. 1. 4. Gal. 3. 13., For it is Gods property, work, and prerogative Royall, to make himselfe honourable by infirmi∣ty; and it is mans worke onely, and all that he can attaine unto, to make himselfe honourable, by things that are exe∣lent, at least in appearance,Acts 12. 21, 22, 23., or in the corrrupt mindes of
those amongst whom he livesActs 12. 21, 22, 23., But so farre, as man is from making the Sonne of God, or from devising and inventing, that great work of salvation, to lift him up through infirmi∣tie, and purifie him through Corruption,1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. even so farre, is he from justification and acquitting before the Throne of God, by any thing that is in himselfe, and so farre as any strive, to make themselves, or the Sonne of God honoura∣ble, by fading things; so farre they are from acknowledging that Christ is become life unto us, through death, which the Saints of God ever acknowledge, and confesse themselves to be his death, as absolutely, as he is their life,Gen. 6. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5. and as Christ cannot be without the one, nor the other, no more can they, for he cannot become the Sonne of man but must dye to all mans exellencies and glory, else his own, as he is God, were not full and compleate, neither can we be made the Sonnes of God, but we must rise from all wretchednesse & infirmitie, or else his death is not full and compleate, but he, is detained in the grave, which is impossible that the Sonne of God should be held of death,Gal. 2. 19. 20. So then.  so farre as our sinns prevaile over us, or the feares, doubts, terrours, and troubles, that naturally man is subjected unto, make us wretched and miserable, breeding perturbations, and dis∣quietnesse in our mindes. Soe farre doe wee deny, that Christ is risen from the dead, and ruleth in the heart of his enemies, namely that his Athori∣ty springs out of nothing else in us, but meerly out of our in∣firmities, therefore it is said to be a rod that is sent, as in the Text, exercised in us, or in our nature, and not in himself, or his own nature, as he is God; for then it could not bee a sent Rod; as is affirmed, nor given, as in the second Psalme, namely, that could neither be said to be given, that he rules overPsal. 16. 10. Rom. 6. 9. 14. Rom. 8, 10, 11.; if there were not a like interchangable gift, when we see our infirmities therefore, we behold the resurrection of Christ in them,Psal. 2. 8. or else we deny that he hath vanquished and overcome them; and so detaine him still in the grave, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 11. 30. not confessing his rule in the midst of his enemirs: so also, if we perceive the power and glory of this world, to come
out, and muster up it selfe against us, wee see his death in it, and so it becomes livelesse unto us, that acknowledge life to be onely in him1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 14., and we perceive how he makes that even the Footestoole of his feate, and will break and shatter them all to peecesCol. 3. 3, 4., as a potters Vessell, and before he shall want executioners, every man shall sheath his Sword in his Brothers sidePsal. 2. 9. Revel. 2. 26, 27., not onely in things that concernes this tempora∣ry life, but in things of a spirituall and of an eternall nature alsoExod. 32. 27.: Wherefore whether we look upon our own infirmi∣ties, or the worlds glory, and tyranny. Christ in this twofold respect (according to the Faith of the Gospel) becomes,  all sufficient unto us, to save both from the one, and from the other1 Cor. 11. 18, 19., For these are those Cherubims, or Cherubs that are set at the East of Eden, with the flame of a Sword shaken turning it selfe, to keepe the way of the Tree of LifeRom. 4. 25 Revel. 11. 4, 5. Revel. 20. 9.; namely this Kingly Priest, and this Priestly King: for Kings are Cverubbs, or CherubionsGen. 3. 24., And those that place the glory of the Kingdome, and Priesthood of Christ, in things according to the wayes of men, or attain∣able by man, that is in any thing that may proceede out of the wisdome of a Creature, they fall from the dignity and glory of the Sonne of God, in so doing: read diligently for proofe hereof, that of the prophet EzekielEzek. 28. 14, 16., and those that finde and place the things of the Kindoms, and Priesthood of Jesus Christ, in such things, as are neither of man nor by manEzek. 12. to 20., nor are they found in any but in the Sonne of God himselfeGal. 1. 11. 12.; They, and they onely, rise from that base and miserable estate and condition of all mankind, unto the glo∣ry, grace, and dignity of the Sonne of GodEphes. 1. 22. 23.: therefore these Cherubims are placed at the East of EdenEphes. 1. 18. to 22. Rom. 8. 16. 17., with the flme of a Sword turned, or changed, (as the word is) for the Hebrew word Ceshaph, signifies turning or changing, or transforming of one thing into another: the word also translated glistering or flaming as a fire, or Sword, alluded unto, hath the signification of secret, or close conveyance, as in secret sleights of jugling, whereby men have their Sences so dazled that they cannot perceive nor finde out theGen 3. 24.
motion, or translating of things: for these, (namely the King∣ly and Priestly Offices of Christ) being the very glory of the Temple, and Kingdome of God, and the onely, and sose en∣try, and in-lets, into the Kingdome, or that garden of GodEzek. 31. 8, 9 Cant. 5. 1., or way to eat of, or communicate in, and with, that Tree of life, are there set forth unto us, under the name of Kings, or Cherubs, Shuttings Man out of the gar den, declaring what work and operation they have, in the hearts and mindes of the men of this world, in that way of the fall and manner of their aposta∣cie from God, not giving credit unto the word of God, ac∣cording as he hath expressed himselfe in the Gospel, for the not perceiving the way and manner of conveyance, of this Kingly and Priestly Offices, as it is in Christ, according to that glorious translation and mutuall communication, be∣twixt God and man in him; they devise, invent, conjecture, and search out, all wayes and meanes according to the art, and wisdome of man, in whatsover the imagination of his own heart, after the cuning slights, and devices of Sathan, can possibly bring forth unto it selfe2 Cor. 11. 3. Col. 2. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 14. 18. 2 Pet. 1. 16. to dignifie and set up both the one, and the other unto himselfe: And hence a∣riseth all that Inchantment, Conjuration, Sooth-saing, dive∣ing, Necromancie, and Witchcrafts, that are now in the world, so condemned by the Law of God, in all places of those wri∣tings of Moses, which are properly meant, of those spirituall juglings, to deceive, delude, and destroy the soules of menDeus. 18. 11. Deut. 2 27. Deut. 4. 7. Deut. 5. 7. Josu. 13. 22. Esa. 2. 6. Exod. 22. 18., according to that deceit, wherewith themselves are deceiv, ed, leading unstable soules downe, to the pitt of corruption, by art, and humane learning exercised in and about the word of God, after the manner of the entising words of mans wisdom, being void and destitute of that wisdome and power of God1 Cor. 2. 4. to 9., For the wisdome of God, doth so elegantly translate our sins unto himselfe, & his righteousnes unto us, in this way of Christ2 Cor. 5. 21., revealing and declaring it unto the world, by such phrases, and manner of operations, as are frequently, con∣versant in every mans mouth, and heartRom. 10. 6, 7, 8., through which things those dazzle the eyes of their understan∣ding,
and by their own subtile sleights doe change and turn the things God exppresseth, into the proper intent and operation of their own naturall and bruitish apprehensionIude 10, 11, 12, 13.. directly contrary to the truth, mind and meaning of the Lord. So that they become the onely Wizards and Juglers in the world, and the more seemingly spirituall, the more dangerous and aborni∣nable. For when our Lord speakes of the power and glory, place and office of the Sonne of God, they translate and trans∣ferre it to the Sonnes of mortall and vain man. So as, when God speaks of sinne, which Christ was made and yet knew no sinne2 Cor. 5. 21., and therefore must needs cleanse them from it. They find such curiositie about this point, in their naturall, and arti∣ficiall understanding, that their art, wit, and invention, is ex∣ercised to find out sinne what it is, in its nature agravations, and graduall operations, according to its proper and due de∣mensions; and accordingly to measure out punishments pro∣portionable, even unto death it self; And that in such devised waies for the terrour of it, as though they had undertaken to cleanse the World of sin themselves, and that in a most curi∣ous, fit and proportionable way; as though the death of the Sonne of God were of no force nor vertue.Dan. 3. 19. 20. Dan. 6. 7. Acts 7. 59. Heb. 11. 35. 36. 37. Great art, and skill, is to be used herein, by the Divines, Soothsayers, or De∣viners of this World; else man could never have a heart, to thrust down into Sheol, his brother made in the Image of God together with himself, as also both alike and the same in that act of apostasie1 Cor. 15. Rom. 5. 17. 18, 19.; nor could he have a head tolook for Gods ap∣probation, and acceptation in such acts (as our Saviour Christ fore-tels he will) if it were not for this divinationIoh. 16. 2.. And as the persecuters of Steven when they stoned him, prayed for the acceptation of their souls, in so doing: For if the words be wel scanned, it will prove to be their prayer made for themselves, & not his; for his prayer is declared to be for them, that God would not lay it to their chargeAct. 7. 59, which was answered by God, and made effectuall in bringing Saul to become a PaulAct. 22. 20.. Nor could he adventure to transfer unto himself those things that are proper unto the Sonne of God, as to be a cleanser of the world from sinne, were it not for this Art, wherein
great and secret slight is used in this kind of close conveyance. So that when the Lord speakes of the Crosse of Christ in that humbled and dejected estate of the word of GodIoh. 1. 14. Isa. 53. 2. to 8., they well perceive there is great curiosity and skill therein, but they cannot find it out to be in any place, but where there is an estate and condition, for the present, incumbred with hea∣vinesse and sorrow; and therefore their Art is used to see how to find out Religion in defending the oppressed, fatherlesse, and widow, relieving, comforting and lifting such up, in their outward estates and condition; and so by this carnall apprehension judging the Kingdome of God to consist in these transitory thingsRom. 14. 17. Iohn 18. 36.; and hereby they alwayes keep Chri∣stianity beneath, under, and below themselves, and make Christ to stand in need of their help and reliefe, though he be spirituall, and themselves never so carnall; and therefore can∣not be ministred unto by them: For he that gives to a Disciple must doe it in the name or authority of a Disciple: that is, in the place and office of a Learner, and then he shall not lose the reward, or (as the word is) the end of a Disciple, which is to be made a Teacher himselfe, as our Lord ever doth, without whom a Disciple is nothingMat. 10. 42., nor is the Lord without a Dis∣ciple. And this requires the same curiosity and skill in Sooh∣saying, or else they could never make men to beleeve that they were the defence, and protection; the reliefe and raisers up of the Sonne of God, as though he were held of death, till sorry man puts forth the hand for his help. In this conveyance, or change, their eyes are dazzled also: for the Crosse of Christ consists not, nor can it possibly have a Being, but in the CrownAct. 8 33, Heb. 2. 7. to 11., though they know it not. But thus their art, and, carnall skill, is exercised in this poynt, in finding out multi∣tudes of sinnes (though they know nor one in truth) to be plagued and punished according to the way they understand it, and persons in misery to be relieved and delivered onely in the way of temporary reliefe and redemption, and by this meanes keep the power and vertue of that resurrection of the Sonne of God, that it cannot be heard of, nor known in the
world, by their metamorphosing and changing it into transi∣tory and momentany things, which hath indeed vanquished, overcome, and put an end to all these things; so as if so be it doth but appeare, and be made manifest, these can in no case captivate, or keep us under2 Cor. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, Rom. 8. 35. 36. 37., but we triumph and are victors over them all1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.. Again, when the word of God speakes of the power, place, office, and operations of the Sonne of God, they perceive no little art and cunning skill exercised thereabout; and therefore they exercise all mans wit, and abilities with respect to the word of God, without which they cannot bewitch to destru∣ction Exo. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12., no more then the Spirit of Christ can Evangelize to salvation, but with respect to our frailties and infirmities: Therefore they exercise their Art to fit and furnish men with abilities, and to adopt and adorne particular persons with Pla∣ces, and Offices, which are proper and peculiar onely to the Sonne of God himselfe. For they know not (neither will they learn) the way of that Common salvation, and faith, once deli∣vered unto the SaintsIude 3 v.: wherein God exerciseth his grace mutually, without any respect of persons at allAct. 10. 34. For as Christ takes all kind of infirmities in every one alike, we be∣ing by nature the same that others areEph. 2. 3.: so doth he dispense his grace to all alike, and is the same in allIoh. 1. 16. Ephes. 1. 23. & 4. 6.. All the use of this turning and change of things from the Sonne of God to Man, is this, it serves onely to adorne and set up the creature, That flesh may seem to have wherein to glory, and whereof to boast2 Cor. 5. 12., by Offices and Excellencies given by Man, and acquired unto himselfe; hereby destroying and disanulling the death of the Lord Jesus, as though he had never died unto the things of this present worldRom. 8. 10. 34.; but as though his comming in the flesh had been only to set up the flesh, that is to say, mans glory, rather then to pull it downIsa. 2. 17., and to bring in, rather then make an end of all things: For whatsoever hee brings in, endures for e∣ver Dan. 9. 24., and it is his glory onely that must appeare in his House & Sanctuary2 Chro. 5. 14.. Great skill in Conjuration must needs be had, else the world could never be borne in hand, that Christ is cru∣fied in the flesh, or to the flesh, and quickned in the Spirit1 Pet. 3. 18.,
whilst they make it their daily work to set him up according to the flesh. And if the spirituality of his Kingdome appeare in any measure, they seek to demolish and overthrow the same: for indeed otherwise their earthly & carnall Priesthood cannot stand, no more then Dagon can stand before the Arke of God1 Sam. 5. 2, 3 4.; for Christ were not a Priest, if he were on the earth; or of any earthly consticution: that is, after the Order of AronHeb. 8. 4.. For all such offer gifts according to the Law, that present unto God that which shall have end, which is accounted by God a carnall CommandmentCol. 2. 21. 22. Heb. 7. 16.; For there cannot be a Priesthood Eldership, or any Office in the House of God, held to be more exelent then all the rest of the Saints are also invested into: but it is earthly and carnall: and cannot agree with the King∣dome and Preisthood of Christ. For to maintaine a greater Dignity and place, in one man then in another, in the House of God, is nothing else but the Law of works, and walking ac∣cording to the carnall Commandment, according to which Christ was never made a PreistHeb. 7. 13 14. 15. 16. 17.: but in being Preist he abolisheth itHeb. 7. 18.. For if Christ had detained any office, or exelencie (what so∣ever) in himselfEph. 1. 23., & not conveyed the same unto, & commu∣nicated the same with his brethren, our salvation had beene made void, and overthrown. Eor if Christ detain in himself, any excelencie or Office, in which the Saints Communicate not with him; then must he of necessity detain all, and they communicate in none, else he cannot be the Son of God, and so no Saviour of the world. For where any part of his office or exelencie is found, there is all, or else he were not God; nor could he be indeviduall, if any part of his excelencie were communicated and not the wholeIames 1. 5. 17. Iohn 1. 16.. Therefore to officiate men in the House of God, in such places as others of their professed brethren, whom they account off as of Saints, are not capable of together with them; is earthly and carnall, seting up the Leviticall Preisthood of the Law, and not that of our Melchisedeck, and cannot stand with, but utterly overthrows the Preisthood and Kingdome of Jesus Christ. For he hath obtained a more exelent Ministry, in as much as he is the Medi∣atour
of a better TestamentHeb. 7. 21, 22, 23, 24. Heb. 8. 6, And in that Testament or Co∣venant: do the Saints Minister communicating with their Head in that grace, having fellowship with him in his office of Me∣diatourship as well as in any other grace, & may aswel be cal∣led Mediatours in him. As Moses was said to be a Media∣tour Gal. 3. 19., or as Ioshua, and the Judges of Israel were called Sa∣viours Neb. 7. 27. Heb. 4. 8. Oba. 21. ver., if we do not Idolize the word, which is the very ground of all Idoletry in the world; even as it is in the Name Jesus to bow at it, as yeelding more respect unto that, then to an other title given unto himPhil. 2. 10.. So it is in this, and other ex∣pressions of the word of God; For to Mediate is to come be∣tween, or to be an umpeere, or an arbitrator for so much the word imports. That is, to Judge indifferently, & without par∣tiallity of the things of two, & so as to bring them to be one. For a Mediatour is not a Mediatour of one, but God is one;Gal. 3. 20. that is, to Judge rightly of the things of God, and of the things of man; truly knowing and pertaking of the mind of the one, and of the other, which the men of this world count blasphemy; that the Saints should communicate in such an office. Although it be true, that without participation and communication herein, No prayer can be made unto God, that can be fruitfull unto us, or acceptable unto himRom. 8. 26. 22.; Yet doth it blaspeme, strick, or pierce, thorough their way of Mediatour∣ship; who judge of all things according to the flesh, that is according to the will, and naturall understanding of a man, that perceives not the things of God1 Cor. 2. 14.. And so indeed their car∣nall Testament, is confirmed unto them by the death of the TestatourHeb. 9. 6. 17.; For they seting up Christ according to the flesh, do thereby put him to death in the Spirit; And so are killers and Crucifiers of the Lord of glory unto themselves, puting him to an open shameHeb. 6. 6., in the whole conrse of their Ministry. Without which, they cannot uphold their places, and offices, unlesse they maintain the first borne, in Cain, Esau, and in Egypt; namely the most exelent things that nature can bring forth, preferring them before that vertue, and power of the Son of GodExo. 7. 11. So that even as their Fathers did, so do they un∣to this dayAct. 7. 51.. But out Mediatour gives man his proper right and due, who is weak, base, and infirme in all things; in the
matters of God, Yea concludes him in his best estate to be alto∣gether vanity, or emptinessePsal. 39. 5.; and gives God his due also who is ever Honourable, Wise, Powerfull, and full of goodnesse and truthExod. 34. 6.. So that wherever he appears, there is glory in the highestLuk. 2. 14., and fulnesse unto perfectionLuk. 1. 53.; yea so, as when he appeares in the greatest weaknesse and infirmity of the flesh, in this way of Christ, he is stronger then man; that is, then all the power and policie in the world1 Cor. 1. 25.. And hence it is, that the Subjects of this Kingdome, or people assembled together with this our Priest, are so described and set forth unto us. verse 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. The Hebrew word Nadaboth heare used, translated wil∣ling is an elegant phrase; cloathed, or adorned: with variety of excellencies, signifying willing oblations, or free-will offerings; and it is a word plurall, as if he should say wills, or volenta∣tinesses, or liberalities, and it hath the signification of princely. or nobility, as if he should call them bountious princes, or Kings, in their Ministery, and office, in the Priesthood, or offer∣ing of their oblations to God, who are ever nobly con∣secrated, or have their hands filled (as the word consecrate signifies) to minister most bountifully, liberally and freely in the house of God1 Chron. 29. 20. 21.: not moved, or constrained by any extrinsicall thing whatsever; no more then a fountain is moved by any thing out of it selfe, to send forth its streames; its own fulnesse being sufficient for that purposePsal. 36. 8. 9.: nor can they be vilified in any part of their office, or operations; this princely power and authority being none of theirs, but the Lords, who cannot admit of any vilification, or diminution of it, at all; no more then of himselfe, or of his own power and glory; by any power or pollicy whatsoeverPsal. 68. 26. such is the dig∣nity, and soveraignty of every person or subsistance in this roy∣all Priesthood and peculiar peopleMal. 3. 6. now the time when they are made manifest and to appeare, (is) in the day of thy power, or in the day of thy Army, or in the day of thy greate Army; as the word will beare without any straining of it at all. That is, when all these Kingly warriers, or priestly wil∣ling
offerers; are summoned, ordered, composed, and uni∣ted together, in one point of time, as in a day; for a thou∣sand yeares, with the Lord, are as one day, and one day as a thou∣sand yeeres, according to his reckoning and account1 Pet. 2. 9. and if wee account not as hee doth; wee cannot be Secretaries, nor recorders in the house of the Lord2 Pet. 3. 8.: So then, when all power and glory, consisting in place, person, office or excellency whatsoever, that hath been, are, or ever shall; are summoned together, & united in one subsistance, or being (as in one day) then doth the power of this princely Army make it selfe Na∣manifest, as in a day of muster (as the word implies) a whole tion is brought into one body, so as every perticular one hath the power, glory, charge, & courage of the whole; & the whole, hath the power, glory, charge, and courage of every particular x: so out of that vnity that is in Christ, is brought forth all, and al manner of vertues, & excellencies whatsoever, that have been, are or ever shalbe distributed unto, or consisting in the whole Kingdome, and that equally unto all, and in every par∣ticular member thereof alike, without any respect of persons at allIsa. 36. 3. in way of any addition, or diminution, preferring one before another, or debasing of any one, as lower then another Isa. 66. 8.; so that the whole glory; and grace takes in every particular; and every particular takes in the wholeActs 10. 34. Iam. 2. 8. 9.: other∣wise it cannot be the grace and glory of God, but onely a devised grace and glory, evented by the creature, which shall come to noughtIam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. for in this holy Army, that which is the power and glory of one, is the power and glory of all; and that which is the glory and power of all, is the glory and power of every one in particular; for in the Kingdome of God, the multiplication of it can no wayes detract or take a∣way from that one out of whom it growes; nor can the a∣bridgment of it, or bringing of it into one particular: suffer, or admit, of the least diminution or depravation, of the power and glory exercised in the whole, from any particular, mem∣ber of it; for in the Kingdome of God, as one day is as a thou∣sand yeares, and a thousand yeares as one dayIohn 17. 21, 22, 23. 1 Iohn 4. 17.; even so, oneEsa. 4. 6. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 24. 2 Pet. 3. 8. Esa. 6. 22. and 66. 8. individual subsistance, is as a multiplyed Nation, or Kingdom;
yea, a compleat worldIsa. 60. 22. & 16. 18. and a compleat world of Belie∣vers, glory, or grace, is as one individuall subsistance; in which respect it surpasseth in glory all other Kingdomes, or polle∣cies that are, or ever shall bee, in this momentany, brittle, and fading world; therefore Solomon himselfe sent ships to other Nations to fetch Gould, Silver, Ivory, Apes, and Peacokes; which his own Land afforded not1 Iohn. 4. 14. Heb. 2. 5.. Yea the Lord himselfe will have preheminence in point of Kingdome, doe the men of the world what they can1 Kin. 10. 22. 2 Cor. 6. 21.: For if this spirituall muster, or day of that powerful Army, be faithfully brought forth; the world with all its fortrests, Battlements, and blockt up con∣dition; like unto that City of Jerico, to hold out the holy one of Israel yet shall it not be able to stand before himPsal. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. there∣fore their manner of assembling is noted to be; In the comly honour of the Sanctuary,  or beuties of holinesse, or beuties of holynesses, as the word will beare. Wherein he declares (by an holy alusion, unto those beuti∣full and honourable garments, which the Priest put on, when he entred into the holy place) that every one in this as∣sembly, is adorned with those royall ornaments, where∣with the Sonne of God himselfe, was beautified and adorned, when he entered into that holy placeJosh. 6. the whole ch. even Heaven it selfeHeb. 6. 19. 20.; into those things which are within the vaile; taking our nature into the bosome of the Father, even as Lazarus was carried into the bosome of our Father AbrahamHeb. 9. 42. So that what ever Christ was furnished with, when he entred into the holynesse of holinesses, as the word isLuk. 16. 22. 23.; through our nature, or the vaile of his fleshHeb. 10. 20., which is the very way of that wonderfull multiplication,  of that, one, onely and intire holi∣nesse, that is in God, for he is oneDew. 6. 4.; and yet doth as truly multiply and make himselfe many in us; though he be one, as we are vnited, and made one in him, though we in our selves be many1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. Joh. 17. 11. 21.; so that with the very same things wherewithall himselfe is adorned, are the people of this assembly, every one in particular, furnished and adorned with all in like manner Joh. 1. 16. Joh. 17. 22. Rom. 8. 11 For Iohn, and Christ, are forerunners, and as Iohn is his forerunner, on the Earth, declaring what entertainment,
Christ hath ever in the world1 Joh. 15. 18 9. 23. 24. 25; which is epitomized in that act of Herods taking off his headPsal. 22. 11. to 18. Mat. 14 8. 9, 10, 11.; and that for denying of Herod, liberty to satisfy himselfe in the workes of the flesh, though Herod pretends faithfulnesse to himselfe, and others in so doing; being in Covenant, yea, under oath with it, as the world ever is unto its own waiesIsay. 28. 15.; even so, as it is with Iohn, in shewing what entertainment Christ hath with the men of this world, so is Christ our forerunner, declaring what entertainment we have with the Father in his KingdomeHeb. 4. 14.; which is also summed up, and epitomized in the cariage of the Father unto him, in that he hath stated and plased him at his right hand, commiting his whole power, authority, and glo∣ry anto himMat. 26. 64. Mat 18. 18.; such are the honourable ornaments of holi∣nesse wherewith every one of this Assembly, or Army, are a∣dorned and blessed with allRev. 2. 26. 27. 28. Rev. 19. 11. 14.; in this way of the Kingdome and Priesthood of Christ, therefore the natvre of their offerings and oblations, are set forth and described in the next words; Verse 3. Of the womb of the early morning, in thee the dew of thy youth,  or of thy youngling, as the word will beare. The word used here (translated womb) is a relative phrase, and therefore cannot be looked upon, or understood, but with respect unto seed, no more then we can nominate or know, any husk, or hull of corne, or of any seed, without having respect unto the grain, or seed, that is naturally con∣tained in it; therefore the barren, or the miscarrying womb, is said to be accursedHos. 9. 14.; because it is the disstruction of seed, which is taken for granted to be communicated with it, by early morning is ment that spring of day, that is from on highLu. 1. 78.; and is of the same rise, alike rare; and of none other antiqui∣tie then that morning and early dayes which is specified by the Lord himselfe, for the convincing of all flesh for assuming unto it selfe, any ability, to be an assistant unto him, in any of his worksIoh. 38. 7.; which by the scope and circomstances of the place, must be ment the morning of eternity, compare there∣with ver. the 4. for explication hereof. The youth or the youngling here spoken of, is that mo∣mentany, fraile, and brittle estate of mans naturall condition,
for all flesh is grasseEsa. 40. 6., and the word was made fleshIohn 1. 14.; and this fleeting condition of mankind, never received being but in this womb of eternity; for the word of eternity, in giving man his forme, assumed the nature, and in assuming, the na∣ture it gives man his forme, so that man in that way of Christ, hath no being but in the word of God; for if the hu∣mane nature of the Sonne of God, had at any time subsisted out of the divine, it had ever been so, for our Lord changeth notMal. 3. 6.; nay, if our nature should subsist, out of the word, Christ then should have two beings; and then he could not be a Saviour; for God cannot give his glory to anotherEsa. 42. 8.: there∣fore all that communicate therein, or participate thereof, must become one with him, in that glorious way of u∣nit in Christ, otherwise it descendeth not upon themIohn 16 13, 14, 15.; for the grace of God can no more descend upon any, that are not of the faith of Christ (or of this subsistance as the Apostle interprets faith to be, the hupostasis, or subsistanceHeb. 11. 1.) then the sins of a wicked man, can be transferred or turned over unto God, whil'st the man himselfe is not in unity with him; or the hand, or any part of the body can be light, without unity with the eyeMat. 22. 23.. Nay, man in his first creation, was not, but as he was made and sprung up, out of this womb of eternity; for he was made in the Image of GodGen. 1. 26. 27.: and there is no Image of God, but onely the wisdom of God in that way of Christ; for he is the expresse Image of his subsistanceCol. 1. 15. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Heb. 1. 3.: Therefore the yongling,, youth or momentany nature of man, (as fraile and fruitlesse, as the dust)Gen. 2. 7. and 3. 19.; cannot be found to have a being, but of, or in, the womb of this early morning; hence it is that the wrath of God kindleth it selfe upon wicked men; burning down to the nethermost hell, for this their naturall condition, being made alive unto God, in that first act of their Creation as they were made in that Image, and righte∣ousnesse of God, which is found no where else but in the Sonne of God, Jesus ChristHeb. 1. 3.; is an occasion of their horrour and vexation for ever, when they see themselves fallen so infinite short of it, and have made themselves so contrary and opposite unto itRom. 8. 6, 7, 8. Esa. 55. 7, 8, 9.: Even as the joy, and salvation of the godly springeth up,Ephes. 2. 1. and ariseth, out of this, that naturally
they are dead in sinnes and trespassesEph. 2. 1. For if it were not for our sinnes and trespasses, the Sonne of God had never dyed1 Tim. 1 15. Matth. 9. 13.: And if it were not for that righteousnes and life that is in the Sonne of God, the sonne of Earth, or Adam, had never made such a forfeiture, and brought forth such a death upon himself and his posterityIsai. 24. 5, 6. Iohn 15, 24, 24.. The womb of the early morning then, and the youth, or youngling, are one, time and eternity, mortallity and immor∣tallity, that which is momentany, and that which endureth fo ever1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. Ioh. 1. 1, 2., are become one individuall subsistance in Christ, so that without both the one and the other, the Sonne of God is notIsai. 9. 6, 7. Luke 1. 31, 32, 33.: Therefore hee that can behold his own infirmities and frailties, and yet not perceive how the Sonne of God (that knowes no infirmity) takes his Being from them unto his hu∣miliation and deathIsai. 53. 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18. that man can never behold the grace, & righteousnesse of God (who of himselfe knowes no grace nor righteousnesse) to see how the sonne of sorry man, who is no∣thing but infirmity and frailty, takes his Being from that grace and righteousnesse that is in God, unto justification and life1 Cor. 5.  21.: Such men therefore that cannot rejoyce in infirmi∣ties and tribulations, they never knew the meaning of the righteousnesse of God through Faith in Christ2 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10.: But shall weep and howle when ever it appearesRev. 1. 7. Ioel 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.. For he that cannot give glo∣ry to the humiliation of Christ, he can never give glory to his exaltation. For the two Cherubims at each end of the Mer∣cy-seat, are alike beautifull and glorious, as is noted above. This Womb and Youngling therefore, are never divided; for their separation is their uniting together. For the fall or defection of man must be accounted according to the dignity of the per∣son, or subsistance of him that fellGen. 1. 26. 27. Luke 3. 38.. For as the death of Christ, was of an infinite extent, because it was the death of him that was the Sonne of GodActs 20. 28. Heb. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 8., though his humane nature was finite and momentany (in it self,) is, and ever shall be, for nothing is infinite in it selfe but God alone1 Tim. 1. 17.. So he that fell, was made in the image of GodPsal. 8. 6, 7, 8.; which image cannot be finite, but infinite: therefore the person or subsistance falling, being in the dignity of Gods Image, his fall must needs be of an in∣finite
extent, though his soule and body was but a finite crea∣ture, as the soule and body of Christ wasPsal. 39. 4, 5. Psal. 22. 6.. Mans fall there∣fore being of an infinite nature and extent, it unites him to God: for there is but one Infinite: Therfore God & Man are thereby become oneEphes. 2. 10. to 22.: So that the neerest unity is wrought through the greatest distance and separation that ever wasIsai. 43. 5, 6, 7.. Such is the way of Faith in that mystery of God by Jesus Christ1 Tim 3. 6., that if it be declared according to the verity of it, there appeares an utter impossibility in the judgement of man, that any should be destroyed. but with God and accor∣ding to his judgement it is possibleMat. 19. 25, 26.. And therefore hath he found out a way also, that the greatest distance and separati∣on ariseth out of, and is wrought through the neerest unity that ever wasIsai. 14. 10., and that is, that Mystery Babel or the my∣stery of iniquityRev. 17. 5. 2 Thess. 2. 7.; which if it be rightly opened, according to the nature thereof, there appeares an utter impossibility in the judgement of man also, that any should be saved; but with God, and according to his judgement, it is possibleMat. 19. 25, 26.: And therefore out of the greatest distance and separation, the unity ariseth: For the early Morning of eternity, and the Youngling of a moment of time, are at an utter distance in nature: And from the unity of these two, all the Oblations and Offerings of these bountious Princes, (exercised in this Priesthood, or Kingdome) doe arise1 Cor. 3. 10. 11. and appeare in number, and for re∣freshment, even as the dew in the morning upon the grasse; for these two are like the Manna and the Quails; the Quails come in the evening, or between the two evenings (as the word isExod. 16 12.: the flesh appeares in the end of a two-fold day; for there is a day of glory, and a day of shame, ending in the flesh of Christ. For there is the glory of man, which is as the flower of the fieldIsai. 40, 6, 7., and the shame of the Sonne of God, in ta∣king that upon him, which is such a deformity, That his visage is marred more then any man, and his form more then the sonnes of menIsai. 52. 14. Isai 53. 3.. These two are both ended, (even as the Eve∣ning ends the day, by vertue of that Day-spring that visites our nature from on highLuk. 1. 78, and the rising of that Sonne of righteous∣nesse with health in his wingsMal. 4. 2., which affordeth a morning
unto us, that discovers that heavenly Manna, even the bread of life, whereof if a man eat, hee shall never dyeJoh. 6. 50. And as the evening and the morning afforded sufficient food for Israel in the wildernesse: so doth this early morning, and youth, or youngling, afford sufficient store, and plenty of oblations and offerings to all such as are of this Royall Priesthood and Kingdome, that as most free, bountious and liberall Princes, they may offer abundantly before the Lord, even as Israel of old hath done1 Chron. 29. 21.. For their Royall conscration affords ful∣nesse of their hands for everEzek. 10. 2.: Therefore their offerings are compared unto the Dew, for the abundance and plenty of themDeut. 32. 2. & 33. 13.. For according to the store-house of mans frailties, and infirmities, and the treasury of Gods grace and excel∣lencies, so are their oblations and free-will off rings multi∣plied Eph 6. 18, Rev. 5.—8., which are here compared to the multiplicitie of the drops of dew upon the grasse in the early morning, which the men of the world going forth according to mans day, or judgement1 Cor. 4 3, or rather in the night of their own understan∣dings Eph. 4. 18,, they cannot discerne nor perceive the abundance therof. And if the Sun of righteousnes arise unto them, through the publication of the Gospel by others, the clearer it shi∣neth, and the more effectually it puts forth its heat, the more is this heavenly Dew, or Manna exhausted and drawn up out of their reach and view. For seeing they have not learned how to rise, come forth, and fill their hands in the first looking forth and aspect of the Sunne, they cannot par∣take in this Manna or in these holy offerings, and free Obla∣tions, but all vanisheth out of their sight: For hee that goeth not out of his Tent to gather, with the Sun appearing is, his Ta∣bernacle Exod. 16. 21. Psal. 19. 4 5, 6., be cannot participate in these offering; either he must be with the first, or not at all, in the things of this kingdom. If there be a Sonship before that by which he be∣comes & is made a Son, he cānot receive a childhood in this house, nor be kinded or aly'd unto GodRom. 8 6 17.. If there be a righte∣ousnesse before that whereby he is made righteous, it is not the righteousnesse of God by faith in Christ Jesus, he is yet in his sin2 Cor. 5. 21.. If there be a Spirit before that by which he is illuminated, it
is not the Spirit of God, received by the hearing of faithGal. 3. 2.; but a spirit of delusion, arising from the works of the Law; if there be a Church to be found before that whereof we ac∣knowledge our selves to be members, it is not the Church of Christ, nor the Assembly of the Sons of the living God; But the Synagogue of Sathan, and the Congregating of that Sonne of perdition, to plot and contrive how to strengthen himselfe against the Sonne of GodPsa. 2. 1, 2. 3, Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9. Ier. 5. 7.; Making melody unto themselves from the workes of their own handsHab. 1. 15. 16. Iob 31. 26, 27, 28., Trium∣phing and dancing about a Calfe of their owne device and framingExo. 32. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 10. 7.. For the Starrs of the Morning, that sing together in that one, and alone bright Morning Starr Jesus Christ, and those Sonnes of God that shout for joy, at the laying of that first Corner Stone of this new Creation or Building, are not onely of the Off-spring, but of that roote of David also: who takes his being from the Womb of this early Morning. So as eternity becomes time in us, and time in us becomes eter∣nity in himRev. 22. 16. Iob. 36. 4, 5, 6, 7. Zack. 4. 7.: Therefore it is that the Poole of Bethesda, or house of efusion & heavenly washingIohn 5. 1, 7. never puts forth vertue, but only upon him that steppeth first in when the waters are moved; So that, if ever God open our eyes, through the Revela∣tion of Iesus Christ we shall see ourselves first in that Poole of heavenly washing, or effusion of his grace through his belo∣ved Son, the first in Church fellowship and Communion, through that Unity we have in our HeadEphes. 4. 15, 16.. The first in espousall, through that mutuall Contract that is in Christ; for we are betrothed in that Righteousnesse that hath the same glo∣ry in respect of beginning, that it hath in respect of ending. For as impossible as it is, for it to have an end, alike im∣possibility there is, that ever it should have beginningHosea 2. 19, 20.: And that man that cannot acknowledge himself to be eter∣nized through that spirit, that is in Christ Iesus proceeding from the FatherEphes. 12. 18, 19, 20. 21, 22., he can never acknowledge the Son of God to be made momentany and subjct unto death, in time, through that flesh assumed in the womb of the Uirgin1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Iohn 1. 14.. For such as the death of the Son of God is, such is the true life of a Chri∣stian, or of the Sonne of man; they hold correspondencie in
in all Points, in way of antithesis, or diameter-wise1 Pet. 3. 18., to de∣ny the one therefore, is to deny the other in the true intent and meaning thereof, and in this point the hippocrites of our dayes, in their preaching and professing, doe nothing else but take up Armes, and all their Religion is but a continu∣ed Act of striving against their makerEsa. 45 9.. If the death of Christ Jesus therefore have an end, the life and state of a Christian is come to nought, and vanisheth. Woe unto the World then, for their falsifying of this point; For the dew of this early Morning, and of this Youth or Youngling is such, that if it should not descend, and that continually, it could ne∣ver ascend, or be exhausted and drawne up into heaven, by that Sun of righteousnesse perpetually; and if it should be exhausted and drawn up onely, it could never descend nor fall upon the things belowEphes. 4. 9, 10.; But joyntly in the one and in the other, the earth is made abundantly fruitfull, and ser∣viceable in all the store and plentious varieties thereof:Devt. 11, 14, 15. and the Heavens become glorious, and full of Dominion and Lordship in all their severall aspects, and opperations, there∣upon Hosea 2. 21. 22 Psa. 19. 1, to 6.. Yea, who ever he be that can find a Priesthood, receiving power and taking its Dominion before that, by vertue of which, he himself ministers in the things of God; that party so officiated, is no Minister of the most high God, in the holy things of God, and House of the LordHeb. 7, 16, 17.: but a Priest of Baal exercised in an Idoles Temple, for unto him the people bow, and not unto ChristRom. 11. 4.; For that Congre∣gation cannot be orderly in their owne estimation, unlesse they give honour unto him, or unto them so officiatedIohn. 5. 44., that can neither uphold nor continue their Office, nor their owne lives to minister thereinHeb. 7. 23.; nor is the comfort and salvation of all those that depend upon them, of any more stabilitie, or certaintyPsa 97. 7. Psa. 110. 4, 5. 6, 7, 8.. Therefore it is, that our high Priest onely is consecrated by an OathHeb. 7. 28.; & all other are after, or according to the Law of works, signified and taught, in opposing the Priesthood of Aaron unto the Priesthood of ChristHeb. 7. 6.; By which Law of works salvation cannot be. And hence it is that our Prophet saith, ver. 4.
The Lord hath sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of MELCHISEDEC. Wherein observe for Order sake, First,  the manner of Confirmation, it is by Oath, the Lord hath sworne. Secondly, the unchangeable state and course of it, in these words, and will not repent. Thirdly, the disposition and Order of it, that is, in these words, after the Order of Melchisedc Fourthly, the continuation or duration of it, in these words. thou art a Priest for ever. For the first, two things are to be observed in the Oath of God;  first, because God cannot sweare by a greater he swears by Himself, for men verrily sweare by the greaterHeb. 6. 13 16.; Therefore God must of necessity sweate by HimselfeEsa. 49. 18., because there is nto a greater; The Lord hath sworne. That is by Himselfe, that is to say, that he is not, nor will be God, but with re∣spect unto this Priesthood; if his being cannot faile, no more can the Priesthood faile, for he cannot be the Father of all, nor the Father of glory, but with respect unto a Son, nor can the Son be a Saviour but with respect unto his deathEph. 4. 6., nor can it be the death of the Son of God but with respect un∣to this Priesthood; For it being of an infinite and an eter∣nall value, cannot find place in the Leviticall Priesthood that vanisheth and passeth away1 Ioh, 1. 7. Rom. 5. 10. Heb. 2. 9, to, 15. 16, 17. For a Lamb slaine from the Beginning (in Sacrifice,)Heb. 7. 15, 16, 17. and a Priest or Sacrificer, raised up, and obtained in time, can never comply and agree toge∣ther in the Temple of God; no not if all the hands in the world were laid upon him in his ordination, or a thousand Rivers of Oyle brought in for his VnctionRev. 13. 8.; For the same antiquitie that is in the Sacrifice, must also be in the Priest the Sacrificer: else it cannot be an acceptable worke before the LordMica 6. 7. So that all those that ordain a temporary Priest, they also depend upon temporary Services, and Sacrifices, and as certainely as the Priest failes in his Office by death; so shall the Sacrifice loose its vertue, when they come to stand
in most need of itProv. 1. 26. 27, 28 29, 30.. Our High Priest therefore, and Sacri∣fice are of the same dignity and of like time, for he is not a Priest, but with respect unto such a Sacrifice; nor is it a Sacrifice, but with respect to such a Priest or Sacrificer, which do joyntly make and give being to this Priesthood, which can in no case be; but with respect unto the Sonne of God; nor can the Sonne of God have being, but with re∣spect unto this Priesthood. Therefore it is,Heb. 7. 21. that the Lord hath sworne by himselfe, for if he bee, then it is also, and ever shall beeIohn 17. Iohn 14. so that what∣soever is in this ministration, springeth from the Sonne of God, who is not but with respect unto the Father, neither is the Father but with respect unto the SonnePsal. 81. 5., and upon this Base standeth the whole administration of the Gospel, so that if any thing be propounded, in the House of God, that can have its being, without God in Christ, it is not of this Priesthood, nor can it standwith the administration of this oath in any thing whatsoever we come before God for ac∣ceptation in: & if we propose any thing in God, that hath be∣ing without respect unto the office of this Priesthood, it is not the realaction of him, that administred this oath, in that way of salvation by Jesus Christ, but the immaginations and notions of the Heathenish Nations, whom the holy Isralite knowes notMica 6. 7. 1 Kings 18. 26., so that whatsoever is propounded unto us in point of divine worship, if God in Christ can have his being without it, it is an earthly, and carnall Priesthood, & not an holy administration; but of an earthly & carnall Priesthood; and sensuall Sacrifice, be it offered with never so great decencie, and zeale in the eyes of the Sonnes of menEphes. 2. 12., If therefore you propound a Church in the way of the Gospel, that the constitution, and being thereof is such, and at such time, that God can have his being in Christ without it, that Church in its constitution and be∣ing, is without God in the world1 Cor. 11. 24. 25. if you propound water to wash in, in the Church, that God may have his being in Christ without such washing, that water in its use in so do∣ing is without God in the world.
If you will have Bread and wine in the Church, as ho∣ly signes, and Seales. of the body and blood of Christ, that God can have his being in Christ without any such body and blood, those signes and seales so used are without God in their use and serviceEsa. 5 8. 5, 6, 7., if you will conclude a fast to be a holy thing, without which abstinance, God can have his being in Christ, that fast so held is kept without the true knowledge of God in the worldEphes. 2. 11. 12., and if you conclude a Sabboth to be such, in the truth and extent of it, as God may have his being in Christ without any such rest, that Sabboth is silibrated with out God in the worldHeb. 4. 3. to 12.; and is not the rest of GodCol. 16. to 23., but is, together with the rest of these things, and such like, a meer deluding, and deceiving of the Sonnes of men, by meates, and drinkes; new moones, Sab∣boths, and holy dayes; being vainly puft up with a fleshly minde, which all vanish in their use: but the body is ChristHeb. 6. 17.. The second thing considerable in an oath, is that which our Apostle notesHeb. 7. 16., where it is said, that God interposeth him∣selfe by an oath, the Lords swearing therefore, which gives being unto this priestly office, is, the interposition of him∣self betwixt it, (viz. this Priestly Office) & any, or all things, whatsoever, that may come out, or rise up to oppose it, make a nullitie of it, or take away the glory, effect and operation of itHeb. 7. 21.; so that what ever stands in contention against it, must first make an assault upon the Lord, and also overcome the Almighty, before it can enter the lists, in the ruine and o∣verthrow of itHeb. 2. 10.: againe he enterposeth this office betwixt him, and his own being, for he takes not his being as a Sa∣viour, in the way of his Sonne Jesus Christ, but through this Priestly OfficeRom. 11. 15., for he lives not but through deathHeb. 7. 24. 25.; therefore the Lord himselfe is not maintained nor stood for in the world, further then this Priestly Office and dignity is testified and witnessed unto by us1 Sam. 8. 6, 7, & 10. 19., so farre therefore as the Office place, dignity, and glory of man, is an accep∣table thing unto us in the House of God, so farre is the Lord himselfe rejected and villified by usIudg. 6. 30, 31, 32., and the House of Baall maintained, and set upi; for he is not that an∣nointed,
but through this Office which consumeth, and bur∣neth up all the glory of the creature, that the glory of the Creator may appeare, to be that onely acceptable thing for e∣ver Isa. 60. 1.; Which is of that extent, that it filleth all things, yea it is all in all.Ephes. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 28. So that he that assumeth a place or dignity in the Church above or before others, or any of his brethren, he is so far from exalting, that he vilifies and disgraceth this Priestly OfficeJam. 2. 9., and in so doing he doth it to the Lord himself1 Sam. 8. 7., who is not in any account or esteeme with us, but in and through itHeb. 7. 1. 2.; For he hath interposed it betwixt himself, and his own being in Christ; So that all that are beloved of him, and washed from their sins in his blood, they are made Kings, and PriestsRev. 1. 5. 6.. Whosoever therefore excludes any of the Saints from Rule, and Priesthood in the House of God, they doe in like manner exclude them from the love of God; and from the washing away of sin by the blood of ChristRev. 5. 9. 10.; Yea, they deny them to have part in that first Resurrection, or any freedom from the power of that second deathRev. 20. 6.. So that in seting up men, and ordaining Officers to make themselves glorious, they thrust down themselves into the nethermost hell; Goeing on as a foole to the stocksPro. 7. 22. glorying in their own shame, minding earth∣ly thingsPhil. 3. 19.. But through this Oath, or interposission: wherein it is impossible that God should lye; we have strong consolation, and that by two imutable thingsHeb. 6. 18.; That is, the Sonne of God is be∣come man, The word was made fleshIohn 1. 14.; Yea a man of sorrowes and acquainted with infirmitieIsa. 50. 33.; And in this God cannot lye, counterfeit, or desemble a thing that is not really so; as the word imports (to counterfit writing) So that the realitie of all the impressions, of mans naturall infirmity, were upon him who is the Son of God, and these being the frailties and infirmities of the Son of God, they must of necessity be immutable and unchangeable; even as the vertue of his death and suffering is. For in him is not a shaddow of changeIam. 1. 17. Mal. 3. 6., and in him is mans nature which is the same, whereever, or upon whomsoever, it is found simply considered in itselfEph. 2. 3. John 5. 17. 20. 36.: And this fraile and weake nature, is also made and become the Son of God; and hath upon it the true nature and pro∣perties of God, by vertue of its unity with him in ChristIohn 4 7, 8, 9, 10..
And in this also God cannot lye, desemble or counterfeit a thing that is not really so; and therefore there is in it, all that power, glory, vertue and excellency that is in the Lord himselfCol. 2. 2, 3. 9.; This also must of necessity be immutable and un∣changeable: So that the Sonne of God is become weake, and fraile; yea dead to the counsel and devices of mans na∣turall heart for ever,;Gen. 6. 6. So also the Son of man is become strong and potent, yea alive unto God in the wisdome and Counsells of his Law and Spirit for everGal. 2. 19. 20. Rom. 8. 2. 11.. The Consolation therefore of a Christian ariseth onely from this Oath of interposition, for God hath interposed this frailty, and infirmity of man, betwixt himselfe and his owne being in Christ; For he is not Jesus the Sonne of God, but through death; For by his death he saves. So that all the Wisdome, Power, and Goodnesse of God, is onely made manifest and exerciseth it selfe through mans weaknesse and infirmityHeb. 2 14, and otherwise it hath not the use, exercise and injoyment of it self, no more then the Father injoyes him∣self without his beloved Sonne2 Cor. 11. 9. 10.. Secondly, God hath interposed himselfe betwixt sorry and weake man, and all those frailties and imperfections that naturally we are subjected unto. So that no misery can come unto us in point of salvation, and our comfort and Faith in God, but it first encounters with God himself, be∣fore it can take hold of him that is in Christ; And what impossibility there is, to overcome and vanquish the Sonne of God the Almighty, yea God blessed for everPro. 8. 21, to 31.; the same impossibility there is, that a Christian should be vanqui∣shed or overcome; of such security and safety, is this Oath of interposition, in the ordination of our Kingly Priest; For as the frailties and infirmities of man, through that wonderfull and unspeakable Wisdome of God in Christ, serve for no other end, nor are of other use but to give Being, unto the humiliation and descension of the Sonne of God in usRom. 9. 5. Psalm 119. 122., so also his power and dignity, is of no other use in this salvation and Priesthood, but to give Being unto the Resurrection, and Assention of the Son of man in himRom. 8. 3. 4.. Ioh. 3. 13. Ephes. 4. 8. 10.
for Christ can neither descend, nor ascend, as hee is simply God; any possibility of that, in either respect, may not bee admitted, in any case: For, as he is God, he can neither be lower, nor higher, then God; for so he is not; Nor can he be subject to motion, mutation, or change,Mal. 3. 6.. But his hu∣miliation, is a motion, or change, from height to depth, Ephes. 4. 8, 9.. From blessednesse, to a curse in the abstract.Gal. 3. 13., And so God becomes low in us, or in our nature,Ephes. 2. 8., His resurre∣ction, or ascension, is a change or motion, also, from the depths into the heights, from being a curs, to become the blessed, yea, the Son of the living God,Ephes. 2. 9, 10. Luke 1. 35., And so we, or our nature. is exalted or lifted up, in the power and dignity of the Word of God, which made all things in the beginning, and without it is nothing madeIohn 1. 1, 2, 3.. Indeed nothing in this King∣dome & Priesthood takes its true forme, or retaines its be∣ing aright, but only as it hath its rise, forme, vertue, opera∣tion, and glory, in this unity, and communication of, and between God and Man, in the way of Jesus ChristIohn 1. 4, 5. Psalm. 139. 15, 16.. There∣fore, in him only doe all things consist,Col. 1. 17. Col. 1. 16 20. are reconciled, har∣monized, and become one, and that one is become all thingsr. So that without faith in him, wee have not the forme and sub∣stance of things, but a meere Shadow, and rude heape in whatsoever concernes the glory, and being of this King∣dome and PriesthoodHeb. 11. 1.. So that the Word of God that gives forme to all things in this Kingdome, is but a riddle unto us, (if we be unbeleevers) in whatsoever it expresseth Mat. 13. 34, 35., So also the work of God, receiving forme and being by it in Christ, is also an uncomely, darke, doubtfull and dange∣rous thing, in the esteeme and value of the men of this world, that are ignorant of ChristAct. 5. 11, 12, 13. Mat. 41. 26. Mat. 27. 54. Let us remember then, that strong consolation stands in those two Immutable things, which not being seen, and kept intire, and distinct, we wan∣der, and are unstable, as a Wave of the Sea, tossed too and fro, with every winde of doctrine, or operation in the world, Iam. 1. 6, 7, 8.. For, the Son of God cannot become one of no reputati∣on, but in our naturePhil. 2. 6, 7,, that is, (as the word signifies) vaine, empty, nothing; he cannot be debased and annihila∣ted
but in us, nor can our nature be dignified, filled with a∣bility to do all things, but in the Word of GodPhil. 4. 12. 13., the na∣ture of Man is Immutable, in that it is ever debased, and humbled in the power and glory of the Word of God: the Word of God is Immutable, in that it is for ever exalted in the weaknesse and infirmity of Man,Cor. 12. 9. 10., So that without the weaknesse and infirmity of man, the Word of God is not, that being the humiliation of Jesus Christ, and with∣out the power and authority of God, the nature of man is not; that being the lifting up, and exaltation of the same Lord Jesus Christ, ignorance therefore of this Oath of inter∣position, standing in these two immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to lye, is the grand discouragement, and discomfort of all the world. For it consists of the Kingdome and Priesthood of Jesus Christ, his exaltation and humiliation, his strength, and his weaknesse, his immortality, and his mortality, his life, and his death, his riches, and his poverty, his supereminencie, and his subjection, his eternity, and being in time, his wise∣dome and his foolishnesse,1 Cor. 1. 25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44., all which being skilfully couched and concluded, in one individuall subsistance, is the joy, peace, and quiet of all that beleeve. For so the Oath of God is made one, though it consists of two natures, alike immutable, and hath a like power to affi∣ance, and bind over in the conscience of man, as it hath in the Bosome of the Almighty, and can no sooner faile in the one, then in the other; for it is of the same possibility and certainty, for strength to be constant, firme and immoveable in weaknesse,Prov. 8. 30. 31., as weaknesse to be constant, firme, and im∣moveable in strengthPsal. 102. 11. 12., so that the nature of this oath, bindeth each un other perpetually in Christ, who is King of Salem, Prince of Peace, and Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7. 1., in whom we have peace though in the world, we find trou∣ble, Iohn 16. 33., which trouble and tumult of the world, ariseth from this, that they seeke these things, in divers and severall persons, or subsistances, to find the life, glory, and power to appear in that way viz. one to be rich in himselfe but another (not only distinct, but diverse from himselfe) to bee
poore, one noble, but another severall, and devided from himselfe ignoble,Jam. 2. 1. to 10., This hath beene the toyle, trouble, and travell of the world from the beginning thereof,1 Iohn 3. 12., to get rest and peace, but could never gaine it to this day; nor ever shall attain its end herein; but when it lookes for peace, behold trouble,1 Sam. 17. 28., and when it stands in most need of help, then shall all stayes shrink and start aside, and leave him desti∣tute, as one having lost his God,Ier. 14. 19. Esa. 8. 22., whom hee had cunningly framed, and fashioned unto himselfe,Iudg. 18. 24., being ignorant of this Oath and Covenant of God, by which only the Lord Jesus is made a Minister of holy things, the World having onely the Oath or Covenant of Man upon them,Esa. 44. 10. 11, 12, 13., not the Bond of the Spirit, which is by the hearing of Faith,1 Iohn 5. 9., but the Spirit of Bondage, which is by the workes of the Law, and therefore ingendreth unto Bondage in all the Conceptions. Formes, and Productions thereofActs 20. 22. Gal. 3. 2.. But this Oath of inter∣position, which never interposeth the Curse betwixt God and Man, but only betwixt God, and his being a Saviour in his Sonne, whereby the Curse is devoured, and brought to nought,Rom. 8. 15. Gal. 4. 24. 25., for the curse cannot tarry on the Son of God, no more then Iniquity can stay upon him,Gal. 3. 13., or guile bee found in his mouth,Psal. 5 4., so that Death is swallowed up in victo∣ry, Esa. 53. 9., yea, the curse is made a blessing in him,1 Cor. 15. 54.: So that this Oath, that is according to the Religion and Wor∣ship of God, is the Oath of God, and God cannot sweare by a greater then himselfe; therefore his Oath cannot go beyond or above himselfe; that is, cannot have its forme and be∣ing out of that subsistance of Jesus Christ: so that as cer∣tainly, as he remaines to be himselfe, and abides a God of Truth, so certainly shall this oath be performed, and kept in all ages in his Elect, and chosen in ChristGal. 3. 13. 14.: But the oath of Man; that is, all swearing, or covenanting according toPsal. 89. 33, 34, 35, 36 37. Esa. 53. 10. the wisedome, art, and skill of the Creature, alwayes inter∣poseth the Curse betwixt God and himselfe, for the naturall and guilty Conscience of a man, ever propounds God unto it selfe, in a way out of, and besides its owne being and subsi∣stance (as at the first, so is it now,Gen. 3. 5.,) which is alwayes
out of the way of Jesus Christ, for the humane nature of Christ had never being, or for a moment could subsist, out of the Word of GodMat. 1. 20 Luke 1. 35.. So that a naturall conscience binds it self over unto God, by interposing a Curse betweene God and it selfe, and according to the motions and operations of and in himselfe, lookes for the application, or the abolishion thereofGen. 20. 8. Rom. 2. 14, 15. Gen. 4. 14.. But the Conscience of a Christian interposeth the Son of God, between it selfe and the Curse, and accor∣ding to the motion and operation of that Wisedome, Spirit, and power, that is in Christ, translates the Curse unto the Son of GodDeut. 21. 23. Gal 3. 13., who takes it away at once, and for ever, Heb. 9. 12., and also translates the blessing or blessednesse,  upon the nature of man, wherein it rests, abides and exerciseth it selfe for everGen. 22. 16, 17, 18. 1 Pet. 2. 9.: This Oath of interposition therefore, infallibly bindeth over God unto man; as also, Man over unto God; for God is not, but as he is light,Iam. 1. 17. 1 Iohn 1. 5., and light cannot bee light, but it must be manifest,Ioh. 3. 20, 21. nor can he be made ma∣nifest, but in his Son; and the Son is not manifest to bee of God, but by his resurrection from the dead,Rom. 1. 4., for by death he overcame him who had the power of death,Heb. 2. 14., which is a worke of none, but of God alone; for by dying in him∣selfe to all humane excellencies, the glory and pompe of this present world,Mat. 8. 20 Psal. 22. 6, 7, he lives in himselfe through humane frail∣tie, unto God in the life and power of the world to come,1 Cor. 13. 4.1 Cor. 13. 4., So that by death of the excellencies, and wisdome of the flesh, he slayes the enmity in himselfe,Ephes. 2. 15, 16., which is indeed the spirit of that wicked one; the wisdome of the Serpent, which hath ever come out and contended with GodGen. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Rev.  12. 7. 17. Gal. 4. 29.. From the beginning, even untill now, to give that unto Man, which God cannot give to another; no, not to any besides him∣selfe. Isai 42. 8.. Sathan would have glory given to another; that is, to another individuall Subsistance. Therefore, he saith, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and e∣vill, Gen. 3. 5.. But God in his way, onely gives to another na∣ture in that way of Christ; but the same individuall subsi∣stance, in, and with himselfe. So then, Christ slayes the emnity; that is, the vitious de∣sires,
pride, and ambition of the flesh, at no further distance from himselfe; then a wicked man slayes, crucifies, and kills that Spirit of the Lord of Glory, unto himselfeHeb. 6. 4, 5, 6.. For however he kills it in, & unto himself yet it lives, & workes effectually in the chosen and beloved of God: so also however, Christ kills & crucifies in himself, the flesh, with all the lusts & affecti∣ons of it,Gal 5. 24.; that is, in all that are made one with him by Faith: yet doth that spirit of uncleannesse worke effectually in the Children of disobedience, and ever shallEphes. 2. 2., God there∣fore hath bound himself ever unto man, by no lesse a tye and obligation, then that great work of the death and humi∣liation of Jesus Christ doth consist of, which is impossible to be knowne or heard of, but only in the nature and wret∣ched condition of MankindHeb. 2. 16 17.: the ground of it is this, the humiliation of Jesus Christ is of the same extent, that his ex∣altation is, they holds correspondencie in all points, else it could not be the humiliation of the Son of God, for that cannot admit of any bounds or limitation whatsoever; For Christ as he is Man, is exalted through his unity with the Word of God, above the state and condition of any created nature whatsoeverRom. 9. 5.. So is the Word, or that Son of God Iohn 1. 14. Heb. 1. 5., being made flesh, vilified and abased below the state & condition of any thing that is simply a creature whatsoever, for all Creatures are by nature goodGen. 1. 31,, as the work of that one, onely, and good God. Now the work of God cannot be perfected but in man, who is an abridgement, or an epittomy of all the Creatures, who are therefore said to be good in the Creation, produ∣ction, or bringing forth of them being said to be so, as they had refrence unto man,Gen. 2. 18. Psal. 8. 6, 7, 8. Being made for his use, benefit, and honour, and suiting with his nature and disposition, all being made before him, to declare that all-tended, and had respect unto him, he being the Fulnesse and whole accom∣plisence of them all: For in him onely is the Worke of God perfect; without which, no rest nor Sabbath can be found, Gen.  1, 2 3.. For as God and his Word are one, and so alike infinite and perfect, the one as the other: so the Word and his
Work are one; and alike infinite and perfect, the one, as the other; and such a worke can be found in none, but onely in man alone. And therefore the humiliation of Christ must of necessity have its being in man, or rather the anihiliation of the Son of God, is only in that Enosh; that is, in sorry man, as the word signifies. Now the work of God only in the Creation of Man, is an infinite work; which in any other, or in all other Creatures it cannot be; for however they be the worke of an infinite God, yet the work is but a Creature, and therefore finit for a Creature, simply considered, is a finit thing; but Man was not, nor had his being for a moment, but in the Image of GodGen. 1. 26, 27.; For in that Image be was created, and had his be∣ing at the first, and that is the proper image, similitude, and likenesse of man: Therefore Adam is said, to beget a Son in his owne Image; not when he begets Cain, but when he be∣gets Seth,Gen. 5. 3. Or that stable and set one, who is the Fa∣ther of our LordLuk. 3. 38, in whom this glorious Image is preser∣ved and kept alive for ever,Heb. 1. 3. Now that this work of God. namely, the Creation, frame, and being of Man, is onely an infinite work, it is evident and plaine, for as certainly as the dust, or slime of the earthGen. 2. 7., that is, that Spaun, or Seed of the Earth, that hath all earthly, transitory, corruptible, fa∣ding, and vanishing things in it, was made in the Image, Wisdome, or Word of the eternall God: So certainly was that Image, Wisdome, or Word of God (which is the per∣fection and fulnesse of all divine and heavenly excellencies) made of, or in the dust or slime of the Earth: So that it is not the proper work of God, looked upon in man, but as it consists of the unity of the Creator, and the Creature, being become one,Ephes. 2. 14. 15, 16 Iohn 17. 21, 22.: So that this work hath in it, not only that which is truly and really a creature, but also the Image and Dignity of the Creator: therefore must be a worke of an infinite and unfathomed extent, being the Image of the Creatour is considered in it,  that cannot admit of any bounds or limits1 Bing. 8. 27. Psalm. 78. 41.. Therefore, it is that God saith, Let us
make man in our own Image,  which is not a Consultation of the Trinity properly, as some would have it; but proper∣ly a confirmation of this great work in the sommoning, and bringing together of Heaven and earthGen. 1. 1 Dev. 30. 19. Gal. 4, 4.; the dust and the Image of God, to be one intire and glorious workmanship. So that Adam in this respect, is truly called the Son of GodLuk. 3. 38., not only by Creation (as men think) but by Adoption also, yea and the Son of God by nature; For he is the Sonne of God by nature, because the Image of God which is the Wisdom of God, and God himself, are of the same nature, and so is he the Son of God by nature. He is also a Son by Adoption, or taken out of the house of a stranger, for as he is earth, and so bears the Image of the earthly1 Cor, 1. 5., he is a stranger, and forreyner from that hea∣venly glory, and excelency that is in God, and so is he the Sonne of God by Adoption. And he is also a Sonne by Creation, and that is, the making and framing of these two together in one glorious work; which is indeed the New Creature, or the Creation of GodRev. 3. 14., and so is he the Sonne of God by Creation, which work is not nor can be truly considered, without God himself being brought into it, without any interposission, of time, place, action, demea∣nour, or comportment of the Creature whatsoever. For the interposission of any thing between God and the Crea∣ture, was the fall, and is the sin of man unto this dayGen. 3. 5. Heb. 10. 39. 39.; for as the operation of our hearts work for the interposing of somwhat betwixt our selves; and our full satisfaction & happines in God through Christ, by so much do our hearts work to put somewhat between the happines of the human nature of Christ in the divine, & so destroy the faith or subsi∣stance of Christ, unto our selves. For as God said let there be light, & it was so, so did he say of the dust & himself, let us make man in our own Image, & it was so. But man, through that ser∣penten like subtility in that way of the woma, or of that wa¦ker, & earthen vessel, (namely) the wisdom of a Creature, wor∣king towards & about the things of the Creator, which is not admire to spark in the Church1 Tim. 2 12, said no, but if we ear. We shal be turning that truth which God had spoken into a lyeRom. 1. 25, which
sin and fall from his CreatourGen. 3. 6., even so God saith that he hath made us heires, first, borne, and Coheares with Christ, Kings, Priests, able to do all things through Christ, that strenghtens usRom. 8. 16. 17. Rev. 5. 10. Phil. 4. 13.; But earthly man saith no, but if we do this, or that, or come to this or that period or point of time, if we suffer, if we waite, if we reform, and conform, then we shall be so, this is that apostate backslyder, and faller of from the living God, namely of those that draw back unto per∣dition, and not of them that believe, to the saving of the souleHeb. 10. 38. 39.. Now the breach of this Oath, Bond, Covenant, Con∣tract, or unity, that is betwixt God and man, in which God is a party, must needs be of an infinite nature, and therefore that, and that onely gives length, and latitude, to the death, and humiliation of Jesus Christ. Now whereas we say, that God is a party in this bond, it is so to be understood, as a party in the Oath, or Contract, but no party in the breach; for the breach and forfeiture, ariseth onely from man, and is his sole and proper worke; even as man also, is a party, or one nature, in the keeping of the Oath and Covenant, and fulfilling of the whole Law of GodRom. 8. 3. 4.; But the whole and intire work thereof, dependeth solely upon God, and nothing can be attributed, or ascribed unto man at all1 Cor. 17, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 4. 7.; So then mans breach of oath, and Cove∣nant in his defection and failing from God, being of an in∣finite nature and extent, God being a party in the Oath, worke or Covenant, that, and that onely, can sufficiently extend, the death and humiliation of Jesus Christ, to be such, as is compatable, and agreeable, to the Sonne of God. Therefore we must either deny the death, and humiliation of Jesus Christ to be such as becomes the Sonne of God, or else confsse man, to be a consociate with, united unto, and become one, with the Sonne of God, who can depart from, or be deprived of his death; no more then he can depart from; or be deprived of his life; for in that he dyed unto the things of this present: world, he can never live un∣to them againe, and in that he liveth unto God, and the things
of God, he can never dye unto them againe, and these do not onely stand together to make him compleate, but are comprised in one, and the same, for he dyed according to the flesh, and never lived unto the lusts of it for a moment, and was quickoned in the Spirit, and never dyed unto the Father, and the things of him, no not for a momentEsa. 53. 9.: Therefore as the Sonne, off-spring, or nature of man is exaulted infi∣nitely above a Creature, and so made higher then the hea∣vens 1 Pet. 3. 18. Psal. 5. 4.; for heavens in their own nature are high, or heights, but to be made heaven through hell, yea the heights in the depthesAeb. 7. 26., that is to be higher then heaven, so also the Sonne of God is made infinitely lower then a Creature, for the humiliation of Christ is through death sin, the curse of the LawPsal. 16. 10., which is lower then hell it selfe, for the corrupting pit may be low, and miserable by nature, in it selfe, but to become low, wretched, and miserable, through height, happinesse, and blessednesse, that is lower then hell it selfe, for that is hell inlargedPsal. 34 6. Ephes. 4. 9. 10.; so as it can never be sa∣tisfied, nor say I have enough, so then the breach of Cove∣nant, Contract, or Oath, in point of Creation, by the sin of man, is of the same extent with that keeping of Covenant Oath & Contract which is through the faith & righteousnes of Jesus Christ; for this is to be observed, that the difference disparri∣ty & Antipothy, between the first Adam & the second, stands not in one being nearer to God then the other, in point of Creation, and incarnation, for as God set himselfe at the first, or in one intire act of relation to man, so he standes for ever, else the holy one should change, which is a thing impossible2 Cor. 5. 21. Rom. 8. 34. Gal. 3. 13.; for the first Adam cannot be knowne but with respect unto the second, nor can the second be known but with respect unto the first; for as the second cannot be known or acknowledged to be a Saviour, without respect unto sin, from which he savesEsa. 5 14. Prov. 27. 20., no more can the first A∣dam be knowne, or acknowledged, but with respect unto that reall righteousnesse, Image, and blessednesse from which he falles, and by which he destroyeth, and overthroweth himselfeMal. 3. 6. Iames. 1 17., so that the difference stands in this, that the one in the way of the mistery of iniquity and death, takes2 Cor. 5. 21. Mat. 1. 21.Ezek. 18. 24. Gen. 2. 17.
occasion by righteousnesse to become sin, by life to become death, by blessing to become a curse, the other in the way of the wisdome and mistery of God, takes occasion, by sin, to be righteousnesse, by death to become life, by the curse to become a blessing, or the blessed for ever, and as neere as the Elect of God are unto the curse by nature, who are the Children of wrath, as well as others, and the very curse it selfe indeedEphes. 2. 152, 3. 8., in the obstract; so neere are the wicked un∣to the blessing, and righteousnesse of God by creation; who are thereby the very blessing and righteousnesse of God in∣deed. So that as the Saints of God, beholding themselves in the light of Gods wisdome2 Cor. 4. 6. 7., can say (and that truly) we were such by natureEphes. 2. 3.: But we are so by grace in the Sonne of God1 Iohn 4. 17. Col. 3. 4., in which ascent, and gathering up unto him, from that low and forlorne condition, is their joy and happinesse for everEphes. 5. 8. 9., even so, the wicked, beholding themselves in the wisdome of man, and light of a Creature, viewing the things of GodGen. 3. 5. 6., shall as truly conclude, we were such by the grace of God, as were made higher then AngelsHeb. 1. 4, 5, 6., having in Christ obtained a more excellent name, then they; but now we are thrust downe into Hades, that place of the damned by our sin, and unbeliefe, and this mi∣serable descent shall be their paine, and torment eternally thence it is said, that the Angels which kept not their first e∣state, or as the word is,  their principality, that is, the Messen∣gers that brought such great tydings of God into the world, as to have his very mind and Image upon them, (as man in his creation at the first had (kept not their Lordship; as ha∣ving the authority and power of the Lord upon them, are reserved in Chaines unto the judgment of the great dayIude 6. 2 Pet. 2. 4., im∣plying, that so long as that great day of Gods power and glory lasteth, so long shall their thraldome, bondage, and sentence of death remaine upon them. It remaines therefore, in the records of the house of God, that Christ was made sinne2 Cor. 5. 21., and became a curseGal. 3. 13., even as dust was made in the Image of God, yea, in righteous∣nesse
and holinesse of TruthGen. 1. 27. Ephes. 4. 24.; no more a shaddow or a semblance, without the truth, and substance of it, in the one, then is in the other, they are both of one, and the same realty, and certainty, and stand in absolute and perpetuall termes, of relation in all points, diamiterwise, or in way of antitheses or oppositionRom. 5. 17, 18, 19., note therefore that the Sonne of God is so made a curse and sinne, that in the very act of so being or becoming such a one, he destroyes sin, and the curse, and takes them away for ever, in that way of faithHosea. 13. 14. Heb. 2. 14.; for evill cannot so journe with him, no not for a moment1 John 5. 5. Psal. 5. 4., neither was guile ever found in his mouthEsa. 53. 9., yet from this glorious act of his, springs up an eternall curse, in the wicked in that way of unbelief, and that sin that shall abide upon them for e∣ver Psa. 58 3. Iob 20. 11.; This happy and blessed act of unity between the word of God and our nature, being the occasion of it, with∣out which it could not be; but it is altogether impossible, that it should be any, no not the lest tittle or jot of cause of it at all; for had not the breach been such, as the composition, or forme of the Covenant, or oath is, (having the height, depth, length, and bredth of him that is God in it) sin and death, had never else received their forme (if we may so call it) or rather their formlesse figure and shapeRev. 9. 2, 3., no more then righteousnesse and life could appeare unto perfection, and satisfactionPsa. 36. 5. 6. Psa. 63. 5. Psa. 19, 11. 3., yet it is as impossible for a Curse to spring out of blessing, or sin out of righteousnesse (as the proper Roote and Fountaine thereof as it is for filthy water to issue out of a pure FountaineIam. 3. 11. 12. Mat. 7. 17. 18.; for the fraile brittle and momentany nature and condition of the Creature, is the proper roote Fonntaine, and cause of sin, and death, but takes occasion thereof, from that firm dura∣ble, & unchangeable state of the most high, without which it could not be so, yet is the Lord cleane, pure, and undefi∣led, in all the inclinations, Motions, and operations of the Creature, in that kind, even as the Saints are free from at tributing unto themselves, any jot of that great work of re∣demption, but ascribe it wholly to that wisdome and pow∣er of God1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. 29. 8. 3. Iob. 30. 11, even as the proper cause of the springing up, and growth of a rush is the mire, for can a rush grow without
mire saith the holy manIob. 8. 11., yet is the heate of the Sun, the occasion of it, without which it groweth not all, so also, the raine falles downe from heaven, its own weight, be∣ing the proper cause of its fall. But the Sunne is the occasion that it falles from thence, for had not it exhausted, and drawn it up into the ayre, it could never have fallen from thence. The sum of all is this, the Sonne of God became a curse and yet was and is the blessed of the Father, from everlasting to everlastingRom. 9. 5., he was made sin and yet never knew sinPsal. 90. 2., but is the Saint or holy one of Israel1 Cor. 5. 21., the holy one of GodPsal. 71. 22.; yea, God blessed for ever amenLuk. 4. 34, even so, the dust or slime of the earth, yea the very spaune of all budding, blossoming, fading, and dying things, vanishing, and becoming vaine as the flower of grasse which withereth in a momentRom. 9. 5.; this was made in the Image, holinesse, and righteousnesse of God, and yet knew no holinesse, nor righteousnesse at all, no more then the Sonne of God knew sin, but in the very act, of so being made in the Image of God, or earth becom∣ing heaven, the wisdome of man transformes unto it selfe, holinesse into defilement, righteousnesse into sin, the Image of God into the Image of Sathan; for there is in this won∣derfull workmanship of God, the wisdome of a Creature, as truly as there is the wisdome of a Creator, even as sure as there is in Christ, the truth of humanity, as well as there is the truth of the nature divine, yet out of this wonderful & unheard of Corruptibility: man, defiling him∣selfe from that which is purity it selfe, even as the Sonne of God purifies himselfe through our infermity, in cleansing himselfe from our sin, that no guilt or staine could once take hold or rest upon that holy one of God1 Pet. 1 24. Esa. 40. 6. 7, 8., being thus compo∣sed and made in the wisdome of GodIohn 14. 30. Heb. 4. 15., yea, being the wisdome of the Father it selfe1 Cor. 1. 30. & 23. 24., so man by his own wis∣dome, as he hath the wisdome of a Creature, defiles for∣mes, and corrupts, himselfe from that, and by that, which is purity, glory, and incorruption it selfe, so that no holi∣nesse nor righteousnesse once taketh hold or resteth upon
him at all, but he is wholly corrupted and defiled, from the first, yea estranged from the wombProv. 8. from 14. to 31. Iohn 14. 7, 8, 9, 10.; even as Christ is holy, and wholy sanctified from the first act, or time of his con∣ception or bringing forthMat. 18. 20.. So that a wicked man is a sinner from the beginning, yea as ancient as that lyar, who is not only the lye but also the Fa∣ther thereof making himself soIoh. 8. 44., from the power and glory of God, appearing and making it selfe known in way of unity with him; Judging according to mans day1 Cor. 4. 3. by ar∣guments reasonings, and consultations meerly humane, and proper to a created nature: Even so also is the Sonne of God righteous, and holy from the beginning, making himself so, by the appearing of our infirmities and sorrie e∣state, in unity with himself, judging according to the Wisdom of God, by arguments, consultations, and deter∣minations, ever suting and complying, with an infinite, gratious, compassionate, and al sufficient God1 Cor. 2. 15. 16.; who is one in this contract, and must ever be brought into the account and reckoning; he having undertaken, and is become surety for usPsa. 11. 122., and according to his worth and dignity, power and vertue, wisdom and knowledge, mercy and compassi∣on, truth and faithfulnesse; the product must ever be a∣prized, and valued, and concluded upon, in case wee summe and cast up, what we are, what we have, and what we doe, or may be put upon: the sum, result, or totall of all; and of every particular; what it amounteth unto must be cast up. reckoned, and valued in him; For in him it hath its pro∣per value price and worth. This distinction, both of the ground and vice of sin, and of the righteousnesse also, of God by faith in Jesus Christ; if we be ignorant of one of these, we are ignorant of both, and if we be ignorant of both, wee are ignorant of the open∣ing and shutting of the Kingdome of heaven; As also, of the opening and shutting of the bottomlesse pit, and so we erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of GodMat. 22. 29. in any part of the Scriptures; For under this Seale, hath lyen hid from the world, the way of she tree of life, even since the
foundation thereofCel. 1. 26. Mat. 13. 35. 2 Cor. 4. 3,: If ever God open it unto us, it will appear and make it self evident throughout the holy writings; For as the whole scope of Scripture, sets before us life and death, cursing and blessingDev. 30.: So doth every particular pert thereof, (to speak after the manner of men) which is indeed a certain a breviary or compendium of the whole, and in this point, is the skill of the Key of David exercisedRev. 3. 7., that openeth and no man shuteth, and shuteth and no man open∣neth; For the opening of the word of God,  is, to set the creature (which is but a bubbleIob 4. 9. Iam. 4. 14., a blast, a vapour, a shadow, a span as a Weavers shuttle, or a Post that tarries not) to set it (we say) or bring it into, the liberty of the Son of GodPsa. 102. 11. & 109. 24.; e∣ven into the Kingdome, power, glory, vertue, and dignity of him that is the Son of eternity, to be able to comprehend with all Saints, what are those dementions of the grace and love of God in Christ.Eph. 3. 18, 19., in the hight, depth, length, and bredth there∣of, which passeth knowledge of any, or of all the creatures in the world, simply considered as creatures: this is the opening of the word of the Kingdome, or the Kingdome consisting in the wordMat. 13. 19.: when the creature is brought in∣to the true and full extention, blesing and state of the Sonne of God1 John 3. 1. 2. Rom. 8. 29. Ephes. 1. 3. Ephes, 2. 6.; which no man can shut, or make of lesse com∣prehention, then eternall, immence infinite and incom∣prehensible Isa. 9. 6. 7. Rom. 9. 5.. This Key openeth from the narrow Scantling of a moment, into such height, depth, length, and breadth, as is compatible to the Son of the eternall God. The skill which this Key exerciseth in shutting also, is of no lesse devine Art, sublimity and dignity, and of the same difficul∣tie and device to be opened; For it being the eternall and immense power, the unsearchable love and incomprehensi∣ble Wisdom of God, to be comprized in one act, sentred in one point of time, composed in one indeviduall being, and subsistance in Christ; For how ever God is one simple be∣ing in himself, from everlasting, yet he is not one in point of salvation, nor can be knowne of the creature: but in way of vnity, in the participation of our nature; by which he conveys unto us his own light, in which only we selightPsa. 36. 9. Psa. 118. 27. Iohn 1. 4. 5,
without which we have no divine or heavenly light at all; but are meere darknesse in that respectEph. 5. 8.; even as the soule conveyes life and light unto the body, by means of its unity with it, without which it is nothing but darknesse in it selfe, as appeares in the departure of the soul out of it: For our knowledge of that simplicity and unity that is in God, in poynt of faith, is to know him as hee is made one, Yea of twain makes one new man in himselfe, so making peaceEph. 2. 14, 15, 16.. All other knowledge and profession of the one-nesse that is in God, is no more then the worst of men may attain unto, and abide still in their evill and sinIames 2. 19. 20.. For if we groap after God in any particular out of Christ, then are we out of that way which he hath founded or appoynted, to come unto him, ei∣ther in the theorick or practicall course of Religion or Chri∣stianity: For as he is the Truth and the Life, so is he, and he onely, the way alsoIoh. 14. 6. into the light, knowledge, and bosome of the Father, the power and authority of this Key, or Keyes, (for if we cannot bring it either to be singular or plurall, we know it not, and so can neither open nor shut by it in the things of God. So that his authority in shutting is, to bring eternity into one poynt of time, the Almighty and immense power to become that which is weaknesse in it selfe: for he became death in us, and so subject unto all things, as also, lesse then any thingPhil. 2. 7. Isai. 52. 14. Isai. 53. 8. Psal. 22. 6.: For of such nature is the Being and sub∣sistance of Christ, as to take his Being in that, which of it selfe hath no Being; for the humane Nature subsists not but in the word, such also are his operations and effectuall workings as to raise up his power and authority out of the poore weak∣ling, as the Word is truly rendred.Psal. 41. 1. Blessed is the man that pru∣dently considereth the poore weakling. Such is the time or man∣ner of his life, that he prolongs and preserves it, in that, which in it selfe hath no time nor life at all. Hence it is, that the Angel proclaiming and publishing this oath of interposition, affirmes, That time shall be no moreRev. 10. 6.; that is, no time of the things of manRom. 14. 17. Mat. 22. 29. 30., nor according to the account and reckoning of man, but all things shal be of God in that Kingdom, according to his judgement and account1 Cor. 6. 2. 3. Psal. 8. 9. 14. Rom. 2. 1. 2.. For as the Son of God hath
nothing in account and reckoning in poynt of his death and humiliation, but what he hath in usHeb. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 18.: so also the Sonne of Man hath nothing in account & reckoning, but what is in the divine power and grace of an eternall GodCol. 3. 3. 11. Ephes. 1. 23. Rom. 11. 35. 36.. No time there∣fore in the House and Kingdome of God, according to the creature, which are nothing but vain genealogies, so reckoned & rested in1 Tim. 1. 4. Titus 3. 9.. But according to the account of the Creator, who accounts of things that are not, to bring to nought things that are1 Cor. 1. 28., that is, things that are not in mans (account and esteeme, to bring to nought things that are, the onely excel∣lent and weighty things in his estimation and judgement, ac∣cording to this account and record, We are light in the LordEph. 5. 8., and our life is hid with Christ in GodCol. 3. 3.: so that he is our light and our life; so also our salvation is in him, (or he is our sal∣vation Psal. 68. 18, 19, 30.) and it is onely to be reckoned for ever in him, and not in the creature. Even so is our time also in him, and therefore as wee are light, life, health and salvation in the Lord, and not in our selves, no more then he was death, dark∣nesse, sorrow, sicknesse, destruction, and a curse in himselfeGal. 3. 13., but soly in us; even so also is our time in him, and so is man eternized, and lives for ever, even as certainly as the Sonne of God was made time, and subject to death in us, which in himself, as God; he could not be. Therefore time in the crea∣tures account, is no more in this House and Kingdome, or up∣on that Sea and Land whereupon this Angell standeth, of such closure and shutting is this Key of David, to bring eternity into one point of time, into a moment and twinkling of an eye; for such is the nature of the operation and glory of God, that it composeth it selfe into that, which is as a moment, or twinkling of an eye: For such is man, whose breath is in his Nostrils;  for hee is not a man according to Gods workmanship, but as he sustaines the image of God, and lives the life of the Son of God, which he cannot preserve himselfe in, no not for a momennt of time; but it wholly de∣pends upon God to doe itPsal. 39, 5 Psal. 94. 11. Psal. 49 12. Job. 7. 6., no more then the Sonne of God can be held of death, or be a sinner for a moment of time. The shortnesse of mans life therefore is such, as is the time he can
preserve himself in that life and image wherein he was made, which is no longer then the Sonne of God can permit him∣selfe to be a sinner, which is not for a moment, for he knew no sinne2 Cor, 5. 21.. The change then of the Sonne of God, from sinne unto righteousnesse, and the change of the sonne of perdition from righteousnesse unto sinne, are of like time and eternity, that is, in the twinkling of an eye, it is done; and for eternity it abides and remaines: for the Sonne of God is made sinne, but changed into righteousnesse in the twinkling of an eye; and the sonne of perdition is made righteous, but changed in∣to sinne in a moment, even in the twinkling of an eye: and we know that the time of the twinkling of an eye is such, as the eye never loseth its object. So is the time of the Sonne of God being made sinne, and death, that hee never loseth the fight-and being of righteousnesse and life; and the time of the sonne of perdition being made righteousnesse, is such, as hee never loseth the sight, and being of that man of sin, and death, into such a narrow poynt, (in the power of shut∣ting) doth this Key bring that immense and unfadomed pow∣er and glory of God into, in that way of Christ: for of such nature as this opening and shutting, are all the actions of the Sonne of God; for in him eternity becomes a moment of time: for of further extent then a moment of time, the life and glory of man cannot be extended, and a poynt of time is opened into eternity; and into a narower compasse then that, none can abridge nor contract the Sonne of GodIsai. 9. 6. John 1. 1. 23. Joh. 8. 53. Prov. 8. 22. to 31.. So that as they are actions performed in a creature, they are momen∣tany, transient, and passe away in the twinkling of an eye: But as they have their rice, originall and fountain in the word of God, they are of an eternall vertue, weight and value, and remain and abide for ever. So, that however he tabernacles in time in our nature, yet his time and age abides for everIoh. 1. 14. Heb. 7. 17, 21. Heb. 7. 3. Psal. 102. 11, 12.. For in the one consists the liberty of the creature; and in the o∣ther, the power of God: for in the one, the creature is brought into the state and condition of the Sonne of God, which is its liberty and freedome indeedIoh. 8. 36., in all excellencies whatsoever: and in the other consists the power of God, which is brought
into a particular creature, action and poynt of time, gathering it selfe together into so narrow a compasse in us (which in it self is incomprehēsible) so that it works most effectually, even as the vast beames of the sunne, contracted into one narrow poynt in a Sun-glasse, burnes most fervently, which cannot be seen, felt, or known so, in any other way; so that the true liberty or freedome of Christians, and the powerfull and ef∣fectuall operation of God, are never dis-joyned, separated, dispersed, or scattered the one from the other2 Cor. 3. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 9.. Observe therefore that as these Keyes of the KingdomeMat. 16. 19., or this Key of DavidRev. 3. 7., openeth unto eternity, and also shutteth into one poynt of time:  so also it openeth from the first unto the last, which is the greatest distance that can be, and shutteth in u∣niting the first and the last into one present being, which is the neerest that possibly can beIsai. 44. 6 Isai. 41. 4.. For this wonderfull and speedy change is made in the sound of the last TrumpetRev. 1. 17. 18., which cannot be known but by the first that ever sounded or uttered it selfe, which is an opening unto the utmost distance: For it is the manner of Gods explicating and opening of his Word and Workes, to declare the last things from the begin∣ning, or from the first, or the least things from the chiefest, and things of old, or the most ancient and honourable from things that are not yet done, or in themselves have not any be∣ing Isai. 46. 9. 10., nor are in any account or reckoning with man at all1 Cor. 1. 28.. The first Trumpet then that ever sounded as an Alarum of this change, was this, And hee breathed into his no∣strils the breath of lives; for so the word is plurall, and man became a living soule, or soulie soule; or animall soule or life, that is the Word, Spirit, Breath, Wisedome, or I∣mage of God, became such a thing or nature, that could not support it selfe, as of, or by it selfe, in that image, breath, or life given unto it, no not for a moment, so that if our nature be not animated, quickned, and revived every moment, it is not possible to live that life or breath, which at the first was given unto it. Hence ariseth that sudden change in the twinkling of an eye, both in the way of the sonne of perditi∣on, and also in the way of the Sonne of God. For God and
Man being one, not by any change of nature, or property, that the nature of God becomes the nature of Man, or the nature of man is become the nature of God; nor is the nature of man infinite, omnipotent, or omniscient, or the like, no more then the nature of God can be finit, impotent, or defe∣ctive in the least, for then he were not GodExod. 3. 14 15.. But there is a unity of the two natures in this wonderfull workmanship of Man: so that the Image of God is not, but with respect to the dust, or our nature; nor is the dust, or our nature (in this work) but with respect to the image, breath, or life, and spirit of God. Therefore, it is said of those two (Let Vs make Man)Gen. 1. 26., even as it is said of the Man and the Woman, in the Image of God created hee (Him) singularly, Male and Female, created he (Them) expressing it in the plurall number, and called their name Adam,Gen. 5. 2., they have both one name in that place given unto them, to declare their unity, and are also ex∣pressed by a word plurall, to note the difference in Sex: Even so are these two natures in this wonderfull Composition of God and Man, comprised under this Name, Adam, or the Sonne of God,Luk. 3. 38. So that if wee cannot proceed in the Genealo∣gie of Christ, from Jesus to Adam, in the way of Sonship, and finde all Sons in one Sonship: yea, lengthen it to the ut∣most point of so many Ages, and Generations, as the Spi∣rit of God by Luke doth,Luke 3. 22 to 38., and also bring them into that unity, as to be one; we are unskilfull in the Word of Righte∣ousnesse, Heb. 5: 12, 13 14., for without Adam Jesus is not, for hee saves by his death,Heb. 2. 14 Heb, 9. 22., but no death can be found, for the Son of God, but in us, or in our nature, in that way of Adam: So that the sinne of Man doth not onely give denomination, but being, and demension, unto the death of the Son of God,Mat. 8. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Isa 53. 4, 5, 6., for the wisdome of God knowes how to bring glory out of shame, and unity out of that vast distance, that is (in na∣ture) betweene God and Man, which is no lesse then sinne and righteousnesse, each in the abstract; even as the Serpent knew, or knowes, how to bring shame out of that glory, and that vast distance between God and Man (which sinne hath made) out of that unity that was in that first act of
Creation: So that all are made Sons in one Sonship, if they be Sons of God, even as all the Elect are chosen, or choice ones, in that one only Elect, and choice one of God,Isa 42. 1. Mat. 3. 17., our Apo∣stle sounding that first, yea, and last Trumpet also,1 Thes. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. saith, the first Man Adam was made a living soule;  and the last Man Adam was made a quickning Spirit. Hee doth not onely here extend his speech from the first Man that was made unto Christ, borne of the Virgin; but he also unites, contracts, and compleates Christ in each of them: otherwise, the Trumpet gives an uncertain sound, and then who can prepare himselfe to the Battell,1 Cor. 14. 7, 8.q, and who dares to handle the Trumpe of God, to give a false alarum: his meaning then is, by the first Man Adam; that is, the first, the chiefe, the most excellent, that ever was; for the Word sometimes given for Man, signifies Nobility, or Digni∣tie. So that he meanes, the chiefest; yea, the beginning and author of all things, is made, and becomes a Creature; yea, is made a souly Soul, or annimall life, such a thing as cannot live; that proper life that is given unto it, for a moment, but as it is animated, enlightned, and inlivened, by him that is the Creatour: yea, light, and life it self: for the proper life of Man,Acts. 17. 25, 26, 27, 28. is the life of the Son of God,Gal. 2. 20. Col. 3. 3, 4., to live after the Spirit: For to live to the flesh, or to be carnally minded about the things of God, is death,Rom. 8. 6., as all men by nature are, and in the sound of this first trumpet, is the death of Christ complea∣ted, in that the wisdome or word of God, that makes all things, is made that, which by nature is such a thing as man is in himself, which is altogether vanity,Phil. 2. 7. 8 Psalm. 39. 5. Psalm. 22. 6. And therefore the sound of the least Trumpet saith, the last man Adam was made or is made a quickening Spirit (that is,) that which is least, the last or lowest of all things, as man by nature is, that cannot preserve himselfe as of himselfe, in the life of the Spirit, or breath of the Almighty for a moment, this is made a quickening or a livemaking Spirit, yea is made a Spirit that gives life, or makes alive othersPsal. 39. 5., and in this is the life of the Lord Jesus compleated, so that however he
sustaine a nature, that by nature is subject to that infirmity that no other Creature is, or can bee, and so is called the last, or the least man, that is the basest man (as the word given for man sometimes signifies base or sorry man, as is before noted) yet this is made such in the word of God as gives life, yea is the very Fountaine of life to othersPsal. 36. 9 68, 26 Rev. 1. 11. 17. and 2. 8. Mat. 11. 11,; thus like un∣to the key of David, is the Trumpet of the campe of God, which sounds so shrill to reach from the first unto the last, from the greatest to the least in this Host of Israel, and yet, collects and summons both into one body, or being, and per∣fecteth one, in, and by another, that death and life are of like length and latitude; for if the Host of Israel have not al∣wayes the slain before him,Exod. 14. 30, 31. Exod. 15. 1. 10, 21., he cannot alwayes tryumph, as in the only day of victory: But if this Key of David bee mistaken in its office, or the sellerity of this charge, upon the sound of the trumpet, not understood in the roote, then doe men groape for the doore of Lot,Gen. 19. 11. Gen. 19. 4 10. 9. (in going about to open the Scriptures, with like corrupt and carnall mindes, as the men of Sodome had) but find it not; but rather climbe up to the window, to rob and steale in the house of God,Iohn 9. 10, that is to gaine some glory, excellency, or profit unto themselves in their exercises and give, not unto that one and alone shepheard and Feeder of Israel,Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 3. Gen. 49. 24., the whole glory and praise of all things in the house, which of right belongs and appertaines unto him alone,Psal. 115. 1. 2 Cor. 4. 7., and also in sounding of the trumpet, they can∣not avoid to give a false alarum unto the Campe of God,Rev. 1. 11. Reve. 22. 13., if it extend not from the first unto the last, from the front, even unto the reare of Israel, and in each of them, bring both into one individuall subsistance or being, in such sort; that it is more possible to divide the least thing; yea,a more in the Sun; than to separate or divide these twaine, the one from the other, no more then Christ can be divided, in, or separa∣ted from himself,1 Cor. 1. 13 2 Tim. 2. 13 Psalm. 139. 7. to 13.. For he is both the one, and the other, that alpha, and that omega, that first, and that last,Rev. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 47.. Therefore, saith our Apostle, the first, or the chiefest (as the word is) is of the earth earthie; that is, becomes the basest in us, and so hee unites both in one, and the second, or the last, or lowest (as the
word will beare) which is this Earth, is the Lord from Hea∣ven; that is, is made the chiefe, supreame, and ruler over all, and so in that also, unites them in one againe,Ephes. 2. 13, 14, 15: yea, ob∣serve this, that, that which is first, or chiefe, is not spirituall, but naturall (that is) the Son of God, as he is God, is not made spiritual (for so he is in himselfe, from everlasting) but natu∣rall, or that which in it selfe is corruptible, by taking our in∣firmities, which are reckoned and accounted onely upon that first and chiefest one (or being) then afterward (as our Apostle saith1 Cor. 15. 46. Ephes. 3. 7. Ephes. 4. 16., or that which followeth, and inevitably succee∣deth hereupon) that which is spirituall, that is, the spirit and power of God is reckoned upon, and becomes one with our nature; and so we that are naturall and corruptible in our selves, in him are made life, spirit, and power, in all Christian operations,Ephes. 2. 1 Col. 2. 13. Phil. 4. 12, 13 1 Thes. 2. 13.. And hence it is, that there are celestiall bodies, or in the singular number (as the word will also beare) a celestiall body,1 Cor. 15. 40., and a body terrestriall, yet these two are one, there is a celestiall body, as our nature is made one with the word of God, and there is a terrestriall body, as the word was made flesh, and tabernacles in us, or in our nature,Iohn 1. 14.. Yet the glory of the celestiall is one, and the glory of the terrestriall is ano∣ther, 1 Cor. 15. 40.; that is, the glory of the celestiall, is the glory of the resurrection of Christ, and the glory of the terrestriall is the glory of the humiliation of Christ; and these cannot bee de∣vided, for they are one: for Christ was ever dead unto sinne; never living unto the lust of the flesh, and is ever alive unto the spirit, and alwayes lives unto the motion and operation thereof,1 Cor. 15. 35, 36 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. Rom. 6. 11. Rev. 1. 18. Rev. 2. 8.: So that the life and death of Jesus Christ, must in the root and Rice of things, of necessity be one intire act, as our Apostle concludes them, when he declares what that glorious end of this unity is; namely, That the Sonne of God, may live unto the Father, through that death that is naturally in us; and that we may dye unto our selves through that life that is naturally in the Sonne of God,Rom. 6. 11 Gal. 2. 20. Col. 3. 3, 4; by which life power and authority is given unto the Sonne, to over∣come and destroy all enemies,1 Cor. 15. 24, 25., being hee hath the power and authority of him, that puts them under his feet,1 Cor. 15. 27., and by
which death unto the flesh, in all the desires thereof, he sub∣mits unto the Father, as he is Man, and yeelds over all power and authority to be of him, and to rise and spring out of that nature, which is of God; that so God may be all in all,1 Cor. 12. 6 Ephes. 1. 23, and man silenced from boasting, or ascribing any power or au∣thority, or any of that great worke unto himself for ever,1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31. 2 Cor. 10. 17, 18, Ier. 9. 23. 24., as he is man; nor can he ever desire it, no more then he can admit of any (the least) cessation, authority, operation, and power, as he is God,1 Tim. 1. 17. Isa 52. 7. Rev. 19. 6.. Therfore, the Apostle presently addes, else what should they doe;1 Cor. 15. 29. or else what should he doe (as the word will also bear) for such as the root is, such are the bran∣ches; that is, such as one is, so are many,w Therefore, the rea∣ding may be either singular or plurall) that is baptized, for, or with death,Rom. 11. 16.. If that death be not the resurrection, how can he at all be baptized for, or drenched with, or plunged in death.1 Cor, 15. 29. If that death should not be the resurrection, from the dead; then should the life of the Sonne of God be extinct for some time; for now is Christ dead, and risen a∣gaine, Rom. 8. 33 34. Revel. 2. 8. and if these two should not be in one act, and point of time, there should be some time of ceslation of the life of the Sonne of God, which the thought of man may not per∣mit for a moment,z Luke 12. 50, Mark 10. 38, 39. that he should cease, in whom all things are and do consist,Col. 16. 17.. So that as the Sonne of God becomes death in Man, the Sonne of Man becomes life in God, in the very same act, and the one and the other is the compleating of Christ,Col. 2. 10. Col. 4. 12., who cannot be the annointed, but as he sustaines both natures; therefore the death is the resurrection, of such scope is that place of the Apostle; and of such force the argument there used: however the words differ in the translation, for more ease in reading: therefore he addes, and wherefore are we in jeopardy every houre, or every moment, as the word signifies,1 Cor. 15. 30., that is, why do you think (for I ap∣peale to your Conscience) wee should give up our selves to all dangers, perills, losses; yea, and to death every moment, and not evade, and wave those things, as the men of the world doe, if we found not safety strength, and stability in them: yea, if this death were not life it self unto us: For, by
how much the more our jeopardies are doubled and re∣doubled, even so is our life augmented or multiplyed in the severall motions, operations, and out-goings thereof: and this the Apostle confirmes by that great affirmation, or asse∣veration, protest by your rejoycing which I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dye daily1 Cor. 15. 31, which affirmation hath the forme of an oath, in declaring, that as death hath the resurrection in it, or is the resurrection it self; even so also, the resurrecti∣on, the dominion or Lordship of Christ hath death in it, or is death it self, and is in substance, this oath of interposition proclaimed in the name of the Lord, shewing the same neces∣sity and infallibillity of the unity and one-nesse of the Saints of God in Christ, in respect of every particular Saint, (or sonne in whom the seed of life and immortallity is expressed) 1 Ioh. 5. 18. 1 Iohn 3 9. 1 Iohn 2. 29. Iames 1. 18. as it doth of the unity of that common nature, or condition of man with the word of God, whereof by nature they are all alike partakers: for the Word of God cannot unite it selfe to a part of mans nature or condition, whereinto man is plunged, no more then our nature in Christ can bee united unto a part of the word, or a part of the condition and state of the Sonne of God, and not to the whole; which in∣deed were to divide Christ. For the humiliation of the Sonne of God is of an infinite extent, & therefore may not, nor can be abridged in point of descension of any misery or wretchednes, the nature of man (in the utmost extent) was ever subjected unto. Therefore it is sayd, He was heard in that which he fearedHeb. 5. 7.. The word in our translation rendred feare, signifies such a fear as is to utter despaire, which indeed is the very state of the damned; therefore his descension was to the lowest and ut∣termost parts of anguish and misery, or else could not his as∣cension be to the sitting on the right hand of the powerMarke 14. 62. Mat. 26. 64. Heb. 1, 3., or to the highest perfection of the glory and majesty of Godh But as in being made sin, he for ever destroyed sin2 Cor. 5. 21, and brought in an everlasting righteousnesse into our natureDan. 9. 24., so in becoming that which was the very condition of the damnedHeb. 5. 7. Psal. 16. 10. Psal. 116. 3., hee for ever destroyed and brought to nought, death and condemna∣tion,
and established victory, prowish and courage in all his Saints everlastingly1 Cor. 15. 54. to 58.. So then this oath brings in the unity of every particular and distinct Saint, or sonne of GodPsal. 89. 35, 36. Psal. 132. 11 12. Iohn 17. 20. 21, 22, 23., or first borne in the Kingdome of heaven, every one in that house or family being a first born in Christ; For he is the first born among, or in many brethren, or (as the word will beare) in all brethrenRom. 8. 29.; or in every particular brother, which in the house of Israel after the flesh, can no wayes be admitted, but makes a confusion in the whole house, and in the mind of every naturall manActs 7. 35. Luke 9. 46. 47, 48. Mark. 11. 27. 28. Mat. 21. 23. Iohn 9. 28. 29 Gen. 19 9., yet in this house of God, they are all first bornes, heires, yea, co-heires with ChristRom. 8. 17.; yet every one distinct and compleat in himselfe, though not one divided from another: For Paul is not Apollo, nor Apollo, Cephas, nor is any of them Christ, no more then in the three witnesses in heaven, it cannot be said the Father is the Word; or the Word is the holy Ghost, yet these three are one; nor can it be sayd of the three witnesses on earth1 Iohn 5. 7. 8., that the Water is the Blood, or the Blood the Spirit, yet these three are one; for so the word will beare (and is in some of our translations) as well as agree in one, and so it is truly to be understood, else we wander from the scope and sense of that place, and it is not known unto us. But let us remember this, for the clearing of that is said of late, that how∣ever the Word of God unites it selfe to the whole nature, state, or condition of man; so that the whole and compleat nature in all poynts, and in all respects is perfected, sanctified and saved, else the salvation of our Lord Christ, were not fullHeb. 7. 25. Psal. 130. 7. 8., nor could the Sonne of God be found a compleat Sa∣viour, lik unto himselfe (who is fulnesse it self) to save them from all sin and wretchednesse whatsoeverPsal. 34. 18. 19, 20. Col. 1. 13. 14.; yet notwithstan∣ding it followes not, that every particular and distinct per∣son, (to speak after the manner of men) must then be saved; no more then it can be sayd, that in regard the nature of man fell from the perfect and compleat image, wisdome, grace and favour of God, and so from all the holinesse and perfecti∣on of Godu, that therefore every particular and distinct creature, that hath alike share in this Apostasiex, must
for ever be excluded and debarred from the presence and per∣fections of that nature,u Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. Rom. 3. 10, 11. 12, Psal. 14. 1. 2. 3. Rom. 3. 23. from which he hath made such a defe∣ction;x Eph. 2. 3. (and yet) the whole nature of man in all poynts and tearmes of relation, states and conditions whatsoever, is con∣demned, perisheth, and comes to utter perdition for ever. For there is as truly a whole world of that wicked one, as the word is truly read1 Iohn 5. 19., as there is a world of the elect and chosen of GodIohn 1. 29. Mark 10. 30.: Therefore it is, that the Apostle brings in worlds in the plurall numberHeb. 1. 2.. Otherwise the state of destru∣ction and death, could not be full, to stand in direct oppositi∣on diameter-wise, in tearmes of antipothy, to the Sonne and salvation of God for ever:  For there is a fulnesse of the sinnes of the AmoritesGen. 15. 16, as well as of the righteousnesse that is of the Israel of GodEph. 1. 22. 23. Gal. 6. 16.: In the one is the mystery of God manife∣sted in the flesh1 Tim. 3.  16., but never lived unto, or after the flesh, but after the Spirit, which is life and peaceRom. 8. 1. 2. 6., and in the other is the mystery of iniquity manifest in the Spirit, or through that spirituall estate wherein man at the first was madeGen. 1. 27. Eccles. 7. 29., and yet never lived unto the spirit, but unto the flesh, which if a man doth he dyes for everRom. 8. 6. Gen. 2. 17., if we be ignorant of the nature, rice, and manner of workings of these two, we are unskilfull in the weights and measures of the Sanctuary, and whatsoever we speake from the word of God, we can∣not give it its due weight, nor set it upon its right Base, or proper principle, and so at the last shall be weighed in the Ballance our selves, and be found too light in our doctrine and whole course of lifeDan. 5. 27. Ier. 10. 8 Math. t. 15. 7, 8, 9.. But our Apostle, yea our great Apostle, by the mouth of Paul, concludes the distinct and particular Saints in one; and that upon this point of joy and tryumph (as the word sig∣nifies) 1 Cor. 15. 31., saying, by your rejoycing, speaking as to all the Saints (which I have) speaking as of one, or, by our joy, that I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, implying that the joy, or try∣umph of all the Saints, is the joy and tryumph of one; and rhe joy and tryumph of one, is the very rejoycing and try∣umph of all: otherwise, it could not spring out of one Saint, or holy one of Israel, and defuse it selfe into all the Saints of
God, nor could it in all the Saints of God gather and con∣tract it selfe in one Lord Jesus. So that Christ is not only all, but he is all in all,1 Cor. 12. 6 1 Cor. 15. 28., and therefore, is both the branch, yea, and root of David also,Revel. 22. 16., So that the victory, joy and tryumph of one, is the victory joy and tryumph of all; and the victory, joy, and tryumph of all, is the victory, joy, and tryumph of every one, and they can no more be without the rejoycing and tryumph of one another (in regard of the nature and manner of this victory and Lordship in Christ) then the Sonne of God could bee without the infirmities of us all, in becoming our salvati∣on Esa. 53. 6 11. Mat. 1. 21.; for as he was a man of sorrowes, and acquainted with griefe, by all the infirmities that are naturally in us, so are we Saints, or men of God, rejoycing and triumphing in, and by all those excellencies, and vertues that are in him1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26, 27. Phil. 2. 17. 18. 1 Thes. 2. 19. 20., and hence he urgeth that argument, that the resurrection is death, to show that our nature never departs from the word of God, in any condition, no not for a moment, for by, or in this mutuall rejoycing (victory triumph, yea digni∣ty authority and dominion) we have in our Lord, I dye daily, or we dye daily,1 Cor. 15. 31. that is, this our Lordship and triumph in Christ, is a continued act of death in us, unto all servile, feare, base, flattery, or slavish subjection, even in the midst of the corrupt wills, caridges, courses, and behaviours of men in this world, the victory, and triumph of our Lord∣ship by Christ, is a continued act of death in us unto them all, so that the afflictions of this present timeRom. 8. 18., can∣not take hold on us, to make us lament, and bewaile, as a people miserable indeed (though in the eye of the world we appeare so) no more then perills, dangers, and feares, can take hold of a dead man, such is our condition with respect unto the troubles, and molestations of this life, by vertue of that rejoycing triumph, and lordly Authority, we have in our Lord Christ, which the Apostle bindes up∣on himselfe, together with all the Saints in Christ, upon no weaker ground nor lesse certainty, then the verity, and au∣thority of an oath, yea the vertue of this oath of interposi∣tion,
binding the things of God over unto man, and the things of man, over unto God in Christ, in which holy tie it runnes through the whole Scriptures. Nor is this Priestly Office, a any time, or in any Mini∣stry exercised, but under the authority, and by vertue of the instalment of this oath; for if we be not consecrated hereby p, our hands are never filled as Priests of the most high God, to serve at that Alter whereunto they have no right, that serve in the way of an earthly TabernacleHeb. 7. 12. to 25.; for none can speake as the oracle, or word of God, in the Courts of the Lords houseHeb. 7. 1. Heb. 13. 10., but onely such as give evidence and beare witnesse, in matters that concerne the right or∣dering & Government therof, for the honour of their Lord, but under the power, and upon the certainty of this oath; for that which was from the begining which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, & our hands have handled of the word of life1 Pet. 4. 11 Psal. 116. 18. 19. Psal. 135. 1, 2, 3., such things, and upon grounds of no lesse certainty, are the witnesses of Jesus Christ, to speake in the audience of such, as waite and attend in the house of the Lord, or at the gates of wisdome1 Iohn 1. 1, 2, 3.; for no Scripture is of any private interpretation,  but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy GhostPsal. 123. 1. 2. Psal. 130. 5, 6, 7. Prov. 5. 1. Prov. 7. 24. Prov. 8. 33. 34., so that by the same spirit (and therefore upon like certainty) that the word was spoken from the begining, it is also to be interpreted, and opened for ever, for prophesies of old, or prophesies (at any time) as the word will beare, and may be read, came not by the will of man; for the will of man is a private spirit, yea if all the men in the world should con∣sent and agree in one thing, it were a private spirit, in case they spoke not by the Spirit of God; for the spirit of man, (and so by the Law of nature corrupted; the spirit of all men) ever aimes at it selfe,2 Pet. 1. 20. 21. in all its Councells and acti∣ons Phil. 2. 21 Psal. 4. 6., and therefore a private spirit, though trained up in the greatest schoole the world affords, or furnished with the greatest consent of library, but the spirit of God ever aimes at, and propounds another, in all its Councels and consultations, therefore it is a publike spirit, though in one
holy man of God, else had the Sonne of God never appea∣red in our nature, if he had not propounded the good of anotherIohn 17. 19. Iohn 10. 1 Rom. 5. 6 to 10., nor could we ever give glory to God in all things if the spirit it selfe helped not our infirmitiesRom. 8. 26. Ephes. 5. 18. 19. 20.; who onely inables us thereunto, and by vertue of that we pro∣pound the honour of our Lord, and not our selves in all our Councells and wayes1 Cor. 10. 31. Col. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 24, and therein have a publick spirit, and all other spirits, are private self-seekers, and not inter∣preters of the word of God at allIohn 2. 16, 2 Pet. 2. 3. 2 Cor. 11. 13 2 Cor. 4. 2. Mat. 23. 13, 14, 15. 2 Cor. 2. 17.; But we see upon what termes of certainty, the Apostle affirmes this, that in the true way of the Gospel, life is a continued act of death, in that authority, and Lordship we have in Christ, we dye unto that basenesse and subjection that naturally is in every man, whether it appeare in tirannicall rule, or de∣jected slavery, all is but the same spirit, namely a living unto the lusts of the flesh, for there is the same spirit in that which the woman saith in the beginning, (we must not eate least we dye) that there is in that which the Serpent saith,  (if ye eate ye shall be as Gods) they both use the word of truth, but in a false sence, and so turne it into alye unto themselves, the one in way of false feare, the other in way of false courage and confidenceGen. 3. 3, 4, 5., even as Sathan used the words of Truth, in tempting of Christ but in a false senceMat. 4. 6., as our Saviour well perceived, although it con∣sist not in the altering of some phrases; in the places al∣leiged, as the world, vainly thinks, for there is no Scrip∣ture uttered, that is brought in againe by the spirit of God, upon any occasion that is alledged precisely in the same termes, phrases, or circumstances, that it was before. But Sathans falsity stands in this, that he takes these words, ye shall be like unto God, in a wrong senceGen. 3. 5., or this word (to live) and the womans falsity stands in this, that she takes dying in a wrong sense, and so the one, and the other, become evill, and are expressions, which are inclu∣ded in the way of the falle, and the way of the falle in them; for Sathan is a lyer from the beginning, and the Fa∣ther thereofIoh. 8. 44.; For it is possible, to eat of, or communicate
in; that Tree in the midst of the garden, and live for everGen. 3. 22. 23., and also to eat of, and communicate in that Tree in the midst of the Garden, and dye for everGen. 2. 17.; yea death and life are in the one, and in the other; yet in the one, life onely appeares, and no death at all; for they are both said to be in the midst of the GardenRevel. 22. 2, 3, 4., which must be made good precisely according to the Truth of that unerring rule, of Gods circumference and senter, not to faile, so much as in a tittle, in the one, or in the other, and therefore must teach us one, and the same thing, which is, the true state of mankind represented unto us therein, according to that glorious device of Gods workmanship, who is the very midst hart, spirit, or life of all his workes, who was made as a Tree of righteousnesseGen. 2 9., consisting of roote and branch, even as that Sonne of David dothPsal. 1. 3. Esa. 61. 3., whom he taught, and represented unto us; a roote, as he is the Image of GodRevel. 22 16. Gen. 1. 27., who is the Fountaine of all things, and so gives being unto the man, as the roote gives being unto the Tree, he is also a branch as he is made of the dust of the earthGen. 2. 7., and so springs up into the glory of God2 Cor. 3. 18., to communicate therefore in this worke, or to eat of this Tree according to the mind and wisdome of God, is to be dead unto the flesh, but alive unto God, which is life indeed, and abides for ever in them, that eat of that Tree of life in the midst of the Paradice of God,Revel. 2. 7. that is, to conclude the one, and the other, to be as really present, as they are to come, and to be in present, being, and use, as they shall for ever be, as a living Fountaine, still to spring up in us, and to usIohn 4. 14., which is nothing else, but to be∣lieve the record that God hath given unto us of his Sonne1 Iohn 5. 10. 11., and put our seale unto it that he is come, and to communicate in the work of God, or eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, as it is the Tree of the knowledge of good and e∣vill, or acknowledgment of pleasing, and displeasing, (as the word signifies) is to communicate in it, according to the will of the flesh, or the wisdome, and reasonings, of a Creature, seene in the minde of the woman, and spirit of
the Serpent, which is to turre the glory of God into shime,Psal. 4. 2. Psal. 106. 20. the truth of God into a lye,Rom. 1. 25.. Concluding, that wee are not so yet, as God hath said we are, in regard of our life in him. But if we eate in a pleasing or good way, we shall be such as he hath said, and also that we are not so bad, in respect of death, or in being base and vile in our selves, as hee hath said. But if we eate (exercise or communicate) in displeasing or bad wayes; we shall be,Gen. 3. 3.: the one of these hath beere the way of unbeliefe, a lye, and falling away from God in Christ; from the beginning, even untill now: and the o∣ther is the way of faith, truth, and life, uniting us unto God, in that way of Jesus Christ even untill now. The world hath still something to eate, to please, or dis∣please God, before it enjoy, or be possessed, either with life, or death (according to the word and speech of God;) that is, it hath still some Fast to keepe, some Sabbath to sanctifie, some Sermon to preach or here, some Battell to fight, some Church to constitute, some Officers to raise up, or Orders to reforme and re-edifie, before it can take God upon his word, that we are compleate in Christ,Col. 2. 10. Ephes. 5. 27.. And if it will eate of none of these, yet it must comunicate with time; that is, yet some more time, and reformation will be made; yet some more time and the state will alter; yet some more time, and Jewes and Gentiles will be called; yet some more time, and Antichrist will be overthrown; yet some more time, and then Christ will come to raigne upon the Earth for a thousand yeares; yet some time must be eaten up, ei∣ther in way of pleasing or displeasing of God, and then na∣turall death will either put us into life, or death eternall: this hath been the way of the fall, and drawing backe of the soule from God unto pardition,Heb. 10. 39., from the beginning to this day, in all those in whom God takes no pleasureHeb. 10. 38., even as the other is the way of Faith comming unto God; and being made one with him, in all those, in whom his soule delighteth, 4 Esa. 2. 1., as in his Elect, or choice Ones; the one hath life and death
in it: In such sort, as they are both considered in the Son of God. And therefore the glory of them both, is given to him a∣lone. Rom. 8. 33. 34., and in that death is swallowed up in victory,1 Cor. 15. 54., so as nothing but life and peace appeares,1 Cor. 15. 57. 1 Iohn 5. 4, 5.: the other hath life and death in it, as considered in the sonne of perdition, who will needes have them in himself; and therefore must needs expect them in a humane, or conjectured way, where there is no life nor spirit of God at all, but only a living unto the flesh; which is nothing else at all but only death,Rom. 8. 13, and as these two trees declare unto us one estate that man is made in, and yet issues out into such differing, and distant opera∣tions: So this state of God and Man being made one, de∣clares also our first Parents what they are, in respect of spi∣rituall and mysticall operations in the world, even as the Man and the Woman (who were one at the first)Gen. 2. 20, 21, 22., are the originall and fountaine of all naturall Birthes and Posteri∣ties in the world. For out of this condition of Man, being made in the Image of God, judged of, embraced, and acknowledged; according to the spirit and wisdome of God, proceeds the Generati∣on and Off-spring of the Sonne of God,Gen. 3. 15. Acts 17. 28. Esa. 53. 10., who is God o∣ver all blessed, for ever, Amen,Rom. 9. 5 or so be it (as the word imports) or so it shall be, having the vertue of this oath of in∣terposission in it, that ever concludes vpon tearmes of cer∣tainty and present being. For, according to the judgment or wisdome of God, it cannot be otherwise in him. So also out of the same composition or condition judged of, looked upon, and acknowledged, according to the wise∣dome, reasoning,  and conjectures of a Creature, which is found also in this composition,Gen. 2. 7. as truly, as is the Image and wisdome of God. Out of this doth also arise that Man of sinne, and Sonne of perdition, that Antichrist whom God destroyes with the breath of his mouth, and abolisheth with the brightnesse of his comming, 2 Thes. 2. 3. 8. and as surely as that wicked Caine, and righteous Abel
came of the Man and the Woman, who were at the first made good; yea, vehemently good;Gen. 1. 31.: So also, doe these contrary (though both mysticall and spirituall Generati∣ons) spring out of that composition, and wonderful work∣manship of God: And if we understand not our first Parents, according to the bringing forth of these severall and contrary Seedes, of Posterities (namely) the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent,Gen. 3. 15 3. Iude 10 as well as we understand them; namely, the Man and the Woman, to be the first originall of our natu∣rall being, wee understand and them to  fruit, nor profit at all; but rather like bruit beasts made to be taken and destroy∣ed, for ever2. Pet. 2. 12.. For there is a being under the Oath of the Curse of that Man of sinne, 2 Thes. 2. 3. Psal. 119. 21. Dewt. 27. 15., as well as a being, in, or under the Oath of the blessing of that Melchiadeck,Gen. 14. 18, 19, 20 Heb. 7. 21., under which; the resurrection and death are the same act or thing. And so it is in the way of sinne and the curse, the resurrection or lift∣ing up of the flesh,2 Pet. 2. 10. Rom. 8 13. Col. 2. 18., is the death of the Spirit, the ope∣ration and raising of wrath, is the cessation and disanulling of peace for ever. And this great distance and contrariety comes to passe by that differing light, which one, and the same thing is be∣held and looked upon withall: the one sees by the light, and revelation of the Spirit, * according to that wisdome that is in the Son of God. And therefore reasons or argues not, nor concludeth upon any thing, but as it is congruous, and stands with the pre∣sent subsistance, and being, power, work, authority, wisdom, honour, and peace of the Son of God: for that which i no wayes inferiour unto God, is in the Lord Jesus Christ; yea, he is God, blessed for ever,Ephes. 1. 17. Heb. 11. 1. Rom. 9. 5. Iohn. 1. 14. Revel. 22. 13. and that beares sway, and pre∣vailes in a Christian, in all his actions and consultations; and that not without respect unto humane frailty, and in∣firmity: So also the other lookes upon the same thing, and sees by the light of a Creature, according to humane reason are, science, edicts, and abilities acquited, and gamed by the
power of nature, and therefore argueth, concludeth, en∣terpriseth, and undertaketh nothing, but according to the instinct, reason, authority, and abillity, of a momentany vaine, and changeable Creature, that cannot promise it selfe, to be the next moment, that which it is at presentProv. 27. 1. Iames 4. 13, 14, 15, 16., and that with respect unto an eternall and infinite God, and therefore ingenders wrath, in that it can never judge it selfe to be equall, agreeable, correspondant, or sutable unto him in any thingEsa. 55. 8. 9. Esa. 46. 5. 6. Ezek. 18. 25, but fales short and is contrary to him in all thingsLevit. 26. 40. 41. Gal. 5. 17. Rom. 8. 7., and from that, the motions of the flesh, bea∣ring, sway in him, he terrifies and destroyes himselfe, yea becomes an adversary unto himselfe, seeking all advanta∣ges from that holinesse, righteousnesse, power, Truth, and ju∣stice, that it in God, to torment, disquiet, and vex himselfe; therefore the word in the Hebrew, somtimes translated DivellDeut. 32. 17, is Seighnirim, that is, roughnesse, or horrour, and feare, and in the Caldean tongue, Shedin, that is a destroyer, such is man unto himselfe, in his own proper light and abi∣lity, in all that he can attaine unto, as he is simply a Crea∣ture, Iob. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 19 and therefore it is said of Israel, thy destruction is of thy selfeHos. 13. 9., and whosoever he is, that ascribes any thing unto God, as being a cause of sin, or of the distruction of the Creature, he also ascribes somthing unto man, as a cause of righteousnesse and salvation, and so gives somwhat, into the hands of flesh to boastIob. 24. to 28. 1 Cor. 1. 29., which is not onely deragatory, but also contradictory unto the faith of Gods ElectEphes. 2. 8, 9, 10. Rom. 11. 5, 6, 7.: Note here that wide difference that is between the oath of the blessing, which is this oath of interposition, binding over, and uniting together in one, God and man, in that way of Christ, so that humane nature is a party in this oath or Covenant; for it must concerne more then one, or else it cannot be taken or made; for a contract cannot be of one, but it makes one, so that here is two natures in one subsistance or being, and yet notwithstanding the compleat power of the oath, and the whole mannaging of the work, depends solely upon the divine nature; for the humanity can no more be any concurrant cause herein, then the earth
at the first could rise up to heaven, and put upon, and cloath it selfe with the Image of God, and make it selfe higher then the Heavens,Gen. 2. 7. Heb. 7. 26. which we know by its own naturall pro∣pensity, it hasts from it, as forcibly and as farre as possible it can, pressing unto the Center, to make it selfe at the ut∣most distance, from all points of the heavens that may be attained, nay it cannot be any cause of this Contract and a∣greement, no more then the womb of a silly virgin, in time; could fetch downe the word of eternity, and frame, or make in her selfe, that which is the maker and framer of her, and of all CreaturesJohn 2. 3. Col. 1. 16., even so the oath of the cursse, is that great divorse and separation of God and man, to that infinite distance from, and opposition against one ano∣ther, to stand upon termes of wrath, emnity, and irreconsi∣liation for ever. Therefore he saith to those Rebels, that put off the rest from themselves in the wildernesse, judging God to be one in Canaan, and another in the wildernesse, even as all those do, that think the glory can never appeare till the woman come out of the Wildernesse, unto whom he sware, yea still, as a continued act sweares, in his wrath if he shall enter into my restPsa. 95. 11 Heb. 43., a short phrase, if they shall enter into my rest; signifying then will I cease to be God, laying an utter impossibility upon it, and in this devorse, emnity and wrath, the divine power is a party; for it is God and man, that are separated, and stand upon termes of discord for e∣ver, and yet it is as impossible that God should be any cause of this emnity and wrath, as a Fountaine, from whence it flowes, or proper subject wherein it consists, or subsists, as it is impossible for God to remove himselfe from his worke, and not to be omnipresent with it1 Kings 8. 27. Ier. 12. 2. Psal. 139. 7. 10 12., or to be wrath with, or hate his own workmanship & device, when he had made all things very good,Gen. 1, 31 or vehemently good, as the word signifies, for the Creation of man in the Image of goodnesse,Mat. 19. 17. as also his restoration in the same ingraven form of his subsistance,Heb. 1. 3. is a work vehemently good, or goodnesse in the utmost extent and most forcible
height of excellency that ever was, and wee look not upon the works of God with a spirituall eye, or light, no further then we know how to center them all in Jesus Christ, and know how all things are made, reconciled together, and brought into one in him,Col. 1. 19. 20. things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earthPhil. 2. 10.. Therefore utterly impossible, that God should be wrath with, or hate so glorious a worke, so that however it is true, and undenyable, that God is a party in this breach, or devorse, yet it is as true, that the whole worke, or ra∣ther the nullity of the work; for God is the maker of all things, but anihilates nothing, nor can this breach or de∣vorse, be called a work, in any other sense, but onely a work of darknesse, which cannot come to the light, or spring out of lightIoh. 3. 20. 1 Iohn 3. 5. John 8. 12., nor can that which is light it selfe have any such operation. Therefore how ever God is a party in the breach, yet the whole disolving of the Contract, in gendring of wrath and exercise of emnity, ariseth onely out of the nature of man, as the proper root, cause, and fountain thereof, looking after, and judging of the things of God, according to the di∣ctate, argumentation, and consultation of the light and spirit of a creature, which in it selfe is good; but the more curi∣ously and diligently it searcheth after the Creator by its own light, the more difference it finds, and the greater distance & disproportion, between it selfe, and that infinite and bles∣sed Being of the CreatorGen. 3. 6. to 10.; and is so farre from ability and skill to make it selfe one with, and correspondent unto him in all things, that he thereby ingenders wrath, breeds emni∣ty, and makes a greater discord betwixt himselfe and his MakerGal. 4. 24. 25., drawing out and enlarging the bounds, or rather boundlesse estate of his destruction and misery, according to that unfadomed and illimited nature of the Creator, both in point of weight and durationIsai. 5. 14. Iob. 6. 2. 3. Gen. 4. 13. 14. Iob, 4. 19. 20. Iob. 14. 19. 20 Deut. 23. 2. 3, as also the various & change∣able operation, and executions thereof, according to that ma∣nifest, Truth, Holinesse, Justice, and Equity that is in God, and must of necessity work towards his Creator, through
the wisdome of the flesh, to his downfall and ruine, by rea∣son of that first act of his Being, and of that first form given unto him in his creation, even as the Spirit of Christ must of necessity work towards, or in and by the infirmities of man, through the wisdome of the Father, in that advance∣ment of himself in the Kingdom of GodHeb. 2. 9. to 15. Heb. 2. 7. 8; and if the Lord do not open our eyes, to see into the nature of this oath, in the confirmation and certainty of it in the elect, by Jesus Christ, as also in the disanulling and breach of it in the wicked, through that way of Antichrist; wee cannot have sound knowledge in the word of God: but our reasonings, con∣sultations, and conclusions thereabout, and therefrom, are meerely of, and from man, and not of, and from the Spirit of God; And it is handled by us as the word of Man, and not as it is indeed the the word of that ever-living & ever-being God1 Thess. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 2. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 2.. And wheras in any thing; men have learned by the tradition of their Fathers, things that the wisdome of a creature rea∣cheth not; as, the incarnation of the Sonne of God, that he that is God should be made a creature; or that the creature should be made that which is God; or that one should bee made righteous, to hold weight in the sight of God, by that which is not in himselfe, but in another; or that the soule of man is immortall; whereas there can be no more immor∣tals then there is infinite; for the creature can as well bee infinite as immortall. When men seem to go into these or the like points, that are so necessary for a Christian to know, as that they give being unto Christianity, they walk, or rather wander and groap in the dark, speaking from Tradition, as they have taken it at the second hand from others (which tra∣dition ever doth, and hath not any thing immediatly from God, according to that way of the Son receiving all things immediatly from his FatherJohn 10. John. 17. 7. 8. John 13. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23, but meerly conjecturall, as false Prophets use to doeDeut. 13. to 5 Jerem. 27. 9. 10. Jude 8., wandring they know not whi∣ther Jude 13., neither did they ever learn from the Lord, whosoever they be, that are such Schollers and accountants, as cannot bring life and death into one and the same act; yea the con∣tract and the divorce to be the same thing.  For if ever we see
our sinnes to bee that which indeed they are, yea, the divorce in its owne nature and distance, then must wee of necessity reckon and account our sinnes upon the Sonne, of God, who is the Lord our righteousnesseIerem. 23. 6. Ier. 33. 16.. For the divorce is of an infinite distance, because he that is infinite is a party in the contract, and there can be but one infinite; therefore our sinnes must of necssity be reckoned and accounted upon that one onely and infinite sonne of God, and so are done a∣way Esa. 63. 9. Esa. 53. 10. 11. Lev. 16. 7. to 22. Heb. 8. 12. Heb. 8. 11. 1 Thes. 4. 9.. Nay further, without the true knowledge of this poynt, (which none can teach but God alone)Iohn 21. 25., Let men use study, experience, Learning in tongues, or arts, reading of bookes, if it were possible, that the whole world could not containe, as it cannot the things that concern, or might bee written of ChristExod. 7. 11, 12, 13. 2 Tim. 3. 8. Acts 8. 17. to 21.. Yea, observe the changes of States, times, and things, as men use to do for their helpe, in open∣ing those wonderfull Revelations of Jesus Christ, which is much like your men, that vse spells, and cast figures, to bring out some strange thing to affect others withallRevel. 12. 14., that so their hire, or reward, may not be grudged but come off, the more easie, whether it be profit, pleasure, preferr∣ment, or shelter, under some great man or State, out of base and servile feare of man, as commonly accompanies such spirits, yet can they never calculate, or make manifest, the time of the womans being in the WildernesseMat. 17. 10, 11, 12. 13:, which some so earnestly seeme to gape after,  even as the Jewes in antient time did, after the Messiah, and that Eliah, that was to come, when as both the one and the other was conversing with them;Mat. 11. 14. nor can they indeed bring forth the truth of any other part of the word of God, no more then they can do that and such like, which their own consciences must of necessity speake, in the behalfe of God against them; for they know they cannot prefix any certaine time of it, and if the Trumpat give an uncertaine sound, who can prepare himselfe to Battel1 Cor. 14. 7. 8.; for indeed that uncertaine sounding is the chiefe cause of all the Slaine, and wounded, both in soule and body, in our native Countrey at this day; for if the roote and rice of things be not
seen, but lye hid and are not known, the body and branch can never been delineated nor brought forth, nei∣ther in substance, nor true circumstance whatsoever: And therefore, not in this of the time of the Womans being brought out of the Wildernesse, which is affir∣med to be for a time, times, and half a time,Rev. 12. 14. So that they know not the Church; no, not in respect of this circumstance of time (if wee may call any thing cir∣cumstantiall) in the Church of Christ: For the truth is there is nothing in the Church which is not substan∣tiall and fundamentall; without which, the Church cannot have a being, we speak what we know,2 Tim. 2 7 Ioh. 4. 21, 22 23, 24. 2 King. 17. 29., For if we have learned the truth as it is in Iesus,Ephes. 4 21, then we know that as the truth is in Jesus; so also, it is in the Church, and no otherwise. For, the Church is nothing in any respect, as accep∣table to God, but only as it is in Jesus Christ, x, and Christ we know hath nothing in him, that is not sub∣stantiall and fundamentall, without which hee is not a perfect and compleat Saviour. For take away any thing that is in Christ, and you make an Idoll, or a nullity of Him unto the soules of men: for, an Idoll, wee know, is nothing in the world,1 Cor. 12. 12, 27. Ephes. 1. 5. 6.. So also it is in the Church of Christ; for take away any thing that is of the Church, or in the Church, and you make an Idoll,1 Cor. 8. 4 and a nullity of it, if wee know Christ in substance, then wee know Him to bee God and Man,1 Tim. 3. 16. Iohn 1. 14. Rom. 9. 5. Act. 20. 28. Iohn 8. 58. Iohn 8. 58. compared with Luke, 24. 37, 38, 39, 40,, or else he is no Christ. So that take away his God-head and he is no Christ; though acknowledged the Son of Man. Take away his Man-hood, and he is no Christ, though acknowledged to be the Son of God. So is it also, in regard of those things we call cir∣cumstantiall, as time, place, and person. Take away any of these from Christ, and he is denyed to be that an∣nointed:
for take away person from Christ, and hee cannot bee Christ, without having person or subsist∣ence. Take away his being annihilated, and made no∣thing (or such a thing as hath no subsistence at all in it selfe) from Christ, and he is denyed to be Christ. Take away his being, circumscribed within a place; from him, and he is no Christ: for then his humanity is denyed. Take from him, his incomprehensiblenesse, and his not being contained in any place, and then wee deny him to be GOD, and so to bee the Saviour of the world. Take away Eternity from Him, and Christ is made of none effect. Take away His being in time, and wee disanull His coming in our nature, which cannot but be in time. Even so it is in regard of a true Church, as it is in re∣gard of a true Christ: for the same tearme or title gi∣ven to the one, is also given to the other,1 Cor. 12. 12.. So that as there are many false Christs,Mat. 24. 5. Mat, 24. 24 22. Marke 13. 22, 23., so also there are many false Churches; and if wee take away any thing from Christ, that is in him, wee propound a false Christ unto the world. So also, if we take away from the Church, any thing that is to be sound in the Church, we propound a false Church; yea, set up the Synagogue of Sathan in the world,Rev. 2. 9. Revel. 3. 9.. And as for that distinction, of being, & well-being of a Church as if the Church might have a being & yet want a well-being it is meerly devised, and humane in the things of God, and no arguing according to godli∣nesse. For as the Sonne of God never had being without well being also; for the humane nature never had be∣ing, but in the divine: So the Church of God never
hath being, without a well-being: For what it is in any respect whatsoever, it is that in Christ, and Christ cannot be divided; for of his fulnesse we all receive, and grace for grace,Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9. compared with Iohn 1. 16.. So that if we know not how to give the woman her due time, of being in the wildernesse, we know not the Chruch of Christ; for it concernes her being and her well-being also. Yea, this circumstance of time is fundamentall; for we know not how the Church hath her being without it; that is, without that her being in the wildernesse: for the womans flight into the wildernesse, instructs us in the weak fraile, and brittle vessell of our earthly na∣ture, and the Man-child caught up to GOD, and His Throne, to rule the Nations,Rev. 12. 5, 6., instructs us in that po∣wer and authority of the Word of God; in such sort, as the Man is not without the Woman; nor the Woman without the Man in the Lord,1 Cor. 11. 11.; no more then the divine nature is without the humane, or humane na∣ture without the divine in that way of Jesus Christ: So that in the Womans appearing in Heaven, having in her a Man-child, is taught the descension of the word in our nature, and the ascension of our nature in the Word of God, even as it was taught, in the making of the first man, having the woman taken out of him: the one declaring the way of death, and subjection of our nature unto sinne, when the woman is brought forth and prevailes with her arguments, and reasonings, ac∣cording to humane frailty, in those suggestions of the Serpent, or wisdome of the fleshGen, 3. 4, 5, 6.: And the other de∣clares the ascension of our nature, when the Man is brought forth of the Woman, and taken up into the Throne to rule over all the wayes, and arguments of the Heathen, or devises suggested by the flesh,Rev. 12. 5. Mat. 4. 10. 11.. So then the Woman in the Wildernesse, is the Word of God descended into our nature, that waylesse, and
vast Wildernesse utterly void, wast and destitute, of the foot steps of God; through the panges paines and tra∣vels whereof, it brings forth it self,Rev. 12. 2., in that glorious descension and humiliation of the Son of God, and the Man child caught up to God, and to his Throne,Rev. 12. 5., is our nature taken up into the Unity of that Word of God, ruling the Nations, in, and by the authority of God, in whose seat or throne it is set,Heb. 1. 3.. So that if wee look into the Wildernesse, there is Christ compleat in his humiliation; and if wee look into Heaven, there is Christ compleat in his exaltation: and these two can never be the one, without the other; for they are one as Christ is one. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord,Deut. 4. 6. The Woman then is in the Wildernesse for a time; that is, Eternity is become that which is contained in a point, or period of time: and one period, or point of time, is become that which is eternall: Eternity is be∣come time, and time is become eternity, in that act of the creation, or incarnation of the Word of God, and without communication with time in this respect, thus extended, and thus abridged, the Church of God can∣not subsist, nor have a being. She is also said to be there for times, in the plurall number; for it is multiplyed into the time of death, and the time of life, the time of descension, & the time of ascension: yea into a time of wrath, and a time of reconciliation and peace. For there was ever a time of Antichrist, for he comes out of the bottomlesse pit,Rev. 9. 23 Rev. 11. 7. Rev. 17. 7.; in which condition and state Christ hath no time at all, & there was ever a time of Christ also, who comes out of the bosome of the Fa∣ther, Mat. 3. 17 Col. 1. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17. Iohn 1. 18., in which state and condition, Antichrist hath no time at all; therefore a plurality of times: yea, Christ himselfe never lived unto the flesh, and he ever lives unto the spirit, which is a two fold time, ever, & never,
and without the communication of these times, the Church of God can have no being. Again she is in the wildernesse for half a time, or for the division of times as the Prophet Daniel hath it,Dan. 7. 25, whence our Apostle brings it, that is, in that very point and moment of time, of the incarnation, or of making the word fleshIohn. 1. 14. is divided into a time of life, and a time of death; in such sort, as the one is not, nor can it be, so much as the twinkling of an eye, before or after the other: no more then God to become Man can be sooner or later, then Man becomes the Sonne of God: and so is the very moment, or point of time, divided in such sort, that it could never be said: Now this is, and the other is not yet; no, not with the quic∣kest eye, that ever cast it selfe upon an object. Nay this division of time is such a parting halfing, or dividing of it that it holds correspondency and proportion, both in respect of the time of life, as also in the time of death in all points: for they stand in direct oppositi∣ons and counterpoise each other, in as much as the Son of God, to dye the death of Man; and the Son of Man to live the life of God, are of equall extent; yea, of the same difficulty and ease, possibility & impossibility; the one as the other, and so are all other things in this di∣vision: for these are the two great wings given unto the woman, wherewith she takes her flight,Rev. 12. 14. which are not according to nature (as in the things trimly al∣luded unto: namely the wings of a Foule) in their first institution and ordination, if they hold not presize proportion in all respects; so that her descension into the wildernesse, is her mounting aloft unto Heaven, as an Eagle doth, and her mounting up to Heaven, is her descension into the wildernesse after the prey, as an Eagle doth; yea, her descension is her ascension, & her ascension is her descension. For she appeares in heaven (as the Man did first in
the Garden) & from thence the Son flyes in her womb into the wildernesse, as an Eagle after the prey, to swallow up death in victory, & the Son being brought forth by her in the Wildernesse, in him she is caught up in∣to the Throne of God, to rule over the Nations,Rev. 12. 5. and to overcome the Divell and his Angels, even as the woman was made in the man at the first Creation, Ruler, and Lord, over all the Workes of Gods hand,Gen. 1. 27, 28.. We con∣clude then, that the woman is in a solitary, waylesse, uncomely, and uncomfortable condition in the Wil∣dernesse (as men conceive) so long as the humiliati∣on of the Son of God, in our nature, and the exaltation of our nature, in being united with the word, can bee devided and separated, and not a jot longer, which is impossible to find, know, understand, or apprehend, the one without the other, in the truth or operation there∣of, no not for a moment of time: onely mens carnall Speculations carry & hurry them after meer pictures, shaddowes, and Idolls that are empty and vaine,Ier. 10. 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 97. 7 1 Cor. 8. 4. Psalm. 96. 4. 5. Psalm. 115. 4, to 8., not knowing the truth, certainty, and subsistance of that Word of grace, given unto us upon such infallible grounds, and gladsome tearmes, as the Gospel of God brings it, and commends it unto us, in; Those therfore that make a time of the Womans being in the Wil∣dernesse, and a time of the destruction of Anti∣christ. A time also, of the calling of the Jewes, &c. before the Church of GOD can attaine its peace, beauty, power, authority, excellencie, and ornaments in this World. They also make a time betweene the humiliation and exaltation of Jesus Christ, betweene his living to the spirit, and dying in and to the flesh,1 Pet. 3. 18 2 Cor. 13. 4., and so de∣stroy and make a nullity of Christ unto themselves, and to all them that heare such doctrine with appro∣bation; for, they preach Christ in the enticing words of
mans wisdome, and naturall conjectures, and operations of mens hearts, and not Christ, the onely wisdome and po∣wer of God,1 Cor. 2. 4 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 1. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Col. 2. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 24, 25., who is seen by no other light but his own, and therefore a Name is given unto him, that none can know but himself, and He is called the Word of God,Rev. 6. 12 13., which according to humane reason, and the common custome of mens alleadging of Scriptures, in their proofe of Doctrine, the wickednest man that lives, or the weakest child that can but reade may know it, being so plainly manifested, as there it is; and yet he affirms that none can know it but himselfe: which therefore must have more in it then any in the world that is not made one with Christ by Faith (and so said to be him∣selfe) can possibly know or see: And so it is in all other words of holy Writ, what ever the world may think or judge of it. Those also that thinke to bring the woman out of the wildernesse, by institutions, ordinances, baptismes, eldership, confessiōs, receptions, expulsions, rearing up Fabricks, reformatory as preparations; or rather parts, and peece meales of that glory they look for and ex∣pect, when the time comes, of the womans comming out of the wildernesse, these kind of people have ever brought the woman out of the wildernesse; but it is that woman which John sees in the wildernesse, sitting up∣on a scarlet coloured beast. full of names of blasphemy, ha∣ving seven heads, and ten hornes arrayed in purple & scar∣let colour, decked with gold, pretious stones and pearles, ha∣ving a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations, and fil∣thinesse of her fornication,Rev. 17. 3 4, 5, 6., which is the very portraiture of the policies, power, pompe, and excellencies of the Churches or synagogues of this world brought out by the wisdome, art, authority and endeavours of men to present a new service, or sacrifices to please God and to compose, compile, and contract the bulke and body of the people together, to make strong the arme of flesh,z in
which the crosse of our Lord, is never found, nor doth his Kingdome consist in any such things,Ier. 17. 5. and therefore our Apostle protests, by the Victory and Lordship hee hath in Christ, that he is in a continued act of death unto them all,Ioh. 18. 36 Rom. 14. 17, 18.. Therefore, it is that he addes to his protestation, and af∣firmation (if saith he) I have fought with Beasts at E∣phesus, 1 Cor. 15. 31., meaning such Beasts, as bear up that beauti∣fied woman,1 Cor. 15. 32., clothed in purple, which he compriseth in the state of that City of Ephesus, calling them Beasts in the plurall number; that is, if I have sought with States, Policies,d Rev. 17. 3, 4, 5. Corporations, Cities, Soldiers, Synods, Ecclesiasticall Assemblies, and Jewish Synedrions; yea, Captaines and Troopes, fighting with the arm of flesh for an earthly and carnal temple and sanctuary, which all use their heads, and hornes; together with those se∣verall Crowns or Authorities that are put upon them, for the preservation of that woman brought forth by them, and maintained, upheld, and born upon them,Rev. 17. 9. to 14. (if saith he) I have fought with such after the manner of men, what advantage is it to me, if the dead rise not that is, if I have done it after the course, custome, and ordinary way of all flesh, or of man that is all man∣kind, it availeth nothing at all unto the resurrection of the dead, but meerly to the setting up of the flesh, which is a quenching, killing, or putting to death of the spirit,1 Thes. 5. 19. 1 Cor. 2, 8. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6., For the manner of humane fighting, is this, namely, in the preservation of its own life, to take a∣way and destroy the life of another, in the setting up of himself to pull down another, in the healing of him self to putrifie another; in the strengthening of himself to weaken another; in the honouring of himselfe, to vilifie and disgrace another: For if there were none to be vilified and disgraced, there were no place for the grace, & honour of this present world: Such are the fighting & combats of men, who ever they incumbant
but the manner of the warring of the Sonne of God, and of all the Saints in him, even of that Michael and his An∣gels, that sight against the Dragon and his AngelsRevel. 12. 7, which our Apostle (according to that worke of faith) assumeth unto himselfe. Therefore saith, if I have fought, even as he saith, accor∣ding to my GospelTim. 2. 8., which fight is after the manner of that Marshall, and heavenly discipline, taught from an high, descending from this our High Priest, and Captaine of our SalvationHeb. 2. 10., which is farre otherwise, yea contrary unto it, standing in flat opposition, to that of the world; yea it is Christ, and Antichrist, when matter of, and for Religion, are ascribed and given thereunto, it is Christ in that way of the sword of the Spirit, and spirituall combate in his strift to save the Soules of men, from a spirituall death and to instate them in a life spirituall and eternallIohn 2. 25. Rom. 6. 23. Rom. 5. 21. Mar. 10. 30. Iohn 3. 15. Iohn 6. 54., and it is Antichrist, in that way of the Arme of flesh, and strength of the reason and understanding of man, who ever strives to settle men in a Church way; for life and salvation in such wayes, institutions, and Ordinances, as must of necessity leave them at the time of their death at the furthestHeb. 7. 22, 23, 24. Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Prov. 23. 4. 5 Psal. 102. 26: Which Bellowes are so infident unto the Priests of our times to blow, and they are no lesse diligent, and frequent therein, then those Paiests were, in the time of the Jewes to stirr up and kindle a fire, in Herod, Pontious Pilate, the Souldiers and the rest of the people of the Jewes to put our Lord to deathMat. 26. 59 Marke 14, 55, 56. Iohn 11. 46, 47, 48. Mark. 15. 1, 2. 3. Luke 23. 1. 2. 23. 24.; for the reformation, honour, and peace of their stateLuke 23. 2 Iohn 11. 48, 49, 50, 51. Acts 24. 5. 6., into which they expect Christ to come, according to the flesh, or so, as to sute their bru∣tish and naturall apprehensions and apitites, for such a Christ and Christianity, the world hath ever looked forMat. 20. 21, 22, 23. Iohn 4. 11. 12. Iohn 7. 25, 26 27. 47. 48. 49.: And therefore judge it most meete, to rid the world of him, in case his doctrine be heavenly and spirituall, yea if the words he speakes be spirit and life, the proper act, order, and discipline of the world,Ioh. 6. 36. is to destroy and take away
that life or spirit, to preserve and maintaine its owne, that walkes not in the Spirit, but according to the carnall de∣sires and immaginations of the fleshRom. 5, 6, 7, 8. Gen. 6. 5. Gal. 5. 17., the fight therefore of the Sonne of God, and of all Sonnes in him, is on this wise, namely in the taking away of his own life to begin; and beget life in anotherIohn 10. 11. 15, 16, 17. Esa. 40. 11. Iohn 6 51.; in the laying downe and humbling of himselfe to raise and lift up another2 Cor. 8. 9. Phil. 2 5. 10 11., in the purifying of himselfe (though he knowes no putrifacationPsal. 16. 10. 2 Cor. 5 21., to purifie and heale another, for this seede of immortality, is sowne in Corruption, but it riseth in Incorruption1 Cor. 15. 42., in the weaknesse of himselfe to give strength and power to ano∣ther; for that seede of life is sown in weaknesse in us (or in our nature) but it riseth in power, as our nature is raised in it1 Cor. 15. 43, yea in the dishonour and villification of himselfe, he honoureth and putteth grace upon another for ever, for the seede of God is sowne in dishonour, but it riseth in glory1 Cor. 15. 43., it is sowne in that dishonourable state of silly man, but it is raised in the glory and dignity of the Sonne of God; who is not nor can be otherwise made manifest, or appeare to be what he indeed is, unto, or in the Creature in any other way, but through our infirmity, no more then the Excel∣lencies of the Soule of man can appeare to a naturall eye, when it is separated from the body, and not in union, or onenesse with it, fighting therefore with unreasonable men, or beasts1 Cor. 15. 32., for all men have not faith,2 Thes. 3. 2. and then they are as farr from knowing, and walking according to the Law rules (or reason) as the word given for Law somtimes signifiesHeb. 2. 2., of that Jerusalem, that comes downe from heaven, or Israel that is of GodRevel. 21. 2. Gal. 4. 26. Gal. 6. 16., as a bruit beast is farre of, and estranged from the art, skill, and rules that a man walkes by. And the Apostle saith, that none knowes the things of a man, but the spirit of a man, that is, no other Creature but his own kind, can reach them1 Cor. 2. 11.; Even so none knowes the things of God, but the Spirit of God1 Cor. 2. 11.; for no unbeliever that is not led by that spirit, can possibly reach them no more then a beast can be taught to cast an Account, or
learne the art of Musick, though they have all the outward sences a man hath, even as all the outward or visible Cha∣racters of the word of God, according to the Letter, are na∣turally ingraven in mans spiritDeut. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. Rom. 10. 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 7., though he know not the minde and meaning of it, no more can any man teach another the things of God; for it is his own mighty handiwork alone, for the hearing eare, and the seeing eye, are both alike of the LordHeb. 8. 11. Prov. 20. 12. Gal. 1. 12. 1 Thes. 4. 9. Ephes. 4. 21. 1 Iohn 2. 27., fighting therefore with, and op∣posing these, after the manner of the Sonne of God, availeth much to the resurrection, nay it is the resurrection it selfe, that is, when we lay downe our own life, to preserve the like of another in the world, (that is, when we lay downe all our own livelihood in our selves) to preserve the life, spirit, doctrine, power, and authority of the Sonne of God amongst, and against, all that oppose that life, spirit, power, and authority of his in the world. Now the laying downe of a mans life, for the preserva∣tion of the life of the Sonne of God, is not properly to lay downe this naturall life, as it is a separation of soule and body, though it doth not exclude that, also in its season; for the life of man is properly to live to himselfe, as all earthly Creatures, by nature do, and as all earthly men doPhil. 2. 21. Phil. 3. 18. 19., that institute, and gather Churches, ordaine Officers, multiply Members, study, preach, pray, fast, feast, baptize, and mi∣nister, in outward, and earthly Elements, and rudements to binde over the consciences of the people, to aford them meanes, to maintaine them, in riches, honour, and ease, as also, the civill Magistrate to defend, and protect them, in what they speake and doExod. 32. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Acts. 7. 39. to 43.: Now whilst Moses is in the Mount, or rather Christ ascen∣ded on highPsal. 68. 18. Ephes. 4. 8., and they know not how to fetch protecti∣on, and defence from him, nor do they indeed know what is become of him, in regard of the exercise of his royall Offices, no more then carnall Israel, knew Moses imploy∣ment with God in the Mount, but if we lay downe our owne life, that the life of Jesus may be made manifest and abound in us, that so in him, we may live to our brethreng,
in any, or in all servises of love2 Cor. 8. 9. 2 Tim. 2. 10 2 Cor. 1. 5. 6., then are we dead unto all the things of this present life, and cannot hunt, or seeke after any mans honour, place, Office, riches, preferr∣ment, credit, reputation, or respect whatsoever, that ano∣ther man injoyes in the things of this present life. But all our warre is, to have these things crucified unto man, and man unto these thingsGal. 5 13. Rom. 12. 10. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3., both in our selves, and likewise in others, that the life of the Lord Iesus might ap∣peare, and exercise it selfe in us allCol. 2. 20.; that is, all the hurt we do, or may wish to any, and the proper end of our com∣bate in this world, and this manner of fight at Ephesus, and so in any state, Corporation, or condition in this world, doth not exclude, but include, the laying downe of this na∣turall life, in the separation of soule and body, in witnes∣sing the nature, end, and use of the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto us, and we unto the worldGal. 61. 4. Col. 3. 5.: It is become as a Crucified thing, or Carior, that is, meane, base, yea abominable in comparison of the life, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, even as we are unto it (in our spirituall Course of walking and worships) in comparison of the workes and livelihood of the flesh, which the world not tasting of plentifully in us, they count us as men that have nothing but ill savour in us, and we are as a crucified thing unto them,Gal. 6. 14. Esa. 53. 3.: Nor make we any question, but a Saint may truly preach in his death, for the conviction, and confusion of the wick∣ed Col. 3. 3. 4 Gal. 2. 18. 19. 20. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 11., and also for the great incouragement, comfort, and instruction of the justIohn 10. 15. Ephes. 5. 2. 1 Iohn 3. 16. Iohn 15. 12., and let his light shine unto them in that for their glorifying of their Father which is in HeavenActs. 7. 54. to 57., as in their workes done in the rest of their life time, yea and may as freely, comfortably, and bouldly through Christ that strengthens themPhil. 2. 17. 18., make a surrender of themselves unto God in that service, to fall a sleepe in itMat. 5. 16. Acts 5. 41. 1 Pet. 4. 14., (if it be sutable to the death of that witnesse Stephen) as in any ser∣mon he hath preached unto the world, in any part of his life time, for God can ripen his Saints, to fall off, as the
first ripe fruitsMica. 7. 1. Iob. 5. 26., willingly, seasonably, and fruitfully in that way, as well as in any other, for it is the testimony that we give unto the world, of the truth, life, spirit, and power of God, that is our consolation, in what way soe∣ver he makes good, and testifies the same unto the sonnes of men, in our selves, and in others, this dying unto our selves is our resurrection in all things, for as the sufferings of Christ abound in ust, (which is to dye to the flesh) even so do his consolations, much more abound in us, our hope in this is stedfast,2 Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 1. 7. that as we are partakers of the suffering, so also, of the consolation2 Cor. 1. 5.; for the death is the resurrection, that which is the sorrow in the eye of all flesh, is the consola∣tion in the sight, and revelation of the spirit, and of that unfained faithEphes. 1. 17. 1. Tim. 1. 5. 2 Tim. 1. 5., but those men that know not the word of God, in the mistery of it, but onely according to the letter2 Cor. 3. 6., they cannot know how this can be, for the let∣ter is the very way, and Caractour of all flesh, as it makes use of the favour, grace, or worke of God, according to its own naturall principles and abillities, changing it into another thing, unto himself then by nature it is, or ever can beRom. 1 18. 25. Rom. 2. 1, 2, 3. Rom. 2 17. to 23.: and the mistery is the very way and true Caracter of that ingraven forme of the subsistance of the Sonne of God, as he makes use of our infirmities, to change them into ano∣ther thing in himselfe, then by nature in themselves they are or ever could be2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Crr. 26. to 31. Rom. 3. 5, 6, 7. 8.: And therefore it is, that man being meerly naturall, can better desire to be transformed into the basest Creature that is on the earth, or in the waters under the earth, then to be transformed into the Image of the Sonne of God and accordingly desires to transforme the Sonne of God into the likenesse of any Creature, foorefooted beast, or creeping thing on the earthRom. 1. 23., rather then to take him ac∣cording to that Caractor of the Father, and ingraven forme of his subsistanceHeb. 1. 3.. Such is mans living unto the flesh, and being dead unto the spiritRom. 8. 5. 6.; so that all that ever he doth in eating and drinking, that is, in communicating with any Creature,
it is to preserve his own life for the present, and thereby put off death till after time, therefore he saith, let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dyed; that is, the conflict and strift of man,c Esa. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 32. in the whole progresse of his fighting after the manner of men, which our Apostle denies, to be the manner of his fight, for that fight or warrfare that is ac∣cording to the Sonne of God, is, that death may have a reall and present being in all things, for that is the true re∣surrection of life, and in whatsoever we communicate with∣in the death of the flesh, all conduceth unto the life and re∣surrection of Jesus Christ, that howsoever the life is one, even as he is one, yet is it as variously multiplyed, as the death is. Therefore our Apostle saith, all flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of men, another flesh of beasta, another of fishes, and another of birds1 Cor. 15. 39. Esa. 31. 3., that is, all weaknesse and death, is not the same weaknesse for flesh somtimes in Scripture signifies weaknesse, so saith the Prophet, the E∣giptions horses are flesh and not spiritGen. 32. 28 Psal. 84. 5. Psal. 138. 3., that is, they are weaknesse, and have not the strength of Israel so all weaknesse is not the same weaknesse, for there is one weaknesse of the flesh, which is indeed flesh in our A∣postles acceptation, and truth of interpretation, in that it is subject unto corruption, not able to sustaine it selfe; there is another weaknesse, in that it is impotent, not able to conceive of, or to performe the things of God1 Cor. 2. 14.. Another weaknesse of dishonour because that in it is not the dignity of that blood royall, in that Generation and off-spring of the most highActs 17. 28, 29. Revel. 22. 16.. Another weaknesse, in that it is naturall, carnall, or sen∣suall, because the very bent, end, and scope of all the opera∣tions of the flesh, tend unto that which is earthly, momen∣tany, and of a fadeing and vanishing nature and condition. And so are the wayes and motions of the flesh multiply∣ed into that vast and illimited gulfe, of mans infirmities and imperfections, which amount unto that account, and
reckoning, that can never be numbred, no more then we can number the severall kindes of grasse, graine, seede flowers, herbes, plants, and Trees that are upon the face of the Earth. Therefore it is said, as was noted before, that man was made of the dust, slime, or seede of the earthGen. 2. 7., to note unto us, that infinit variety, and illimited multiplicity of earthly and corruptible fruit,  that naturally of himselfe he yeelds, and brings forth, for there is a body terrestriall that is compleate, unto which no addition can be made (no more then the influence of the heavens, add unto the Crea∣tion of things on the earth which God made at the first) to increase the kindes of them, onely the influence of the heavens doth generate, and bring them forth; So also there is a body celestiall which is absolute and compleate, that no addition can be admitted of in it, no more then the motion, and operation of things here below, can either add or deminish, those heavenly bodies that are above, onely in their changes operations, and generations, they shew forth and make manifest the severall vertues and powers which are in those heavenly bodies, yet each hath his propper and distinct glory; for the one is the way and glory of the humiliation of Jesus Christ, unto which nothing can be added or deminished, and the other is the way and glory of his resurrection and exaltation, which admits not of a jot lesse impossibility of any additi∣on, or deminution; but as the weaknesses, and frailties are multiplyed in the one respect, so also are the glories, and perfections multiplyed in the other respect. Therefore it is said, there is one Glory of the Sonne, an∣other Glory of the Moone, another of the Starres, yea Starre differeth from Starre in Glory; so also is the Resurrection,1 Cor. 15. 41, 42, 43. that is, according to the various infirmity of the body terrestriall, and the infinit and heavenly perfection of that Body celestiall, so is the resurrection that is in Jesus Christ. The Lord hath wonderfully proportioned those infinit
and heavenly excellencies & perfections that are in himself unto that world of infirmity and frailty that is in usIam. 3. 6., and of the one and the other, doth that death and resur∣rection consist,  that is by Jesus Christ, and that is the pattern and Platforme that Moses saw in the Mount.Numb. 8. 4. Heb. 8. 5.. Without the knowledge of which no direction can in the least be given, how that Tabernacle of David should be reared, rectified us set up, though it be the onely errant that Christ had in the world, to performe and do that workeAmos. 9. 11., and so it is of them that are Christs at his com∣ming. Acts 15. 16.. The worke therefore neglected, or unskilfully handled, Christ is not come unto us, this body therefore, graine, or seede of Immortality; is sowne in Corruption, but it riseth in Incorruption1 Cor. 15. 23. Esa. 61. 3. 4.; it is sowne in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sowne inweaknesse, but it is raised in power; it is sowne a naturall body, it riseth a spirituall body; so that without the unity of two; there can be no resur∣rection, for the wheate Corne must dye, before it rise to mul∣tiplycation; so that however bare Graine be sowne; it riseth againe with a multiplyed body, yea and God gives to every seede its own body, whether it be wheate or any other Graine.1 Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38.. So that the word of God sowne in our nature; if in our mortality; it is raised in immortality; for these two become one body, or subsistance, they consist in one, even as the seede sowne in the earth, and the earth be∣come one body, else it cannot grow. For as that one graine multiplies it selfe in the earth, in so many severall small conveyances, in its taking roote; so doth the earth multiply it selfe, in the eare, and full Corne in the eareMarke 4. 28., else it were impossible, that so many should come of one; so also if it be sowne, in that dishonourable condition of our nature, it is raised in glory, for dishonour, and honour, become one body, the one is the descention of the divine nature, the other is the exaltation of the humane,
The descension of the divine nature, is into our estate and condition,,Iohn 1. 14. 1 Tim. 3. 16., which is humane and fraile. The exaltation of the humane nature, is into the state, condition, and authority of the word,Phil. 2, 8, 9, 10. Iohn 5. 26, 27. Ioh. 17. 2., which is di∣vine and potent, and these two become one: And as impossible as it is, for that pure and honorable Word, or Son of the Father, to be mortall or dishonorable in him∣selfe; but solely and wholly in us, hee is made mortall and dishonourable. So also it is impossible that wee should be immortall or glorious in our selves, but solely and wholly in that word, we are made immortall and glorious. So that his becomming mortall, and subject to death, is our becomming immortall, and living for ever; or else the seed of life is not sowne in death, the Son of GOD hath not suffered and dyed for our sins; and his being dis∣honourable, and being debased, is our becomming ho∣nourable, and being exalted; or else the Sonne of Man is not exalted and risen again, wee are yet in our sins and na∣kednesse, 1 Cor. 15. 17 Xev. 16. 15.. So that Christ his humiliation, is not without our ex∣altation; nor is our exaltation without his humiliation, for they are one. So that if we separate or divide these, we make a nul∣lity of Jesus Christ: for the Word cannot be lowern it self, then naturally it is in it self, for then it should cease to be GOD, in whom is not so much as a shaddow of change or alteration,Iames 1. 17. So that his humiliation; as also his exaltation, must both be in us,Rom. 8. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 5.. And therefore to deny either of these in our selves, is to deny that Christ is dead; yea, rather that he is risen a∣gain from the dead,Rom. 8. 34. For if we deny these things in the nature of any, we deny them in the nature of all men,1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.. For every man sustains the whole and compleat nature of man.
Therefore it is, that by nature we are all alike,Ephes. 2. 1, 2, 3.. And thence it is, that as the seed of the Virgin became one with the whole and compleat divine nature, and being of the Word: even so did the Word become one with the whole nature, and disposition, state or condition of Mankind, without any limitation or restrict on at all,Heb. 2. 9. Rom. 5. 19, 20, 21. else had not his humiliation beene absolute and perfect, such as becomes, and is compatible to the Son of an in∣finite God: such is the authority and force of the oath of interposition, whereby our High-Priest is installed into his Office and Ministry, as so to tye, & unite God and Man together, in such relation, that without the one, the other is not, nor can be expressed or made knowne: If this point were understood, it would bring to naught that grosse, sensuall and more then Heathenish Opinion, that we heare is now so audaciously broached in our native Countrey; concerning the mortality of mans soule, af∣firming that it dyes with the body, and sleepeth or cor∣rupteth together with it in the grave, and for the time of the bodies being there ceaseth together with it; in all its motions and operation; and in that, they deny the death and resurrection on of our Lord Iesus Christ, and ascribe unto man no higher, nor better estate and condition, than that of a bruit Beast upon the face of the Earth: For Christ did become mortall, as the soule of Man be∣come, immortal; and the one is as possible, eyther to be so, or to be known to be so, as is the other. For as the Word cannot be mortall but only in us: so we cannot be immortall, but only in it. So that if the eternall Word, the Sonne of God, may cease to dye unto the flesh (unto which he cannot dye, unlesse he continue, and abide to be one with it) then may the sonne of sorry man cease to live to the spirit; which he cannot doe, unlesse he cease to be one with it; and to affirme the one or the other, is to make voyd that unity that is in Christ; and to disanull that Covenant
and Contract between God and Man, and make of none effect that oath of interposition, whereby our High Priest is installed into his Office; and by vertue whereof he is made, a minister of the Sanctuary,Heb. 7. 21 Heb. 8. 1, 2., and ever liveth to make in∣tercession for us,Heb. 7. 25. Yea, if that eternall word should cease to be, that which is in time, so much as for a moment (which it must doe, if the soule dye with the body, at such time as the body of Christ lay dead in the grave) then must the Sonne of God cease to be Christ, And for so long layes aside the sweet savour of his oyntment,Psalm. 45. 7, 8. Acts 10. 38. Acts 4. 27. 1 Ioh. 2. 27. And so there must be an intermission of his being Je∣sus a Saviour; yea, and for so long is swallowed up of Death; and then is his death void, we are yet in our sinne.Act. 2. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 17. For if the eternall cease to be that which is in time, hee cannot be Christ: for eternity and time must ever bee in Christ, else he ceaseth to be God & Man, that Emanuel,Isa 7. 14. Mat. 1. 23. and so is not that beginning and ending, which is in that Christ of God,Rev. 22. 23 Luke 9. 20.. So that if we deny eternity to the humanity, we like∣wise deny, that the Deity was in time, and so destroy Christ unto our selves, the faith of such persons is vaine,1 Cor. 15 14.. Yet is the Deity or the Word in its own nature, simply, eternall, and our nature or the humanity is in it self, and of its own nature simply momentany, and fading; but the unity of them both is Christ, whose humanity is eter∣nized in the Word, and his divinity is as truly momen∣tized in our nature. So as take away the life of humane nature (so as the Creature is extinct) for a moment, and take away the life of the Son of God; yea, the very life of eternity: for he never lived as a Saviour, but through death (nay, as hath been said) his death is his life: So that take away that nature for a moment, wherein his death doth con∣sist, and you make a nullity of our Lord Jesus: So that the doctrine of Christ, and the mortality of the soule, are
utterly inconsistent, they cannot stand together. They therefore, that hold the mortality of the soule, they must of necessity deny the resurrection, the appea∣ring and comming of our Lord Jesus, it is in this case, as our Apostle speakes of the man and the wife; the man hath not power of his own body, but the wife; and the wife hath not power of her owne body, but the husband,1 Cor. 7. 4 Even so it is here God hath not power of that body of excellency, grace and vertue, that is in himself, but hath made it over unto us, for mans use and benefit. Otherwise, we could not live unto him, conceive and bring forth fruit acceptable and pleasing unto him, being of his owne begetting, and of his owne nature, as it is in Christ,Iam. 1. 18. 1 Ioh. 5. 1. 18 1 Pet. 1. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 14.. Neither have we power of our own body, of infirmity and frailty, but the Lord hath taken it unto himselfe for his own use: otherwise, hee could never dye, nor could he without it generate, beget, and multiply himselfe, as he doth in Christ,Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 10. Rom. 8. 16, 17., for he is the first begotten of death,Rov. 1. 5. Col. 1. 18., and he can have no death in himselfe, but as hee hath it in us. So that if wee dissolve this unity and contract for a moment, we dissolve that heavenly Marriage, that is be∣tweene the Creator, and the Creature in Christ,Hosea 2. 16, 20. Isa. 24. 5., ma∣king a nullity of it, and so make voyd our salvation,Psal. 119. 126. Rom. 4. 140; for if eyther of the parties cease to be, so much as for a moment, the contract is ended, our salvation is voyd, for then the Son of God ceaseth to be a Saviour, if hee cease to be found in the Creature whom he saves, and the Son of sory man ceaseth to be saved, if at any time he ceaseth to be found in the CREATOR, who is his only, and viour,Rom. 8. 33 Rom. 4. 5. Psalm. 3. 8. Psalm. 68. 19, 20.. So that those that hold the mortallity of the soule of man, which gives him his forme to be a man, and no other Creature, they do as absolutely and resolutely deny that
glorious, happy, and fruitfull intercourse, of life and death that is betweene God and Man in Jesus Christ; for that which is the death of the Sonne of God, is the life of the Sonne of sorry man; and that which is the death of the Sonne of sorry man, is the life of the Son of God. For the Sonne of GOD is made that in our nature, that by nature hath no life of God in it, and so becomes dead; or, is made that which is dead unto the things of God. The Son of man is made that in the word, which by nature hath no life of man (or life of a Creature in it) and so becomes dead to the things of Man and of the one and the other, doth Christ our Saviour consist; and with∣out the one and the other, hee is not Christ, nor Jesus at all; for the mortality of mans soule, is nothing else but the death and infirmity of the Sonne of God, and the death and infirmity of the Sonne of God, is nothing else but the life, perfection, and immortality of the Sonne of Man: and no longer then the word of eternity (which admits of no intermission of time) can bee held or swal∣lowed up of death,Act. 2. 24. Psal. 16. 10., no longer can the soule or nature of man, (which is nothing but momentany or brittlenesse it selfe) lay aside that spirit of life and immortality, where by it liveth and endureth for ever,Gal. 2. 20. Rom. 8. 9, 10, 11., in and by that Word of God,Col. 3. 16.. For the sonne of God hath no life as a Saviour, but only in, and through death; nor the sonne of Man hath no death unto sinne and sorrow, as saved, but in and through that life of the sonne of God, which is impossible to cease for a moment; and so is that also, that once lives thereby, and enjoyes it. Therefore, to preach the cessation of the life of the soule, in laying aside for atime the life of the body, is no lesse then to preach the cessation of the life of the sonne of GOD for a sea∣son; that is, so long as the soule is deprived of life and immortality.
But these bruitish, barbarous, and more then Atheisti∣call fabulous fantasies, we leave unto those; left and for∣saken spirits, who have seired themselves with a hot Iron,1 Tim. 4. 1 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4 Acts. 28. 27,, least the force and vertue of the Word of God, should take hold of them, and appeare upon them. But least any should mistake our meaning in this point of the resurrection; as though we too much neg∣lected, or slighted the resurrection of the body;  in regard we affirme that the death and resurrection are one act; so as the death is the resurrection it selfe (which the death and resurrection of the body cannot be.) We are to understand therefore, that where ever the holy Scriptures speak, of the resurrection of the Saints; the thing principally, and chiefly intended, is the resurre∣ction of our Lord Jesus, together with all his Saints in him; and therefore, they are said, to be set down together with him in heavenly places,Ephes. 1. 3. Ephes. 2. 6., and that resurrection in the first place, the Scripture intends; namely, his rising from that eternall death, which by nature wee are all guilty of, and plunged into, which is that victory over sinne, death, hell, and the grave, which none but the Sonne of God could overcome, nor rescue from; for hee onely purchaseth that renowne and glory unto himselfe alone, which otherwise had never appeared unto the Crea∣ture, which resurrection from death and hell, sinne, sor∣row, and the grave, or from Sheoll,Psalm. 16. 10, 11., that corrupting pit is in him most absolute and perfect; yea, it is perfected at once for ever,Heb. 7. 27 Heb. 9. 26. Heb. 10. 10. Psalm. 112. 9., in one simple, eternall, and incompre∣hensible act, which comprehends all those various, and infinitely multiplyed perfections, wherewith his Church is adorned, beautified, and lifted up for ever,Psalm. 110 3. Rom. 6. to 6. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6 6, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Ephes. 4. 7, 8., insomuch as the whole glory of the resurrection of the Saints, is seated in this resurrection of the Son of God out of She∣oll, or Hades, that corrupting pit, wherein man is by na∣ture drowned and over-whelmed. So that the resurrection of the body out of the grave, at
the last day in the re-uniting of it with the spirit or soule, addes nothing at all unto this glorious resurrecti∣on of the Son of God (which comprehends, and involves the resurrection of all the Saints) no more then the se∣paration of soule and body, and the dissolution of the body in the grave (for a season) can adde any thing unto that death of the Son of God, which includes and com∣prehends the death of all the Saints, unto all sinne and sorrow, whatsoever by nature they were lyable unto, & to hold eyther the one, or the other, is nothing else, but to set up flesh to boast, by arrogating unto our selves, the pri∣viledges peculiar to the Son of God,Rom. 3. 23 to 28. 1 Cor. 1. 28, 29, 30, 31 Col. 3. 11., in holding, that eyther in the rising of our bodies, or the dissolution of them, should eyther adde or detract, to, or from that eter∣nall weight of glory and vertue, that is in the life and death of the Son of God. And yet doth not this fulnesse that is in the resurrecti∣on of Christ Jesus, hinder the rising of the body in due time out of the grave; no more then that plenary deli∣verance and redemption that is in the death of Christ, hinders the body from death and dissolution in the grave. SeeHeb. 9. 21 Act 2. 29. Psal. 86. 48. this more plainly in the matching of contra∣ries as thus, the plenary and full curse of God seized up∣on man in the very day, point of time, or act of eating that forbidden fruit: otherwise, the Word of God were not fulfilled, in that it saith, in the day thou eates thereof, thou shalt surely dye,Gen. 2. 17., (or as the word is) in dying, thou shalt dye; that is, in that one act of death, is com∣prized and comprehended all those innumerable wayes of destruction and corruption that man naturally is sub∣jected unto. So that under that one act of death, all acts of death are contained, otherwise the Curse could not be full; and yet that fulnesse of the Curse hinders not, but rather is a way for the separation of soule and body, and the disso∣lution
of the body in the grave, in its time and season: but this dissolution and separation addes nothing unto the Curse; for then the Curse should not be perfect be∣fore: and in case the Curse were not perfect before the dissolution of the body, then man stood not in need of a perfect blessing in the Saviour, untill the time of the sepa¦ration of his soul & body. And then it would follow, that perfection were not in that promise made of the Messia, the seed of the woman shall crush the head of the Serpent,Gen. 3. 15., because man had not a perfect curse or death upon him to be saved and delivered from which is most deragato∣ry unto the nature of the Saviour, in that rich and boun∣teous grace of the GospelRom. 5. 15 20. Rom. 15. 13. 2 Cor. 8. 7. 2 Cir. 9. 8.. Nor could Enoch participate in a grace that saved him from a plenary curse, whereof all men are alike guilty by nature,Ephes. 2. 3. Rom. 3. 10, 11, 12. Rom. 3. 23., if that the death of the body were any additi∣on unto the Curse, or augmentation thereof, for hee was translated, and never saw death▪ Ephes. 2. 3. Rom. 3. 10, 11, 12. Rom. 3. 23. and then hee was never saved from a perfect Curse, if the death of the body were any part thereof; nor can we tell how to free any of the Saints, from remaining under the Curse, whilest they lye in the grave,Heb. 11. 5. Gen. 5. 24. if the separation of the soule & body were any part of it. For,Gal. 3. 10. Deut. 27. 26. it is with the Curse, as it is with the breach of the Law; for cursed is he that con not in all things written in the Booke of the Law to doe them, and he that is guilty of the breach of one, is guilty of all,Iam. 2. 10.. So he that is under any one part of the Curse, is under the whole Curse,Gal. 3. 10.. Therefore, the separation of soule and body, is no part of it: for however, it is an accursed thing in the eyes of man to hang upon a materiall tree, to the separation of soule and body,Deu. 27. 26 Gal. 3. 13.. Yet it is a higher thing that makes accur∣sed in the sight of God, separating the soule from God, and so is he accursed that hangs on a tree, or that dependeth or relyeth upon a tree, as the word signifies, as man did,
when he laid his whole weight (as the word will beare;) that is, his life and his death, to be good or to be evill, by eating or not eating of that forbidden tree,Gen. 3. 3. 4 5.i, as all do unto this day, that depend upon, and lay the weight of their salvation upon, doing, or not doing (in themselves) things that are pleasing or displeasing unto the Almighty; and in the mean time neglecting and vilifying that glorious work of God, at once for ever perfected in Christ,Heb. 1. 3. Heb. 7. 27.. Even as man at the first neglected and vilified that glorious image of God, where∣in he was created,Gen. 1. 27, depending and relying upon his ea∣ting of the tree, to attaine thereby to be like unto his Ma∣ker,1 Ioh. 5. 10 11. Gen. 5. 1. Gen. 1. 27. whereas he was already made in his likenesse, and image, and so denyed that record that God had given unto him (concerning his Word and Worke) namelp, that hee had made him in his own image,1 Ioh. 5. 10. 11. and thereby denyed the glory of that work of God; for as no man ever came unto God, but by beleeving the record that God hath given of his Son,Ioh. 1. 12. Act. 13. 39. Heb. 11. 6.; namely, that we have eternall life, and that this life is in his Son,Gal. 4. 29. Heb. 11. 4. Gen. 3. 9, 7, 8. and he being the way, the truth and the life,Ioh. 14. 16: Never did, nor shall, any come unto the Father, but only by him; in him therefore is, and ever was, mans approach and com∣ming neere unto God; and without him, no unity nor peace with God: even so also, never did, nor shall any de∣cline & fall from God but by denying, that record & te∣stimony that God hath given of his Son, denying our life to be in him, and seeking it in our selves, by our owne Workes; for as it was in the beginning, even soo it is now,* both in point of faith, and of the fall, for to call in question that Work of God whereby he hath created us in Christ Ie∣sus, unto good workes,Ephes. 2. 10, or, in a good Worke, as the word will beare, for it is a Work of God & not of Man & there∣fore absolute & good. Now to call this in question, as though the Work were not yet perfect, adding our indeavours to accomplish and perfect the same: this proceeds from that ancient spirit, that hath been a lyer from the beginning and a∣boad, not in the truth,Ioh. 8. 44., whose workes his children follow,Ioh. 8. 41, 42, 44., for all the wayes of administrations practised, and with all
care, diligence, and frequencie observed by the Saints of God in the world, are not at all to perfect any thing, in that great work of God by Jesus Christ, but only to declare & make manifest the absolute fulnesse and perfection of it, which whosoever setteth his seale unto,Ioh. 3. 33. Rom. 3. 4., doth by the grace of God communicate therein unto life eternall.Ioh. 6. 54. Ich. 17. 3. Ioh. 10. 28. 1 Ioh. 5. 11.. We conclude, therefore, that the curse is full and absolute before the se∣paration of soule and body which was in Adam, so many hundred yeares after the Curse was perfected, or fully upon our nature in him,Gen. 2. 17. Gen. 5. 5. and therefore that the separation of soule and body cannot be any part of it: For the Curse is of a more higher and more spirituall nature, then is the se∣paration of soule and body, being it is a separation of God, even from his own work, and an eternall emnity between the Creature and the Creator; and yet this Curse is a means and way of the separation of the soule and the body, & of the bodies lying down for a time in the dust: But the prin∣cipall and main thing the Scripture intends, when it speaks of death, is that spirituall and eternall death,Gen. 2. 17. Rom. 8. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 22 yet not ex∣cluding the other (namely the separation of soule & body, unto which it alludes: So also is the resurrection that is by Christ of a more spirituall and heavenly nature, then the rising of the body out of the grave, or re-uniting of soule and body in one againe; for it is that wonderfull u∣nion and conjunction that is betweene God and Man in Christ, who are made one out of such an infinite distance, as Man by nature is removed, and made remote by sinne & corruption, from his Creator, in that his desertion from him at the first: therefore, where ever the resurrection is spoken of in the Scripture, it chiefly intends this spirituall resurrection that is by Jesus Christ, not excluding the Re∣surrection of the body unto which it alludeth, & elegantly pointeth at: nor do we deny that this spirituall resurrecti∣on from sinne, sorrow, and eternall death by Jesus Christ, is the way and meanes of the resurrection of the body out of the grave, and re-uniting of the soule unto it: the last day. But let us remember, that the work of our Salvation by
Christ is spiritual, And therefore take heed how we ascribe any thing of the glory of the resurrection, unto the rising a∣gain of our bodies out of the grave, or to detract, or take away from it, by the laying down of our bodies in the dust, knowing that all that the Lord Jesus hath in us, is nothing but death and deformity,Isa 52. 14. Isa. 53. 6, 7, 8, 9., and that all our life & con∣formity unto God our Father, is only in himCol. 3. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Rom. 8. 29. Phil. 3. 10.. So that those that ascribe unto the Saints infirmity and weaknesse, because of the laying aside these naturall and corruptible bodies for a season, or conclude them then, to bee more no∣ble and powerfull when the body is raised, then before they were, in the time of its being in the grave: This is but a meere device, and subtil invention, to magnifie the flesh, by ascribing somewhat unto it hereafter, which for the present, they dare not doe, whereby they judge of our Sal∣vation according to the judgment and things of men, and not according to the judgment and things of God,Rom. 2. 2. Ioh. 7. 24. Psalm. 72. 2. Ioh. 8. 15, 16 Ioh. 5. 30., and in this point our Interpreters contradict themselves, who affirme, that our Sanctification is perfected only at the time of the death of this naturall and corporeall body, and that the perfection of Sanctification, is Glorification; and yet notwithstanding, hold that our glorification is not perfect and full, till our bodies arise out of the grave: this is tho∣row that great mistake of confounding that naturall death, and that spirituall death together, not giving to each its proper right and due, and so ascribe more unto the resur∣rection of the body, then God hath put upon it; for Christ hath nothing in, and by us, but meerly infirmity and weak∣nesse; and therefore, whatsoever is properly ours, or of our selves, can adde nothing unto our glory; for all that wee have of our selves as creatures, amounteth to no more, but the compleat crosse of the Son of God: So that all our glo∣ry is in him, who never saw corruption,Psalm. 16. 10., which great mi∣stake, the Lord may seem to correct, knowing the operation of mans heart in this point, in that we read not in the Scri∣ptures, of such whose bodies were raised out of the grave, of any wonderful work which afterwards they did, or more
heavenly word that at any time they spake more then for∣merly they had done; nay, our Lord himself appeared alike, unto his Disciples after his resurrection as he had done be∣fore Luke 24. 13. to 32. Joh. 20. 19, 20, 26, 27, 28. nay to beate down that naturall, carnall, & fond o∣pinion, of putting off the day of the Lord,Hag. 1. 2, to 9. Joh. 4. 25., and the good things of his Kingdome till hereafter: he denyed to expresse in his humane body after his resurrection that glory which he had manifested unto them, in his transfiguration before his death,Mat. 17. 1, 2.; yea further, wee are carefully & prudently to consider,  of this oath of interposition or installment, and confir∣mation of this our high Priest, that the Word of God in all points & parts of the holy Scripture, is to be looked upon, held, rofessed, & maintained to be as absolute in the uni∣ty thereof, as it is in its multiplication: for as it doubletly, & redoubleth it self in way of multiplication, of words, a∣ction; ordinances, relations, & things: So also, all these words, actions ordinances, relations, & things are obrevia∣ted into one: so that there is but one expression of the mind of the Father only in him, who is called the Word of God,Rev. 19. 13, there is but one act, or operation, the incarnation of the Son of God at once for ever; but one ordinance or distribution, the giving or dispensation, of that one good thing the Spirit of God,Mat. 7. 11 empared with Luk. 11 13. but one relation, which is that bond of faith be∣tween Gob and Man in Christ, comprehending that common salvation, & was at once given unto the Saints,Jude 3. v. But one thing which is, that glorious composition of the heaven & earth in Jesus Christi,Joh. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 15. 44, to 49.. So that the multiplication, visititude, & changes of things, is but as the circumference, & spatious act of all rhe workmanship, & glorious fabrick, of that wonderfull device of God in our salvation by Christ, & that ebreviary or abridgment of all into one is as that center, or pricke in the middle, in which all the lines, from all parts of the cir∣cumference meet together in one, for our support, susten∣tation, edification, & comfort: Therefore our Apostle saith, which he takes from the Psalmst that one day with the Lord is as a thousand yeares and a thousand yeares are as one day,2 Pet. 3. 8. Psal. 90. 4., that is, one word action or ordinance of God is multiply∣ed
into thousands & ten thousands; yea, ad infinitum look∣ing unto time past, present; & to come, & that infinite and spatious multiplication: likewise, of his words workes, and grace by Christ, is united & contracted into one,Joh. 17. 21 22, 23. Rom. 13. 8, 9, 10.. Thus it is with our Lord, as our Apostle there speaks, who is, that prick, or point of eternity, in whom all things consist, are reconciled, and made one,Col. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20, who is at an equall distance, to all times, places or persons, & things in Christ; with whom if we be made one by faith,Ephes. 4. 13. Ephes. 4. 3. Psal. 133. 1., then doe all things in him meet together, and present themselves for our use, benefit, fruit, and profit, all having received comission, to be wayes meanes, and instruments,Psal. 119. 89, 90 91 Psal. 87. 6, 7 Eccles. 3. 11., of the conveyance of the conso∣lations of God unto us,Isa. 12. 2 3. Isa. 66. 11. Job. 15. 11.: yea, into every unite, that is a Saint by callingRom. 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Col. 2. 2. of the most high, and also makes & inables every such a one, to be an instrument recipprocally to de∣clare, set forth, and divulge the high praises of God in all points and parts of the Circumference, in things that have been, are, or ever shall. For if we dwell in Christ, and he in us by faith,Ephes. 3. 17 2 Cor. 6. 16. Rom. 8. 9, 11 Col. 3. 16. then of neaessity (as all grace meetes and centers in us through him) so also, must all vertue & praise by him proceed and break forth from us,Act. 13. 31, 32. Act 17. 23. Act 20. 27. 1 Cor. 15, 1. 1 Pet. 2. 9.. For as in case of an oath amongst men, the witnesse brings that to be present, (he being an eye, or ear-witnesse of it) that was done long since, in regard of time; and far remote, in regard of place: yet is it so made present as the Judge scruples not to give sentence accordingly: even so it is & much more true and certain) in this oath, concerning our Priesthood and King∣dome in Christ, that the witnesse and testimony of the spirit (if we see with the eye and heare with the eare, of the revelation thereof) that it brings things (that by nature are as far remote & distant, as heaven & earth to be pre∣sent; in such sort as we are not afraid to conclude, and give sentence accordingly, whether it concern the power & all∣sufficiency of God, or our own weaknesse & deficiency & without both the one & the other of these twaine, the spirit of GOD never witnesseth unto the soule and conscience of any.
For there is no use of witnesse, where distance of actions and operations are not. Therefore the spirit ever testifies, an infinite distance betwixt our operations by nature, and the operations of the Son of God; & sentence being given accordingly to condemn and silence the guilty, and cleere and open the mouth of that innocent one: sinne is taken a∣way from our gate, it is our salvation, that this distance is made one in Christ,Ephes. 2. 12 13, 14, in whom we rejoyce, with joy un∣speakable, and full of glory,1 Pet. 1. 8., and have no confidence in the flesh,Phil. 3. 3.. But in this point, let us not forget, that large & spa∣tious Commentary; & also that short abreviary of things contained in that holy Word of God, and that in all points particularly and distinctly, that governes our salvation. When the Scripture speakes of death, it makes a large Comment thereof, in such a multitude of persons, wayes, degrees and severall kinds of death, all setting forth those particular crosses or deaths, that man by nature is subject∣ed unto; all which it is impossible to find upon any one par∣ticular person or subsistence, that is made meerly & simply a mortall and momentary Creature. Now if God enlighten our minds, & extend them unto that large Comment and Volume of the Crosse, or of death, according to that spati∣ous continent expressed in his Word. Then doth he equa∣ly instruct us, how to abreviate & bring them all into one, and to know how one crosse, or one act of death compre∣hends & compriseth them all. And so it can be found upon none, but only upon him that is the Son of God,Act. 20. 28. Ioh. 3. 16. Rom. 8. 33, 34. Rev. 13. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20, that one crosse, or one act of death should contain all crosses & kinds of the terrors of death,Psal. 40. 12 Psalm. 69. 4 Psalm. 38. 4 Psalm. 42. 7 Isa 53. 6. Amos 2. 13., that are expressed in the Scrip∣tures; & that the sons of men by nature are lyable & sub∣ject unto, and if death be so contracted, that it can be found upon none, but only upon him that is the Son of God (for he only can comprehend, comprize, and beare away all the terrors thereof) then are the sons of men freed & delivered from death in all the terrors of it, onely in the way of faith, whereby we are made one with him, & so communicate in that one, & alone death of his, without the communication
and participation whereof, there never was, is, nor shall be salvation,Rev. 13. 8. Heb. 9. 22. 1 Ioh. 1. 7., for his death is our life, his weaknesse is our strength, & his crosse is our only crown: thence it is, that we rejoyce in nothing but in our infirmities, for when we are weak then are we strong, & can freely deprecate, or earnestly wish it, to be far from us, to rejoyce in any thing but in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified, or is as a dead carrion unto us, and we also unto the world,Gal. 6. 14.. So that every one that will be a follower of Christ, must take up his Crosse,Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7. Job. 31. 35, 36. 2 Cor. 12. 10 15. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Rom. 8. 35, 36, 37.* that is, must elevate and lift up that particular weaknesse, whereunto he sees himself naturally inclined or danger he is, or may be lyable unto, & set it in that height & dignity that the Son of God hath brought it unto,Heb. 2. 6, 7 8, 9. Ephes. 4. 8, 9, 10., who hath taken our weaknesse, onely that hee may become our strength,1 Cor. 1. 25 he hath taken our foolishnesse, that he may bee made our wisdome; and our sorrow, that he may become our joy for ever,Isa 53. 4. Psal. 16. 11. Psalm. 43. 4., and in that very way of our own emp∣tinesse, we are replenished with his fulnesse, who filleth all in all,Ioh. 1. 16. Eph. 1. 23. Col. 1. 19. Col. 3. 11.. For he endured the crosse, and despised the shame; that is, he sustained or nourished the crosse, as the word signi∣fies, he nourisheth a death unto the flesh, in his Saints for ever, and despiseth the shame; that is, contemned, rejected, or cast it off for ever, in that the life of the spirit takes place through the death of the flesh,Rom. 8. 10 11, 12, 13 1 Pet. 3. 18., the power of the Creatour in the weaknesse of the Creature, and that sits at the right hand of God, in such sort, as the Father will do nothing without him,Mat. 26. 64 Mat. 2. 18. Ioh. 17. 2. Heb. 1. 2. Ps. 118 15, 16. Psalm. 17. 7. Psal. 80. 17.. no more then a man will shew him his art, power, and skill, but with his right hand,* So that they that teach the Crosse of Christ, to be a terrible, dreadfull, sor∣rowful, uncomfortable, & an afflicted state & condition, they utterly mistake the crosse of Christ, for it is the peace, joy, crown, diadem, & glory of the Saints for ever, in that, that through their infirmities, the power of God exerciseth it self, appears, & is made manifest in them, & they that hold the crosse of Christ otherwise, as to consist in such things as are common to all men; yea, some of them unto the very bruit creatures themselves: these offer great indignity to hat great grace of the Gospel, as when they state it in
wars robberies, banishments, imprisonments, poverty, sick∣nesse, aches, weaknesse of body, & pains which are innume∣rable all these things considered, as troubles & vexations of the creature, they are no cros of Christ, but only such things as the natural minds of menlead thē to inslict one upon a∣nother, & the bodies of all men one as wel as another are in∣sident unto,1 cor. 10. 13 Eccles. 9. 1, 2, 3, yet do the Saints of God alone passe through such like wayes of infirmity in this world, wherein they communicate in the crosse, or in the death of their Lord; God exercising them under, or leadng them through such wayes, to this very end & purpose, that therin he may make himself more apparently known,Psal. 9 16 Psalm. 79. 1 2, 3, 4, 5 Rom. 9. 17. Exod. 9. 15, 16, 17., either that in them∣selves they may see more cleerly & visibly him that is in∣visible, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27., when he makes his power apparent in them,Rom. 6. 17., by supporting, sustaining, & delivering of them,Rom. 4. 15 16. Exod. 14. 30 31. Exod. 15., or else to make it appear to others, that God was in them that so suf∣fer, though they were not aware of it,Psal. 50. 2. Psal. 80. 1, 2 1 Cor. 14 24, 25. Gen. 28, 16, 17., & in the one & the o∣ther, the consolations of God abound2 Cor. 1. 5. Psal. 94. 17 18, 19. Rom. 5. 20., which is the pro∣per crosse of Christ, that great grace of the Gospel; for with∣out the crown & dignity of the creature, the crosse and in∣dignity of the Son of God is never made known; so that the natural infirmities & distempratures of the Creature are no crosse of Christ, further then the power & authority of God, in that blessed & heavenly temprature of his own son appears in them,2 Cor. 7. 8. 9, 10, 11 2 Cor. 1 2. 8, 9 10, 11 2 Cor. 6. 3 to 10.: there is a further mistake in the crosse of Christ, that goes beyond these heathenish & brui∣tish infirmities (that men are so apt by nature to centere it in) when it is held to consist in troubles of mind, terrors of cnscience, fears & tremblings of heart, anxiaty & bitter∣nesse of spirit, doubts, scruples, sorrowes, reasonings, questi∣onings and jealusies, concerning Gods approbation of us, presence with us suretiship to carty us through all; cove∣nant & oath to make all things good unto us, what ever he hath said of his son his disposition & compassions not to be infinitly more to us, then of any earthly father to his onely begotten one, in a word, to centere the crosse of Christ; in any thought or feare of contradiction, or distance between God & Man is tocenre it in the terrors, tremblings, Jea∣lousies,
and suspitions of Sathan * himself, and not in that death and humiliation of Jesus Christ; for it was never the worke, power, nor spirit of God to breed a difference and distance be∣tween God & Man, but the only & proper work of that Serpent∣to begot jealousies and suspitions hereof, from the beginning even untill now.Gen. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5., in the hearts of earthly minded men: for the son of God was as truly made earthly, as hee was heavenly at the first, and yet without sinne,Gen. 1. 27. compared with Gen. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 49. Luke 3. 38., or any fault or blemish at all, to be imputed unto him; even as the sonne of Man was made up∣right & heavenly at the first, & yet can by nature hold no plea for himself before the, judgment seate of God, of any righte∣ousnesse or holinesse at all, that he can any wayes bring before God, to answer unto him, for the obtaining of the least part of payment or acquittance, but is every way a transgressor, e∣ven from the wombe of that early morning, of an eternall, and infinite accountPsal. 58. 3, for the wombe, of that bottomlesse pit, or the Curse,Revel. 9. 1. 2., is of no lesse extent, then is the wombe of that blessed promise that God gave before the foundations of the world were laid,Titus 1. 1. 2. 2 Tim. 1. 9. 10. 1 Cor. 2. 7., and made it manifest in due time through preaching: the Crosse therefore is to be extended unto all seve∣rall and particular misries; and also contracted & shut up in one; out of which all glory, excellency, comfort, and peace ari∣seth, Gal. 6. 14. Ephes. 2. 13. to 18. Iames 1, 2, 3, 4. Rom. 5. 3, 4. 4., or else we know it not, nor can we partake of the fruit & benefit of it, no more then the body can partake of the ex∣cellencies of the soul, whilst it hath not unity or oneness with it: the like may be said of all the ordinancies, excellencies, and wayes of dispensation of the Son of God, they are to be exten∣ded to the utmost distance, & contracted in the nearest unity that possibly can be, otherwise they carry not in them the sub∣stance, strength, and vertue of our salvation by Christ, take any instance breefely in three things. Viz. 1. In Elders ordained in the Church. 2. Sacrifices offered for the Church. 3. Baptismes and washings of the Church; For Elders ordained in the Church, eldership is to be extended, accor∣ding to the various dispensation revealed, and exercised by the Sonne of God, in holy Scripture, that is. 1. To such as are Elders, by the priviledge and right of the
first borne, in the Familie, as in the dayes of the FathersGen. 48. 18.. 2. To such as was a Priest according to the time of Melchi∣zedeck in the dayes of AbrahamGen. 49. 3.. 3. To such as are chosen and called by God himselfe as was AaronGen. 14. 18, 19, 20.. 4. To such as are chosen by Moses, upon whom the spirit of God cum as in those seventy of the senedrianHeb. 5. 4.. 5. To such as served by course, in their order in the house of God in the dayes of David, and SolomonNumb. 11. 24. 25.. 6. To such as the Prophets annointed to be such, as in the dayes of Eliah2 Chron. 5. 11. 1 Chron. 16. 7. Esa. 3. 11. Luke 1. 5.. 7. To such as Christ breathes upon, and bids them receive the Holy-Ghost, in the dayes of Jesus our Saviour1 King. 19. 16.. 8. To such as Christ healed of that uncleane, sollitary, merci∣lesse, and multiplyed spirit, in the Countrey of the Gaderons whom he sent to preach to Decapolis, or unto ten Cities as the word signifiesIohn 20. 21. 22.. 9. Yea to such as upon whom, one Apostle layes his handes as in the dayes of PaulMarke 5. 19. 20.. 10. Also to such as the whole Presbytery or Eldership lay their handes onActs 19. 6.. 11. Yea unto such as are Elders, by their placing about the Throne of God1 Tim. 4. 14., and many the like, all these are written for our understanding and instruction (in this one point or ordi∣nance of Eldership in the Church) upon whom the ends of the world are comeRevel. 4. 4., that is all worldly and carnall spi∣rits, are shut up from any sight or ability to frame unto them∣selves a way of imitation, of such an Eldership acceptibly to practice, or exercise themselves in any one of them, so that they are as truly all ended as any one of them is ended, unto the abilities and practice of all the men of the world, and yet do they all as truly live, and abide in the house of God, as any one of them, in that way of the ministry of the spirit, and power of God1 Cor. 10. 11., and are frequently to be maintained and practised in the house and Kingdome of God; therefore hath our Lord over reached all naturall spirits,2 Cor. 3. 6. and immitaters in the sight of all men, in that booke of the Revelation, in ma∣king Angels Ministers, to sound the Trumpets, power out
the viails; to fly through the midst of heaven, preaching an ever∣lasting GospelRevel. 14. 6.; yea he that is both a Lamb, and a Lyon to o∣pen that seaven sealed bookRevel. 5. 5. compared with Revel. 6. 1., and foure beasts to minister be∣fore the Throne which are both in the mid of the Throne, and round about the ThroneRevel. 4. 6., and many the like, which passeth mans skill to invent, and devise a worship that may present it selfe to the eyes of carnall mindes, as a like figure thereunto, and as truly as God goeth beyond, all the device of man, in any one way of administration in his house, so doth he also in all the wayes of administration, wherein he hath at any time, appared in it, to, his Saints; for as we are to extend the Eldership or ministration of the Gospel; to all the wayes wherein the Lord hath shewed, and set forth himselfe, or else we denye to give un∣to it that latitude, that God hath given in his word, so also we are to contract, and involve them all in one, and center them in one person, or individuall subsstance, and so the ministration and Eldership of the Gospel can be found in none that is a meere Creature, in heaven or in earth, but is onely proper unto, and found in the Sonne of God, he is that High Priest of our Professi∣onHeb. 3. 1., whose lips alons preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth the Saints have saught the Law in all agesMal. 2. 7., and therefore he is said to be Iesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for e∣ver, Heb. 13. 8., for he borrowed not of these times to make himselfe perfect, in the beginning, for then he had not been a Lambe, uine from the beginningRevel. 13. 8., nor doth he borrow of the last times to make himselfe perfect in the midst or fulnesse of time, for then his death had not been compleate in the fulnesse of timeGal. 4. 4. when it is also said he dyed for us, because that one act of his death comprehends all times, nor doth he borrow of the first, or of the fulnesse of time, to make himselfe perfect in the last dayes, for then could he not be said to suffer in the end of the worldHeb. 9. 25.; for he is made perfect, onely through sufferingsHeb. 2. 10., so that he abides a Priest, or Elder in the Church, you the same for ever, after the or∣der of MelchizedeckHeb. 7. 21. 22. 23. 24. Act. 1. 20. Psal. 109. 8., and that Eldership, or ministry onely, that is extended, and multiplyed as also, so united and con∣tracted, that carries the power of God along in it, and none else, and it may be said of the faithfull, and holy ones of God in their imbracing this Bishopprick, or Ministry w, as it is said of the
Fathers, in their imbracing of the promises, viz. all these dyed in Faith and received not the promises, but saw them farre off, or re∣mit Heb. 11. 13., and received them thankefully, which is a contradiction in the things of men, but made good, and a holy order in the things of God, according to the Ministery and order of the Gos∣pel; so it may be said of the Saints, in their imbracing of this Eldership and Ministry; for all the wayes of it are dead unto them through Faith, as well as any one way, wherein it hath been revealed and made knowne, and they themselves also are dead by Faith unto them all, that is, they are dead one unto the other, and removed a farr off, one from another, in regard of the letter of them in all the wayes of administration, and ordination, and that outward and perfunctory Immitation which the world takes up to deceive it selfe, which is nothingelse but the mistery of the letter that kills, and puts the spirit to death, Wherever it comes, for this we are ever to observe, that those that cast godlinesse into a forme, they ever denye the power of it, from which the Saints and true Ministers of the Gospel, ever turne away Tim. 3. 5.; for they professe themselves by their workes, that they are leaders of the spirit of God, and not the spirit of themRom. 8. 1. Rom. 8. 14.  5. 18., (as it ought to be) whilst they appoint him his times, and seasons, persons, actions, and instruments, when and by whom, as also in what way and manner, he shall worke, operate, and appeare amongst them, unto such things are the Saints dead, and by faith, kept from the imbracing of them; but they receive and imbrace most thankfully, through faith all these wayes of ordination, and administration according to the Ministery of the spiritCor. 3. 6. Cor. 14. 29 30, 31. 1 Pet. 4. 11., which gives life unto them all amongst the Saints, who are through the same spirit and power of faith, exercised, in and about them all, in the house of God, being well content, that he shall appoint the time and place, make choyce of the instruments, meanes, and manner, how, where, when, and by whom he shall please to make himselfe manifest amongst themom 12. 6, 7. 8.; according to the diverse wayes, and infinit variety of the dispensation of his grace by Je∣sus ChristPsal. 65. 1. Psal. 23, 1.; for the publike and solemn solemnization where∣of, praise silently, wayteth for God continually in Sion 77. 19. 20., and in him is the vow or Covenant, in this ministration performed, according to that bond, or obligation, or various relations wherein soever he pleaseth to exercise them, or leade them forth e; if as a Lambe
before the shearer, they are dumb, and open not their mouthEsa. 5 3. 7., if as a Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, they roare in Sion, to the astonishment of the NationsPsal. 24. 11. 22. Rom. 8. 36.; if as a perd they leade forth to greene pa∣stures, to make fat and florishing in the house of God, and cause to re∣turne by the waters of quietnesseGen. 49. 9. Ioel. 3. 16.; where those waves and surges of a troubled conscience, are alayd and abatedPsal. 23. 1. 2. Psal. 92. 12. 13., yea they are more ready to lay downe their lives, to feede and confirme the flock of God, then to ingage them to part with any of their fleece, to obtaine their residence, and aboade amongst themPsal. 23.; for as freely as they have received, so freely they givePsal. 40. 7. Gen. 8. 3. 8. 11, even as those that preach for hire, unto a people, expecting somwhat for their paines, they ever bring somwhat in their hand, in their performances, to give unto God, in exchange for their abilities, as some fastings, prayers, readings, learning, observation, studies, and the like1 Iohn 3 16 2 Cor. 12. 14. 15., whereby they thinke they ingage God, even as they do the people, to be benificiall unto them, not knowing the meaning of that speech; freely have you received, freely do you giveMat. 10. 8, if he leade them forth as FathersRom. 11. 39 Esa. 13. to, they have in store layd up for their ChildrenMat. 10., and with the care, compassion, dil∣ligence, tendernesse, and love of a Father, minister unto them cheerefully, not looking for ought againe1 Cor. 4. 15; more then the prosperity, successe, and thriving condition of the Children, if God leade them out as husbands, they have words therewith to edifie and comfort the Spouse2 Cor. 1 1, and are enabled, to walke before her as men of knowledgeLuk. 6. 3. 3, that is, as men composed of know∣ledge, never to be exhausted or drawne drye, in the things of God by Christ; for they are become the wells of the Saviour, as Esay calles them2 Cor. 2. Esa. 40. 1., for so the word ought to be translated, if he leade them forth as a bride, they know how with all comlinesse, in that honourable ornament of modesty to submit unto their Lord2 Pet. 3., in all the wayes of his administrations, and expressing of himselfe unto them by eithers, without other wantonnesse, or gain saying at allEsa. Iohn 3. 29. Revel. 21. 1 Pet. 3. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 3.; but we may not go into particulars in these things, in a word, it is so with the Saints, in all those relations, wherein God hath set them to himselfe, and one towards another, by faith in Christ which are infinitly expressed, and made manifest in the word of God, and for all those thred bare compositions, institutions, and overworne tracts of men following one another
by tradition, like the horse in a mill, faith cannot but contemne, and reject them all, for the Commandement given by our Lord is ever newIoh 2. 8.; so that we must either extend the ministry of the Gospel, the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ, unto all those unto whom God vouchsafeth, the spirit of Faith, or else we diminish, and vilifie that great and wonderfull grace, for as it was in dayes of old, with our spirituall David, taught in his figure, he beleeved, and therefore he spakePsal. 116. 10., that is, he subsisted in the bo∣some of the Father, and therefore could not but divulge, and de∣clare the minde of his Father, unto his Brethren, so will it be in the present time, if we also believe, we cannot but also speake2 Cor. 4. 13. that is, if we have our subsistance and being in Christ, we cannot but declare, and set forth the minde of Christ,1 Cor. 2. 16. and we know that except we abide in Christ, and he in us, we have no life in uIohn 15. 4., and if any have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of hisRom. 8. 9., therefore the Priesthood of Christ must be extended, and multi∣plyed, according to the true latitude of it, else we derogate, and detract from it, pulling downe it, and setting up men, having mens persons in admirationIude 16., and may as well denye any of the faithfull, any other grace that comes by Jesus Christ, as to denye them, the grace of Eldership, prophesie, or administration in the house of God, yea the peace of conscience, remission of their sins, as well as this grace of Priesthood or Eldership in the Church, we must also abreviate, and bring it all into one, that the whole administration, and every part or particular thereof, dependeth solely upon the Sonne of God, or else we give unto men that glory, that God never gave unto them, (but hath made it the pe∣culiar honour of his Sonne) and so set up Idolls unto our selves, in the house of God;Iames 1. 6. 27. Tim. 3. 9. instead of that pure and undefiled wor∣ship of God, yea, that man Idolizeth himselfe, that attri∣butes unto himselfe a greater necessity to teach, then to learne from others,Psal. 19. 9. 44. Psal. 78. 41. in the house and wayes of the worship of God, whatever he may thinke of himselfe, in that point, for he limits the holy one of Israelc, tying him to speake by him, and not leaving it to his own grace and wisdome, who is free, and ever hath ben,Co. 14. 26. 6 31. either to speake or heare by whom he pleaseth, for the hearing care, and the seeing eye, are both alike of the Lord.d. But concerning the second thing propounded,Prov. 20. 12., that is the Sa∣crifices offered for the Church, let us instance in one for all, name∣ly
the offering of the Lambe,  which if we seriously and duly consider, was never offered up, twice in the same forme, but it is differed either in respect of time, place, or in the subject offer∣ed, in the ordering of it, or in the object to whom it was offered, in respect of his action, and demeanure in the approbationGen. 22. 7 8 Exod. 12. 3, 4, 5. Levit. 3. 7. Levit. 4. 32. Exod. 13. 13 Exod. 29. 39 Deut. 9. 3. Levit. 14. 10. 12. 13., or else in regard of some other act, or adjunct, in or about the offer∣ing of it; now if we will know what the offering of a Lambe is, we must consider it in all the circumstances that concernes it in the variety, and severall multiplications thereof, as being a Lambe slaine from the beginningRevel. 13. 8., a Lambe slaine in EgiptExod. 12. 3., a Lambe slaine in Israel1 Sam. 7. 9. 10., with many other circumstances, ad∣juncts, and exercises in and about the offering thereof, but in all, not twice in the same manner, in all and every respect, all which we must bring into the sacrificing of one Lambe, which can ne∣ver be found in any, but onely in that Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the worldIohn 1. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 7.; so that he that was about to sacri∣fice a Lambe, in any one particular way mencioned, in the Law of the sacrificing thereof, he disnulled the Law, and makes it voide and of none effect to himselfe, if it do not comprehend all the wayes, of offering, the Lambe, and he that goeth about to sa∣crifice, in all the wayes of offering the Lambe, he disanulles the Law also unto himselfe, unlesse he can bring them all into one in∣tire act of offering up of one Lambe, that comprehends all the rest of the Sacrifices, and Lambes offered, and of such unity and mul∣tiplication are all other Sacrifices, Offerings, and Oblations, in that leviticall, and mosaicall Law, otherwise Jesus Christ is not taught in them, but they are made meerly historicall, and traditionall, and of none effect to those that are trained up and taught in such points of doctrine, as multiplies not one into ma∣ny and comprehends many in one, for it is the voice of the spous, with respect to her unity, with her Lord to say, (draw me) in the singular number, and with respect to the multiplication of her seede, we will run after thee in the plurallCant. 1. 4, So saith the Pro∣phet Esay of Christ, he shall see his seede, and they shall prolong his dyesEsa. 53. 10., his life and dayes are multiplyed in them, and their life and dayes are made one in him, and so doth the pleasure or good will of the Lord prosper, take effect, or is succesfull in his hand, that is, in his ministryPsal. 77.; for the grace of God is a bundle of life, in our Lord Iesus, so that he that hath right and interest in one, hath right and interest in all, & whatever the Saints have right unto, & interest in, from
the Lord, they make use of; putting it to the ExchangersMat. 25. 27., and so many not be deburied from any way of administration in the house of God, they have right, but unto one grace, that one salvation by Christ, and so he is our strength and Salvation f they have right also,Psal. 18 32. 39. Psal. 27. 1. Ps. 84. 5. to a multitude of Salvations, even as many as there are severall wayes of distruction, and so he is called the God of Salvations, for the word is plurall, in that place of the Psalmeg even so it is with our sines that the Lambe of God taketh awayh; there is but one sin, because there is but one infinit, eternall, and divine act, and being, against which and against whom; sin is committed, yet this one sin is multiplyedPsal. 68. 20. Iohn 1., adinfinitum; because that one sin opposeth;Psal. 140. 7. & contradicteth all those infinite perfections that are in that one divine act, and being; therefore it is, that we cannot acknowledge any sin to he veniall, because it becomes not the strength of the Sonne of God, to stoope under a small burden, nor the vertue of that blood of sprinkling to utter it selfe to any little or small effectHeb. 29 12. 24., nor can any sin as it is a sin against God, possibly be without an infinit and an eternall git in it, crossing and standing at enmity, and indirect opposition against the minde and will of an infinite God, which cannot admit of any graduall distinctions; therefore the Apostle saith, that sin is the transgression of the Laws, or as the Greek word there sounds, the withoutnesse of a rule, so that every sin is the withoutnes of a rule, that is, it hath not one jot or tittle of the Law, mind, rule, or of the true reason of the Almighty in it; for som∣times the phrase used for word or Law, signifies reason1 Ioh 3. 4., so that according to Gods wisdom, in the orderly course of things, in the production of them, it hath not anything at all thereof in it, but as the Law or wisdom of God is nothing else but instructive, so is sin, or the vvisdom of the Serpent, nothing else but destructive; for a the vvisdom of God in all the productions of it selfe in Christ, expungeth all sin & corruption out of our nature, so that never guile was found in his mouth, but as a I am spoile & undefiledHeb. 2. 2, in so much that however it be but a Creature that is properly saved, yet this work of Salvation, state & condition, which the Cre∣ature is set in; doth infinitely surmount & transcend the condition of a Creature; for as the wisdom and the worke is properly of God, so is the state & conditi∣on godly, and holy, and so of an infinite, and an eternall value, even so it is with the wisdome of the flesh, that is not subject to this will and law of God, neither indeed can beEsa. 53. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 19., or that wisdome of the Serpent, in all its operations, and pro∣ductions of it selfe, expungeth all holinesse and righteousnesse, yea that com∣pleate law of the spirit and life that is in Christ IesusRo. 8. 7., in every tittle of it, out of it selfe, leaving it selfe an uncleane spirit, having a garment in every one part of it, spotted with the fleshRo. 8 2 Ecl. 7. 29 Gen. 7. 5, and is become altogether ungodly and defi∣led, so that as Christ was tempted in all things like unto us, yet without sin; so is Antichrist by his creation, as also in that redemption of mankinde, in all things made like unto the Sonne of God, and yet without righteousnesse, yea so free, as the sonne of God is from sinMat. 12 43. 5., though tempted, so free is the Sonne of per∣dition from righteousnesse, though furnished at the first with it, being made in itLu. 11. 24. Iude 23. Heb. 4 15 Ioh. 14. 30., So that howsoever it is proper to a finite Creature, to decline, and fall a∣way from God, yet that worke of darknes, stare, & condition, into which it brings the Creature, is of an infinite nature, & extent, because it is an annihilation, and destruction of that whole worke and fabrick, of which the Sonne of God him∣selfe, is the onely and chiefe corner stone in the buildingGen. 1. 27. Gen. 5. 1. Gen. 2. 7. Ecl. 7. 29 Iob. 38. 6 Psal. 118. 22. Esa. 28. 16., or in expunging, and blotting out of that law, of the spirit which holds correspondency with the son of God, in all points, every breach of which infinite law, must needes be, of an infinite and eternall git, and in our pretended opening of the Scripture, to fall short of this latitude, and extent in any particular sin, is the proper preva∣rication
Law, or play the part of a false Lawyer at the Bar, as the word signifies, that in pleading his Clients cause, neglects the chiefe point in the Law that should principally be brought in, and puts it into his Adversaries hand secretly, to cast the cause against his Client, of such use are they to the soules of their hearers, that neglect, or fall short of this principall point of the Law, in the infinite extent of mans sin; for finite and infinite being made one, the proper act of sin is the dis-junction and separation of them, which is the pro∣per worke of the flesh, or naturall reasonings of the minde of a creatureGen. 3. 1, 6 Rom. 7. 9, 10, 11. betweene it selfe, and the Creator: so also finite and infinite being dis-joyned, and separated by sin, namely God and man, made one at the first, it is the proper work of the Grace and Spirit of God (by faith) to unite and make these twaine to be one, and both these are of the same extent; the validitie and substance of the one is not more exalted, lifted up, and made permanent then the va∣nitie and emptinesse of the other is vilified and debased, becoming corrupted, and putrified for ever, without the love and distinct knowledge whereof, we can neither un∣derstand the fall of man, nor yet his restauration by Christ, of such use and concernment is the knowledge of the multi∣plication of the offering of the Lamb, together with the u∣nity of it, without which our speeches and thoughts of the taking away of the sins of the world,John 1. 29. are meere blind con∣jectures, and the certaine knowledge and faith thereof, we have not yet attained untoPro. 19. 2., we are yet dead in our sins1 Cor. 15. 17., and doe not participate, in the life of the Lord Jesus1 Iohn. 5. 10, 11., unto the first ResurrectionRev. 20. 6.: for till we know how the death of Christ in our nature answereth in all points diametrically unto our life in that Word of God, or nature divine, we cannot have the comfort of that life of Jesus Christ, for mans fall can be of no lesse extent then that Resurrection of the Son of God is, therefore as he that prayeth or prophecieth with his head covered, dishonoureth his head1 Cor. 11. 4.; that is, if he doe not discover, make bare and manifest, the extent of that righte∣ousnesse that is by Christ, to be no lesse then the righteous∣nesse
of God through faith in himRom. 10. 3, 4., hee dishonours and shames his head; now we know, that the head of every man is Christ1 Cor. 11. 3., even so also, he that hides his sins shall not pros∣per, that is, shall not passe through, or succeed well, as the word signifiesPro. 28. 13; but that man hides his sin, whatever he be, that gives it not its proper weight, guilt and extent, which is not lesse then the death of the Son of GodRom. 4. 24 25. Isa. 53. 4, 5, what sin soever it be, and if we make it not to be that which it is, we hide it, and shall never prosper, succeed, or goe through the difficulty and power thereof, for if we hide it, it rests upon our selvesIoh. 9. 41. 2 Cor. 3. 14, and is the death of Christ in us, according to the Spirit, for we thereby crucifie the Son of God unto our selvesHeb. 6. 6., in the spirit, by treading under footHeb. 10. 29., that is, by vili∣fying and undervaluing his blood, not giving it its due propor∣tion, we reckon it upon our selves to our owne destruction, for he is thereby dead in us in respect of the Spirit, or of that spirituall state and condition of which he consisteth2 Cor. 5. 16. Heb. 10. 29., but if we confesse and forsake themPro. 28. 13., that is, if we preach, confesse or professe them, according to their extent, then we also forsake them, that is, we reckon and account them upon another, namely the Son of GodIsa. 53. 4 Iohn 1. 29., for elsewhere they cannot be found, when they are confessed and judged of ac∣cording to the judgement of God in their extention, and so they are this death of Christ also, that is, he is dead in us unto all the lusts and distempers of the fleshGal. 5. 24. Gal. 6. 14., and we are alive unto God in himRom. 6. 11.; so truly and absolutely then, as the Son of God was made sin2 Cor. 5. 21., not in a shadow or a figure, or vaine imagination, or tooke some part of our infirmity, and not the whole; but he really and absolutely descended in∣to the depth of our misery, and was made a curse for us, yea even in the abstractGal. 3. 13., and yet notwithstanding the curse could never tarry upon himPsal. 5. 4., nor he receive the least stain or blemish thereby1 Pet. 1. 19., even so was man made in the Image of God, not as a shadow, or in some certaine resemblance, of a thing which he was not, but was really and absolutely made in that highest degree of perfection, that the Creator of all things could ever put upon himGen. 5. 1, 2, and if his fall bee
made a lesse thing, then a defection from, a vilification of, and a lie made against, or slander laid upon the highest work, and greatest grace that ever was made or given, then is not sin knowne, without which the Saviour is never conceived nor brought forth in the world, in that way of the salvati∣on of the sons of menPsal. 5 1. 5 6, 7, 8., in this point lies the very key of the knowledge of, and entrance into the word of life, how elegantly doth the Prophet speak of that state and conditi∣on of Antichrist, under the person and State of that proud King of Tyrus, declaring of what nature and kinde his state and condition was that he fell fromEzek. 28. 12. to 15., without any fraud or collusion, telling us, (in the truth and verdict of the Spirit of the Prophets) That he was that annointed and covering Cherub, one that had the holy unction, that teacheth all things1 Iohn 2. 20, 27., as also a holy office to cover the arke and the mercy seat, where the Law was, and the lively Oracle spake, yea the called of God, and the covering Cherub, yea that he had beene in Eden, the Garden of God, where nothing but delight and pleasure could be found, decked with all precious stones, costly and most delight∣full things in that day of his creation and bringing forth: nay, he affirmes him to have been in the Mount of God, making one in the building of that Temple, not made with hands, or one that talked with the Lord face to face, even as Moses did in that Mount, all this is affirmed (by a trim allusion) to the glory that was manifested in the daies of Moses and Aaron in the exercises of the Law, which was life to some, but death to others, to be true even of that man of sin in his first crea∣tion, and according to that glorious workemanship of God in mankind at the first, and yet affirmes him to be most wic∣ked, proud, and in a state and condition for ever to bee la∣mented, in whom the very body, bulke, and sum of all wicked∣nesse and cruelty was sealed up: these things may as truly be said of that Man of Sin, that he was annoynted, made beau∣tiful and glorious, yea with no lesse dignity, honour and pow∣er, then that which is proper to the Son of God himself, and unto none els but he alone, and yet is he that man of sin, and son of perdition, even as it is truly said, that the Son of God
was made sin2 Cor. 5. 21., a curseGal. 3. 13, deathRom. 8. 34, and hellPsal. 16. 10., and yet none of these things could ever be found in him, but he abides that holy and unspotted Lamb of God1 Pet. 1. 19., and Sonne of the Father for ever2 Pet. 1. 17: So that, as he that is our Saviour took upon him the state of the sonne of perdition, els had he never redee∣med from death and hellPsa. 86. 13., and yet ever remained to be the blessed and beloved of GodMat. 3. 17; even so he that is that sonne of perdition, was as absolutely made the sonne of God, and that in the highest dignity that heaven it selfe affordeth, and yet ever remaines to be that accursed and forsaken of GodIohn 8. 44, the one in being made sin expungeth and takes it away, and becomes thereby a Saviour1 Ioh. 3. 5, and the other in being made the righteousnesse of God, expungeth it and blots it out, and so becomes that wicked one and destroyer1 Ioh. 5. 19. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Psal. 17. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 10; therefore it is said, that the Angells that kept not their first estate, (or, as the word is, their principality) are reserved in chaines: that is, those which were in the state of Elohim, or Gods, they kept not that estate, or that principality; for, the word some∣times used for Angells, in the Hebrew is Elohim, as in the eighth PsalmePsal. 8. 5., which our Apostle translates Angels in his writing unto the HebrewsHeb. 2. 7., therfore they were such that fel, as were (by that act of their creation) in the state and con∣dition of the Sonne of God; and that was the state that was falne from, which if it be minced or diminished, sinne is covered and hid by usPro. 28. 13, and so no successe in the things of God: for, he that hides his sinne, as AdamIob 31. 33, shall not pro∣sper, who went about to lessen it, by making another the cause of itGen. 3. 12; as men doe in these dayes, that lessen the sin of man, in that he was tempted thereunto by another, which they call wicked Angells, that fell before man, whose nature they say the Sonne of God never took upon him, and would father their opinion upon the Apostle, who intends no such thingHeb. 2. 16: For, if there were any creature worse then man, or state and condition below his, then did not the Sonne of God take into unity the worst nature, nor descend into the lowest state of death in his humiliation; and then it will follow, according to the rule of contraries, that man is not
made one with the most pure and holy nature of God in Christ, neither was our nature exalted to the highest and most glorious state of Majesty in himActs 5. 30 31. Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10.; for, if his exaltati∣on be of infinite and illimited glory and dignity, then is his humiliation also of infinite and illimited shame and infamy: and if so, then the worst estate and condition, or the worst creature, and greatest enmity, can in no wise bee exempted from being the way of the death of the Son of God: so that, that ayrie doctrine of the fall of Angells, not knowing how it and they, namely the fall and the creature, is compri∣sed in man, is nothing else but meerly vain speculation, and carnall and empty conceits and reasoning, tending to no∣thing else but to make void the salvation wrought by the Sonne of God, holding mens minds in admiration in things they know notCol. 2. 18., neither will they understandActs 13. 40 41. Hb. 1. 5.: For, in the way of salvation in all the elect and choice ones, God ¦selfe is all in all, which must presuppose an infinite vacu and emptinesse in themselves, in case that infinite and divine grace be their fulnesse in ChristIohn 1. 16., and in the way of the wic∣ked also, sin and enmity hath its fulnesseGen. 15. 16, which must pre∣suppose a vacnity and emptinesse of that alone, and divine grace and Majesty, which is infinite; and the state of the one is in all points as vast as the other. For, as the Sonne of God is the Saviour of the world without limitation or re∣straint; even so doth the whole world lie in wickednesse, or as the word is, is of that wicked one, meaning that sonne of perdition, without limitation or restraint1 Ioh. 5. 19: so that by the Sonne of God the worlds are made, in the plurall number, the worldsHeb. 1. 2., so as that world of righteousnesse is made by the Sonne of God2 Pet. 3 13, where all things are filled with his blessing and presencePsal. 16. 11., yea all things, even death it selfe, becomes life unto us in him; so that life and peace spring up in all things, and the blood of sprinkling utters it selfe in the voice of purityHeb. 12. 24. and reconciliation of all thingsCol. 1. 20 21.. Againe, the world of death and of sin is also made by the Son of God, that is, occasionally, or accidentally: for if he had not come and spoken unto the world, it had not had sin, but now there
is no cloake nor covering for itJohn 15. 22; and this is done by his being slaine, and expelled the world by the wicked, even as Abel was at the beginningGen. 4. 8. 1 Iohn 3. 12; and this bloud so spilt by that wic∣ked one, and all of his generationMat. 23. 34, 35, 36., speaks from the ground unto this dayGen. 4. 10. Heb. 11. 4., even from those earthly, carnall, and cruell reasonings of men, who will have the first-borne after the flesh (and not of God) to reigne, which speaks nothing but guilt and horrourGen. 4. 14, from such an act done in so neare a fra∣ternity Gen. 4. 13: and hence ariseth nothing but horrour and feare, yea all things, even life it selfe which is the Sonne of God, becomes death and destruction unto themRev. 6. 15 16, 17.: and here is a world of horrour and feare; for the expulsion of the Sonne of God admits not of any bounds, no more then his pre∣sence dothEph. 4. 9, 10. Psal. 139. 7 to 12., yea that vast distance that is between God and man in that way of Antichrist for ever, springs from as neare a unity between God and man in the beginning, as that vast distance that is between God and man by sinne and wickednesse comes into unity in that way and onenesse that is between God and man in Jesus ChristLuk. 3. 38, which if wee see not, our sin appeares not, neither doth our Saviour appeare, and make manifest himselfe unto us unto life and godli∣nesse Eph. 2. 13. to 16.: Whatever wee professe in words, our deeds shall deny himTitus 1. 16; wee seeking our owne things, and not the things that are hisPhil. 2. 21.; and out of this fountaine spring those expres∣sions of the Word of Truth, that cannot lie, saying, I have said ye are Gods, and the children of the most highPsal. 82. 6 7., which is not spoken onely of Princes, and Rulers of this world, but of all that wicked race of mankinde that goeth on in the waies of Antichrist, therefore he adds, but ye shall die as Adam, for so the word is, that is, in seeking to bee excel∣lent you corrupt your selves for ever, and in the way yee expect life, nothing but death ensues, and overtakes you; for that word (as) is not alwaies to be taken comparatively (as somwhat like) but somtimes in Scripture it signifies ve∣rily, or the very same thing, as in that place in JohnIohn 1. 14, And wee saw his glory (as) the glory of the onely begotten Son of God, that is, the very same glory of that onely begotten
Son of God, full of grace and truth, so it is here, you shall die (as) Adam, that is, the very same manner and kind of death that he died, therefore he addes, that they shall fal like Kings, that sought after great things, yea made war to take into possession the faire houses of GodPsal. 83. 12., like Zeb and Oreb, Jabin and Sisara, Zeba and Zalmunna, the Princes of MidianPsal. 83. 11., so that as it may truly be said, of the saved of the Lord, yee were dead in sins and trespasses, but now ye are alive unto God through Jesus ChristRom. 6. 11: so it may as truly be said of the wicked of the world, you were alive unto GodRom. 7. 9., in righteousnesse and ho∣linesse of truthEph. 4. 24, but ye are now dead in sins and wickednesse through that spirit of the old Man, and Antichrist, that spirit of the Prince of the power of the ayre, that now workes effectu∣ally in the children of disobedience or unbeleefe, as the word isEph. 2. 2., in that place: againe it is said, that there shall be false Tea∣chers, even denying the Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon themselves swift destruction2 Pet. 2. 1, which none can open to satisfie the consciences, unlesse he enter into the Word by this doore, to declare how they can be bought by our Lord Christ, and yet be destroyed; for it is also said as truly by that Word of truth, that some read under foot the blood of the new Covenant (whereby they were sanctified) and count it an un∣holy thing. So that it is no lesse true and certain, that those which are destroyed, and prove contemners of the grace of God in the Gospell, are sanctified and bought by the bloud of Jesus Christ (and yet partake in no salvation, nor in any jot of sanctity at all) then it is true and certain, that those which are saved are by nature lost and sold under sinne, and yet in our Lord Jesus they are not at any losse in any thing, nor under any slavery or bondage of sin at allRom. 8 15 Iohn 8. 35, 36.: and how∣ever we have traditionally received one of these as truth, and seem to approve it, yet have we no more certainty of the truth of it, then God makes knowne the truth of the other, but our thoughts are meerly conjecturall, as will appeare, When God sits as a Refiners fire, to purge and trie the house of LeviMal. 3. 2, 3.: yea unlesse God open this mystery unto us, we faile in the root of things, and all our contention and strife is but
about superfluous branches, and wee abide united in the fountaine of that Originall pollution, and savour all of one and the same stocke and root, some violently conten∣ding, (being dark in this point) that men may attaine to true grace, and be exercised in it for a time, and yet fall a∣way from it, and so can in this life have no certainty of sal∣vation; others, that if true grace be once abtained, that they can never fall away from it totally, but that they may have the comfort and assurance of it, they must wisely di∣stinguish between certain common graces of the Spirit that are the good guifts of God, and yet fall short of salvation, and those that are peculiar and speciall graces of the Spirit that attaine unto the end, which is salvation, whereas the truth is, in the meane time there is but one good Spirit or grace of God possessing the Elect, and leading the Sons of GodRom. 8. 14 into all truthIoh. 16. 13., which one Spirit multiplies it selfe into those various and seven-fold operations, that non can number the doubled and redoubled particulars, or di∣stinct kinds thereof, and yet but that one good thingRevel. 4 5 Revel. 1. 4. Mat. 7. 11., or spirit of sanctity and holinesse, which our Father knowes how to give to them that aske it, as also one spirit of that Prince of the pow∣er of the aireEphes. 2. 2, which enters into every heart and minde that is empty and vacant of that good spirit of grace from God our Father, even as the ayre cannot be kept out of any emp∣ty and void thing, but it presently fills it with it selfe, and this spirit only now works in the children of disobedience, or unbeleefe, and this in like manner though but one, yet can call it selfe Legion, because of the multitude thereofMark 5. 9 Luke 8. 30. Mat. 12. 45, which doth also double and redouble it selfe in operations for number, and severall kindes that cannot be reckoned up, but is the very same uncleane spirit, when it is transformed into an Angell of light2 Cor. 11. 14, 15., that he is in the dismall feares and ter∣rours in the men of this world;Isa. 33. 14; so that he that makes a common grace or spirit that is good, but yet brings not to salvation, and a speciall one that is good also, and leads unto salvation, that is indeed to make no spirit of God, nor of Satan at all, but a meere sophisticall coupling of light
and darknesse, Christ and Beliall together in one2 Cor. . 15., to the utter deluding and deceiving of the world, as the Magici∣ans of old did Pharaoh, and his servantsExod. 7. 11, 12., when by their so∣phistrie they resisted Moses, even as Jannes and Jambres at this day resist light, and stir up a mighty smoak to hide and cover the truth2 Tim. 3. 8, promising unto others liberty, when they themselves are the servants of corruption2 Pet. 2. 18, 19., in which place the Apostle speakes of some that have escaped the filthinesse and polluti∣on of the world, through the acknowledgement of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and yet are intangled againe in corruption and overcome, so as they never recover: For this latter end is worse then their beginning, also they are such as have knowne the way of the Lord, and turned from the holy Commandement as the dog to his vomit, and2 Pet. 2. 21, 22., as the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. So that wicked men, yea that son of perdition is as clearly escaped all the lusts of the flesh, by that worke of God in the Creation, or redemp∣tion of mankinde, as though there were not any corruption or putrifaction at all, and yet notwithstanding is intangled in them, altogether void of any purity at all, and that by the worke of his owne minde and understanding, opera∣ting upon that holy and glorious act of his Creator, judg∣ing of it according to the imaginations of his own heart, e∣ven as the Saints of God are really and wholly putrified and corrupted by their owne worke in the fall of man, and yet in that way of Christ Jesus have no spot or wrinckleEph. 5. 27., no more then as if there had never been any such thing at all: The one hath as truly the knowledge of the Commande∣ment by nature, according to the work of his Creation, and yet drowned in ignorance, and walloweth in it as the sow in the mire2 Pet. 2. 20.; even as the other hath taken upon himselfe the state of an Idiot, in that worke of his humiliation, and yet impossible that he should erreIsa. 35. 8., or fall short of holding corre∣spondency with the Father, of lights in the least particle, of the understanding of his will; the one hath it by nature, in respect of his unity in the creation with that nature that is nothing but purity and knowledge: the other hath it by
nature also, in respect of that which he taketh into unity with himselfe, which in it selfe is nothing but impurity and grosse darknesseEph. 5. 8. Col. 1. 12, 13, without the knowledge of this misery, we may speake things of certaine knowledge in the way of man, and so preach the word of a man, and not of God1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. Col. 2. 4., but we can never speake spirituall things in a spirituall man∣ner,1 Cor. 2. 13. as that phrase of the Apostle sounds, and so speak as the Oracle of God1 Pet. 4. 11., without the knowledge of this myste∣ry, we may utter a spirituall thing in respect of termes and phrasesNumb. 24. 3. to 9., but we cannot know the ground and reason of it, according to God, and so we know not whence it comes, or how it ariseth, nor whither it tends, and what will be the is∣sue of it, and so can never communicate in the truth, life, power, and benefit thereof: But thus much at this time for the offering of the Lamb, which concernes both the eating and roasting of his flesh, as also the preservation of his bones, that one of them shall never be brokenPsa. 34. 20 Ioh. 19. 33. 36., as also the multiplication and unity of it.  The third instance we named, was in the Baptismes, and washings of the Church, and this is a thing that nature produceth in its owne way to adorne it selfe withall, and to make it selfe acceptable unto God, even as the two former that we have already named, in the out∣ward formes and figures thereof, for nature it selfe produ∣ceth, sets up, and creates a Priest or Eldership, as we see it apparant in these poore and barbarous heathens amongst whom we live; so had the heathen in former times, when they set up Molech, Chion, and exercised in the Taberna∣cle which belonged unto themAmos 5. 26., unto which our Apostle alludes, declaring that Idolatry committed by the Fathers in the wildernesse, perceiving it to be the same with that a∣mong the heathen, and altogether as heathenish, or aliena∣ted a thing from the true worshippersActs 7 43: yea Stephen applies it to that naturall and carnall worship which the Jewes so stifly maintainedActs 7. 57 58, 59., so that rather then it should fall, the Lords faithfull Martyr or Witnesse should be put to death, yea that holy man StephenActs 7. 60; even so also the offering of a sacrifice to God, nature doth bring forth according to its
owne though severall devices and inventions: and hence it is, that so many waies of worship are found in the world; so the heathen they sacrificed, but the Prophet said, it was to Devills, and not unto GodDeut. 32. 17., yea, they offered their children to Molech, for what will not a man give for the sin of his soule, the cattell of a thousand mountaines, with ten thousand rivers of oyle, yea the first borne of his body, to be released from the sin of his souleMica 6. 7., so also it is with Baptisms and Washings, nature produceth such and adornes it selfe with them, as it did by eating of the forbidden tree at the first, that it might become amiable, and be made thereby like unto God, and therefore the Apostle bids us lay aside, or to cease from (as the word will beare) the Word, or the Doctrine, or Preaching of the beginnings of ChristHeb. 6. 1, 2.: now the Word of the beginnings of Christ, is that which is properly preached in that wherein Christ had a beginning, and that is onely in our nature as he was the Son of Man, for as he is God, he hath no beginning at all, but is from all eternity: so that those things we are to cease from, are such Doctrines as that nature wherein Christ hath a beginning, doth naturally of it selfe produce, preach, or bring forth, which were in Christ, are and ever shall be in that way of Christ left and censed from, which are things imper∣fect and defective, and therefore cannot stand before GodIsa. 28. 20; but our Apostle leads us from those unto things of perfecti∣on, which are onely found in that Son of God, which are things that God onely admits, or certainely approves of, and not to lay againe that foundation that is naturally laid in the hearts of all men, as repentance from, or as the word may be read, repentance out of dead workes, that is, such a repen∣tance as ariseth out of the dead workes of the Law natural∣ly in mans heartRom. 7. 4, 6., which hath no life of God in it, but is ever to be repented of wherever it appears, of such nature also is that faith towards God, that there he would have us leave and cease from; or faith besides or against God, as the word there used will also beare; as wel as to read it, towards God, therefore the Apostle saith, thou beleevest that there is one God, thou dost well, the Devills also beleeve it, and trembleIames 2. 19.;
for there is nothing in the Devills but what stands in oppo∣sition against God, and is at enmity with his Creator, and therefore is his trembling, because his faith presents God, standing in termes of opposition unto him, for this faith that nature brings forth presents one God unto us, but not one God as in his Son, consisting of two natures, and in whom or in what particular that kinde of faith is, he is vaine and empty that so beleevesIam. 2. 20., and it is the very way that the Prince of the power of the ayre, as was above noted, enters into the soule, and ever hath done even from the beginning, for the Son of God is not the life, and fulnesse of that faith, or any particular act or opperation of it, where our nature is not reckoned up together with him as one, thence it is, that it is called a dead faithIam. 2. 20., not having the life of Christ in it, but the workes of the Law, by which no flesh can be justi∣fiedRom. 3. 20, and by which works the Apostle saith, salvation cannot beeGal. 2. 16., for then man might boastEph. 2. 8, 9., which he cannot in any case doe, but where Christ is the life and fullnesse of the creature there are the workes and operations of the Son of GodEph. 1, 19, 20, 22, 23., and without these works neither Abraham in offering Isaac nor any of his posterity can ever be saved and justified before GodIam. 2. 14. 21. to 26., therefore he saith, that Abraham was justified by workes, for faith without works (saith he) is deadIam. 2. 20, because it is alone, or as the word is, by it selfeIam. 2. 17: that is to say, is not the faith of union which alwaies lookes at God and man, as one in Christ, so that however some may say I have faith, and thou hast workesIam. 2. 18, yet there is no faith without workes, or works without faith; for if there be faith which is meerly natu∣rall, yea, that the Devils have, it is never exempted from the workes or operations of the Devill and of the flesh, and and if there be the works of the Sonne of God, and of the Spirit, they are never exempted from the faith of union of God and man in one subsistance. So also there is a Bap∣tisme and Washing that is naturall, which men adorne them∣selves withall in the Worship of God, which is manifold, therefore put in the plurall number BaptismsHeb. 6. 2., as mens minds varie, this we see in the practise of these Indians amongst
whom we live, that in their Worship and Services used for the recovery of the sicke, the Priest sprinckles the diseased person with cleane water, many times in the act of their worship: this is seen also in those wicked Jewes, that had nothing but naturall operations to draw or to drive them (rather) to Johns Baptisme, whom he calls a generation of vipers, whom he upbraideth with their fore-warned, or forestalled opinionMat. 3. 7. Luke 3. 7., that such a dipping or washing should save them from wrath to come, as hee performed it, being that all that he did was but to shew what a turbulent Jor∣dan and Deluge of wrath the Son of God descended into (which was already in their hearts) and for no other end, but that we might in him ascend into that fountaine and overflowing streame of Gods grace, compassion, and ten∣der mercy for ever, in the vertuous and glorious actions of the Son of God, for Johns Ministry and dipping, sheweth what Christ hath in our nature, and the Ministry of Christ in his coming up, or ascending out of the waters, with the Spirit of God lighting, residing, or abiding upon him, de∣clares what we are in that divine nature of the Word, or Son of God: Now these Jewes would be playing the part, and presuming to performe the Office of the Son of God, (who descends downe into the depth of the wrath of his Father) hoping thereby to escape wrath, even as our first Parents entred into the way of death, in hope to escape it, and to attaine life thereby, and in the meane time neglect, contemne and despise that glory of the Son, which he in that dipping or descention of his, doth so freely tender, and offer unto them, for it is onely his part to descend and be dipped in the waters of our weaknesse, that have by na∣ture no life nor Spirit of God in us at all, or into that trou∣bled Jordan of Gods wrath, which naturally burneth in e∣very mans soule, and it is onely our priviledge to ascend and come out of that wrath and weaknesse in that descen∣ding and residing of that life, and Dove-like Spirit of God upon us for everMat. 3. 16: the first of these is naturall, and inci∣dent unto all men, to dip, to dive, to sprinckle and wash
with materiall water, or to plunge themselves into some infirmity or weaknesse of the flesh, as fasting, mourning, afflicting of themselves, or the like, hoping thereby to please God, for the appeasing of his wrath, and so do un∣dertake the Office of the Son of God, to undergoe the Crosse in themselves, which is the very spirit of Antichrist, and in the meane time neglect and contemne the other, namely that glorious resurrection of our nature through that residency of the Spirit upon it, whereby we are made able to give Satan the foyle in all his temptations, even as our Lord did by the power of his mightMat. 4. 1.—11. Col. 1. 11. Phil. 4. 13. Rev. 2. 26, 27.; Therefore in all Baptisms and Washings practised in the holy Scripture we must know, that there is not any two performed alike, all circumstances considered, therefore that Church which takes up the way of any particular of them alone, and of it selfe, cannot practise nor performe the true Baptisme, when the whole Administration thereof (which the Holy Ghost hath beene pleased to declare the right of it in so many differing waies) is not brought in; therefore if wee will professe and practise the perfect Baptisme unto which our Apostle leads us, when he saith, let us goe on unto per∣fectionHeb. 6. 1., then we must unite and contract them all into one, and so shall we finde the Ordinance of Baptisme to bee found faulty in all Churches under heaven, unlesse they have learned to center them all in one, and if they doe so, it will not be found in any but onely in the Son of God, whose dipping or washing comprehends them all, and so hath in it all spirituall and holy dippings and washings whatsoever, therefore if we set up another besides that which is perfected in him, we make an Idoll of it, and so subject our selves unto wrath1 Cor. 10. 1, to 7., for it is in this point of Baptisme as it is in the death of Christ, if we professe ano∣ther death (that is spirituall) besides that which Christ hath undergone, we make an Idoll of it, and subject our selves thereby to the undergoing of that eternall death to come, by usurping and arrogating unto our selves the death of Christ, which he at once for ever perfectedHeb. 7. 27 Heb. 10. 10., for the water of
that Baptisme that now is saveth us, even as Noah was saved in the Arke by waters1 Pet. 3. 20, 21., that he perished not with the rest of the world; even so doth the Baptisme of Christ (which is his Crosse) save us, and lift us up from perishing in those wa∣ters, or in that wrath that naturally ingenders, breeds, and breakes forth in every mans heart, both from things below, and also from things above, as those waters of Noah didGal. 4. 24, 25. Gen. 7. 11, 12., for he appearing in the similitude of sinfull flesh, by sin, or by becoming sin in us, condemned sin in the fleshRom. 8. 3., passed sentence upon it, that it should never live in us, nor have dominion over us any moreRom. 6. 14, for he made a plaister of our sins to heal us of, and save us from our sins for ever, and so by death o∣vercame him that had the power of deathHeb. 2. 14., even as the Arke by the waters overcame the waters, and yet the same waters stifled and choaked the world, so by being made sin, Christ overcomes sin, and yet the same sin destroyes and con∣demns the worldPsal. 34. 21.: For as the waters of Noah lifted up the Arke to heaven out of all danger, that otherwise might have befallen it, and the very same waters also drowned and destroyed the rest of the world, so doth the Baptisme of Christ (which is his Crosse) save us, and lift us up unto God, and yet the very same thing, which is his Crosse or Death, doth also destroy and overthrow the wicked, for the Son of God taking our nature into unity with himselfe,  is that which is properly his Crosse or Death, he thereby sustaining our infirmitiesIsa. 53. 4., and so in one act for ever perfecteth our salva∣tionHeb. 10. 14, and all those things that Jesus Christ suffered upon the earth, in so many acts, places, and by so many persons, and waies, is his Crosse Doctrinally, and all those things doe set forth and declare what that one intire act of the Son of God is, in taking our nature into unity with the Word, which act indeed is the proper Baptisme, Crosse or Death of Christ that saves us1 Pet. 3. 21., and all other Baptismes per∣formed in the holy Scriptures at all times amongst the Saints, are onely the teaching and setting forth of that one, unto which they all look with an equall and indifferent eye, so that if we take up one of them more or lesse then ano∣ther,
we wrong both it, and all the rest, and doe nothing else but make an Idoll of it, for if we goe about to forme and fashion another Baptisme (but what is already perfected in Christ) we may as well goe about to forme and frame un∣to our selves another Crosse then that which Christ hath already undergone, and that were to arrogate unto our selves the proper and sole work of the Son of God1 Cor. 4 7, there∣fore he saith, I must be baptized with a Baptisme, and how am I pained, or kept in, or pressed and gathered together? as the word signifiesLuke 12. 50., shewing that all Baptismes are gathered together into that one act of his, which is the ending and consummation of them all, even as all death is comprized in that one and alone act of death of the Son of God, which puts an end unto all death spirituall, that tends to the se∣paration of God and man whatever it beeHos. 13. 14 Rom. 8. 34., so that the proper portion and inheritance of the Saints is nothing else but light and life, for all death and darknesse, is in Christ done awayEphes. 5. 8, so that we may as well goe about to frame unto our selves another spirituall death, that hath not been already undergone and perfected for ever, as to frame an∣other Baptisme or Washing that is spirituall, that is not yet performed and already perfected, so that if ever we commu∣nicate in that one onely death of Jesus Christ, unto solid and sound satisfaction, then shall we also participate in his only and alone Baptisme, to our full edification and conso∣lation Heb. 10. 22, 23., which Baptisme is not a putting away of the filth of the flesh1 Pet. 3. 21., or as the word may be read, the low and base e∣steeme of the flesh, as to be low and base in respect not be such a thing in it selfe, as to be low and base in respect of it self, but it is the stipulation or answering againe of a good conscience towards God in the Resurrection of Iesus Christ; that is, there is an answering of all those particulars wherein our natu∣rall infirmity and weaknesse doth divulge and utter it selfe in us, there is an answering againe (I say) unto them all, in that Resurrection of Jesus Christ, through the testimony of a good conscience, that is to say, to fill with plenty every thing in want, to strengthen and give power to every thing
that is weake, yea, there is in him a salve to heale every sore that is in us, a comfort for every sorrow, a cover for every part of our nakednesse, and glory, to make honourable e∣very dishonourable thing, such a thing is the Baptisme of the Gospell, that by how much the more our infirmities are multiplied, as being that which is the death of the Son of God, by so much the more is our righteousnesse and peace made manifest in us2 Cor. 1. 4 5, 6., through his Resurrection, which is the life of the Son of God, so that as sin hath abounded, so al∣so doth grace abound much more; and the more we catch at any other Baptisme, the more we shew our selves to be carnall, and ignorant of this answering againe of a good con∣science through that Resurrection of Jesus Christ, even as in water face answereth to face: If we will professe our selves rightly to understand, embrace, and practise that Baptisme which is according to the grace of the Gospell, that is ac∣cording to Principles springing out of the Son of God, and not according to that shallow and short scantling of the apprehensions and operations of mans heart, which all men are apt and ready to bring forth, according to the way of their education and training up: then must we know, through the light of that SpiritEph. 1. 17., and Law that can onely make wise the simplePsal. 19. 7 Psal. 119. 130, and cause the Idiot so to walke as hee cannot erreIsa. 35. 8., how to extend and multiply this Ordinance of Bap∣tisme, and how to abridge and contract all those severall waies of it into one intire act; as that of the peoples, be∣ing baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea1 Cor. 10. 1, 2., also Johns baptizing in JordanMat. 3. 13, and in Enon, or in the cloud, or many waters, as the word signifiesJohn 3. 23, his baptisme of Christ the Son of GodMat. 3. 15, 16., his baptizing of the Jewes and Generation of vipersMat. 3. 5, 6, 7., his baptizing of PublicansLuke 3. 12, and the like, so also baptizing with the Holy Ghost and with fireLuk. 3. 16, the baptizing of repentance and remission of sinsMark 1. 4, the Baptisme to be admini∣stred onely upon beleevingAct. 8. 36, 37., the Baptisme of the Eunuch, Phi∣lip going downe into the water with himActs 8. 38, the Baptisme of the house of Cornelius, where no such thing as going downe in∣to the water is practisedAct. 10. 47, the Baptisme of good men, such as
the said Cornelius wasActs 10. 22., the Baptisme of wicked men, such as Simon Magus wasActs 8. 13, with many the like severall sorts of Baptisme, this we say, that Baptisme is not knowne, (in that extent which God hath given it unto us in) unlesse it be tru∣ly and in a holy manner extended unto all those severall waies, together with all circumstances which the Lord hath commended it unto us in, and thereby bring that true la∣ver and fountaine of Baptisme to diffuse it self in a most godly manner into them all, as also we must know, how every streame of it doth returne and center it selfe in that one onely fountaine, and this is the multiplication, as also the abbreviation of that Ordinance, without which it can∣not be fruitfull unto us: But in what one particular way so∣ever we practise it, it will prove unto us a meere way of man, and so a worke of the flesh, and of the flesh, we shall not reap but onely corruptionGdl. 6. 8., but if God declare it unto us, dif∣fusively and distributively into all the actions of it, and also summarily in one onely act, then can we finde it in none but Christ alone, who onely is that great and waighty Or∣dinance of Baptisme in the house of God, as well as he is that of Priesthood, out of which it springs, and that of of∣fering up the Lamb, and whilest we are ordering this Ordinance of Baptisme, or any other, to please our selves and others, in a way of the Religion of God, trimming and adorning our selves with one particular way of it, and lay aside all the rest as things either out of date, as that of Bap∣tizing unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea1 Cor. 10. 2., or else as ex∣traordinary acts, as that of baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, in the descending of the Spirit upon us, to fit us for all offices and occasionsMat. 3. 16. Mat. 4. 1., or else as things impossible to bee attained, as that all should goe into JordanMat. 5. 6., or things not a∣greeable unto the Countrey, as to go downe with all the body into the water, because of the coldAct. 8. 38, or as things not conclu∣ded by the gravest Synods, and most judicious Divines, I say, we may as well (as to reason and practise thus in our way of Baptisme) take up one of the Commandements,  or of those Lawes God hath given unto us to be our onely rule to
walke by, and lay aside all the rest, for the Law of God is multiplied, we see, in all other points as well as in this of Baptisme; for it is not onely laid downe in those ten words given unto Moses in the MountExod. 34. 27. Deut. 10. 4., but infinitely in the holy Scriptures, and it is also contracted and brought into one, insomuch, that he that breakes one Commandement is guilty of allIam. 2. 10, 11., therefore it is said, I have written unto them the great things of my LawHos. 8. 12.: but the word is, I have written unto them the multitudes of my Law, it is great for multitude, so that the Law is multiplyed, yea it is innumerable, and it is also a∣bridged into one, therefore it is said, and if there be any o∣ther Commandement it is all contained in this one word, love thy neighbour as thy selfe, and is said to be the fulfilling of the LawRom. 13. 8, 9, 10. 1 Tim. 1. 5.; So that if we will have one way of Baptisme, and lay aside all the rest, when as God hath diffused it in his Word into so many wayes, then let us also (on the like ground) take one of the Lawes of God, to be our rule to walk by, and lay aside all the rest, the one of these will prove onely the spirit of a Libertine to pick out one Law which he (accor∣ding to the wisdome and judgement of the flesh) can best suit himselfe unto, and neglect and despise whatsoever cros∣seth his carnall appetite in all the rest; and the other is that great and cruell Spirit of bondage that prepares a yoke that all mens necks must bow under, and be subjected unto, or else undergoe the penalty whatever it isMat. 23. 4. 1 King. 12. 11. 14. Acts 9. 14.. A like Doctrine also is that of the guifts of the Spirit,  attributing one guift to one man, and another guift to another, and may not be doubtfull of his condition, estate or office in the Church, if he have any one of them which they unskilfully gather from those excellent places (wrested as they doe all other Scriptures to the sleighty healing of soules) where the guifts of the spirit are set forth by a trim allusion unto the parts of a mans body, shewing the harmonicall relations and di∣stinct use and exercise of them, concluding, that if all were an eye, then where were the hearing? and if all were an eare, then where were the smelling1 Cor. 12 17.? from such places as these con∣cluding, that one man hath one guift, and another man hath
another gift, wee confesse the argument to be true in na∣ture, that one man hath not every gift: but as true as that is in nature, so certaine and true is it in this also, that such arguing in the things of God proceeds from naturall rea∣son onelyIude 10.; for we grant in the things of men, that he that is a father, is not the son, and she that is a wife is not the husband, nor is he that is the master the servant: But if men will analize spirituall things with naturall, we have no such custome, neither the Churches of God, as the Apostle speaks in a like case1 Cor. 11. 16., yet this we know, that the members of the body, unto which our Apostle alludes, in their severall and distinct offices, it is presupposed that every body is indued with them all, else it were not a compleat body to be al∣luded untoMat. 6. 22 23., so also is it in the gifts of the spirit, eve∣ry Christian that is compleat in Christ is blessed with them both in their multiplication, and also in their concatenation in their harmonious relations one to another, and orderly operations distinct one from another; otherwise there would alwaies be strange and unknown tongues in the house of God1 Cor. 14. 1, 2, to 19., in case that one should utter himselfe in a gift that all the rest of the Church were not indued with; for, that new name written in that white stone none can know but hee that hath itRev. 2. 17.: So that, if any utter the mystery of the Go∣spell, according to any particular gift given in the Church, all the rest must either have the same gift, or els they cannot know what is uttered, But he that speaks is unto them a Bar∣barian, and they to him1 Cor. 14. 11.: for, what gifts, offices, or abilities are distributed unto the whole body of the Church, are also proper unto (yea the very portion of) every particular member in it, or els Christ were divided, if hee were not that to every one that he is to any one, or to all: and we may as well deny all grace to any member, as one grace; for, if one, then any one; as the grace of justification, pardon of sin, faith, or the like; which to be without, we know, makes a nullity of a Christian; for, he cannot be a Christian with∣out such grace. Againe, if every one share not alike in all grace, then Christ cannot be all in allCol. 3. Eph. 4. 6. Eph. 5. 9., (which honour the
word gives unto him) which he cannot be, if he were part in one member, and part in another; therefore you have the spirit multiplied, for the seven spirits of God are before the throneRev. 1. 4.: you have it also contracted; for it is but one Spi∣rit Eph. 4. 3, 4.: so that it is seven which implies the perfections of it, or fulnesse of its going forth in all its operations, as that number seven in Scripture signifies: and it is but one, to shew the unity and necessity of it, in all its works to be the same1 Cor. 12 4. to 11., which one if any man have not, the same is none of ChristsRom. 8. 9.; for if any man have not Spirit of Christ he is none of his: yea that number seven in Scripture sometimes signifies weeks, as where the Law appoints the feast of weeks or of se∣vens Exod. 34. 22. Deut. 16. 10 16. 2 Chron. 8. 3., as the world may rightly be rendred: which number is given to the Spirit of God before the throne, to declare, that as the word went out at the first, in the framing of hea∣ven and earth, in the whole, and every particular creature, and operation in the Universe, within the compasse of se∣ven dayes; so also doth the Spirit of God go forth, where∣ever, or in whomsoever it is, in the whole, and every parti∣cular work and operation in the new creature, or in that cre∣ation of GodRev. 3. 14, in that seven-fold operation which is given to every particular Saint, as well as unto the whole body of the Church; for if any man be in Christ he is a new crea∣ture 2 Cor. 5. 17.: And as there are multitudes of creatures in heaven and earth, whence it is said, that every creature groaneth and travelleth in paineRom. 8. 22; so also the whole is but one creature, and therefore he saith, The creature it selfe (speaking as of one) shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sonnes of GodRom. 8. 21, or in the singular num∣ber, into the glorious liberty of the Sonne of God: it is e∣very creature (in the plurall number) as one creation consists of so many; and it is but one, as so many creatures make but one work of the creation: and if God teach us not this art of multiplication and abbreviation in the word of God, and in every Ordinance in the opening of it, we can never at∣taine to that of the Apostle (the duty of all skilfull and faithfull Ministers) to declare unto the flock of God the whole
minde and counsell of GodActs 20. 27.; for if wee preach not whole Christ out of every Scripture, we open not the Scripture, to run cleare unto the flock, but puddle the waters, and such as puddle the waters, will also push with the horne at the sheepe of ChristEzek. 34. 18. to 25.: for, every word of God, that is, every Scripture, composed into one proper head, whether in way of Histo∣ry, Prophecie, Proverb, Parable, or the like, proposeth whole Christ unto us; and so also doth every Ordinance, exercise or gift of the Spirit, truly understood, published or practi∣sed in the house of God: and if we set forth Jesus Christ, we declare the whole counsell of God; for he is the mind and will of the Father, not in part, but wholly and complete in the whole, as also in every part: for, in his incarnation whole Christ is comprised therein, as also in his divulging and open∣ing of the minde of the Father, whole Christ is composing in that his preaching, in his death, whole Christ, in his resurrection whole Christ, in his intercession whole Christ, in his Kingly Office whole Christ, in his Priestly office whole Christ, in his Propheticall Office no lesse then whole Christ, in prayer whole Christ, in his fasting whole Christ, in his temptations whole Christ; yea thus it is in every point that concernes Christ; and all things in the religion, wayes and worship of God have no lesse reference and respect unto Christ, that word of life, in their ordination, consecration, publication, dispensa∣tion, exercise and practice of them, then all the creatures in heaven and earth have respect unto that word of God in their creation, conservation, and orderly gubernation unto this dayPsal. 33. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Psal. 119. 89, 90, 91., which made, sustaines, and upholds them all: and as it is in the art of Philosophie, that in the full and accurate discussing of any particular creature, in its nature, operation, and of∣fice, relations and respects, we must bring in the whole crea∣tion, to set it forth to perfection: so is it in the things of God; there is no particular in that new creature, that can be discussed unto edification and comfort; but whole Christ is brought in, who is the perfection and brightnesse of the Fathers gloryHeb. 1. 3., els is not the mystery of God declared, the word of God interpre∣ted, nor the kingdome of heaven opened unto believers, and the beloved of God. So also in the opening of the mystery of
iniquity2 Thes. 2. 7., every point and particular therein skilfully hand∣led by him that hath the key of that bottomlesse pitRev. 9. 1, 2., is the ve∣ry in-let of Satan, yea the proper power and kingdome of darknesse, and compriseth that whole brood and generation of that man of sin, and is that way of annullity, vastation, and emptinesse of the Sonne of God: For, as certainly as Satan found nothing of himselfe in ChristIohn 14. 30. our Saviour, so is nothing of Christ found in that Sonne of perdition, nei∣ther in the whole, nor in any particular of him: so that in every point his sin is as capitall, and of no lesse headship, then is the putting to death of the Sonne of God,  whose life (in the least) is no wayes found in him; thence it is that the proper office of Christ assigned by God, is to crush the aead of the SerpentGen. 3. 15, so that he never goeth out in his true office of ministerie, but he strikes at the very head of Antichrist; for there is no sin that reignes in any of the sonnes of men, that hath not in it the headship and domina∣tion of Antichrist; for it is of no lesse guilt and crime, then is the putting of the Lord of heaven and of earth unto death1 Cor. 2. 8: So that those that strive and contend against sinnes that are not capitall, yea the very force and head of Satan in that man of sin, they never go forth in that Office and Ministe∣ry of the Sonne of God; for the seed of the woman is onely assigned by his Father to breake or crush the head of the ser∣pent Isa. 51 9. Psal. 74. 14; and at lesse he never strikes, then at the ring-leaders to death and destruction, yea at such as destroy, and crucifie the Sonne of the living GodHeb. 6. 6.: and yet notwithstanding, it cannot properly be said that Satan foiles or overcomes the Sonne of God, but is foiled and overcome himselfe, for Michael and his Angells overcome the Dragon and his An∣gells Rev. 12. 7, to 11.; therefore he is said to bruise the heele of Christ, or as the word signifies, to crush the print of the foot-sole, that is, he denies unto himselfe that headship, power, and autho∣rity that is peculiar and proper to the Sonne of God, whose Kingdome and power is not of this worldIohn 18. 36., and in denying that, he denies all the grace of the Sonne of God; for no man can any more receive or apply that righteousnesse of
God in Christ, by faith to his justification, then he can attri∣bute and apply the power, and authority of God unto himselfe, for his headship and domination, and so he crush∣eth the print of his foot-sole, that is to say, he brings to nought that thing that at the first had the very print, image, and character of the Son of God upon it, for his heart confes∣seth, and his words and actions declare it, that the Lordship and dominion of the Son of God is another thing, then for the present he is conversant in and about, and this ne∣gation or deniall of the headship of Christ, sets him in di∣rect opposition against Christ, seeking by all meanes to ex∣alt himselfe in the power and waies of the flesh, which is according to the letter that kills2 Cor. 3. 6., written in all mens hearts which is the very print of the foot-sole of Christ, declaring the extent and depth of his humiliation, the form whereof Satan crusheth, and bringeth to nought in himselfe, by de∣minishing of it in himselfe, making it of lesse extent then indeed it is, and so maketh the headship of Christ of no other use unto himselfe, but to give dimension unto his sin, which kindleth wrath in himselfe for everRom. 2. 4, 5, 6. Gal. 4. 24.; for he that confesseth himself to be really and indeed that only bottomless gulf of Christ his humiliation, cannot but acknowledge Christ to be really and indeed that onely and alone height of his exalta∣tion, and therefore it is, that Christ crusheth the Serpents head, that is, extends the flesh unto its height and head∣ship which cannot rest, unlesse by eating it may bee like GodGen. 3. 6., which disposition or condition Christ takes into u∣nity with himselfe in us, which is the very depth and state of his humiliation, and hereby destroyes it, which act is his great victory and exaltation for everActs 8. 33, making it to bee of no other use, but meerly to give dimension unto his exal∣tation and glory for ever, that it may appeare unto the crea∣ture of what eminency, height, and dignity it is, which o∣therwise could not appeare. But some will say, what though things be thus in Jesus Christ, which we willingly acknowledge, yet what is that to mee for my present comfort and peace? how may I
know that these things belong to my selfe?  Let me in love answer, in the words of the Apostle in case of the resurre∣ction, Thou foole1 Cor. 15. 36.; canst thou give Christ a true forme and being in mans nature, and yet there is but one nature of man, which thou hast and art, (for by nature wee are all a∣like Ephes. 2. 3 Rom. 3. 10. 11. 12.) and yet canst not give him a forme in thy selfe? it is impossible so to be: So that, the forming of Christ with∣out us, being in our selves destitute of his life, love, spirit, and power, is meerly imaginary, historicall, traditionall, and and that will vanish in time of need; and not reall, accord∣ing to the dictate of the spirit, in the power of faith, through which the Saints are kept unto, or in salvation1 Pet. 1. 5., for hee hath a name given unto him that none can know but himselfeRev. 19. 12.; and to affirme that we are able to give Christ a true forme and being, out of our selves doctrinally, and yet that he is not in our selves, operating and working effectually, is as much as to affirme, we can give Christ a true forme and being with∣out mans nature, which the word of God knowes not, nor ever did; for he is that onely and alone way unto the Fa∣ther John 14. 6., yea he had never the relation of a Sonne unto the Father, but through death; for if ever he had closed with the Father in any other way, he had never tasted death for usHeb. 2. 9., for the Lord our righteousnesse cannot changeIer. 23. 6. Mal. 3. 6. in any thing, then not in his relation unto the Father; so that it was ever through death, and he never had death but in us, which once granted, is the very in-let of life unto us for e∣ver. Nay to conclude, we give Christ a true forme and being as he was framed in our nature in the wombe of the Vir∣gin Luk. 1. 35, and yet are destitute of his being framed and fashio∣ned in our hearts and conversationsGal. 4. 19. by faith, to our com∣fort in the edification of others, is all one, as if a man should affirm himself to be able to frame a place for the safety of a man in a rock impregnable, and yet himselfe could not be in safety thereby; for Christ is that rocke of agesDeut. 32. 18. 31.: where e∣ver faith gives him his true proportion: further, to give Christ his true forme without us, and yet to bee with∣out the comfort and fruit of his dwelling, and being resident
in us by his grace (and that apparently) is as if a man should affirm, that the eye is of use, and onely sees for it selfe, but not for the body in which it is, nor is of that use, as to be the light of itMat. 6. 22 Luke 11. 34, for the eyes sees properly for the body, rather then for it selfe; for, If the eye be single, the whole body is light; yea the hand sees to work, and the foot to walk, as apparently, as if such a member were the eye it selfe, because it is in the body. Now Christ is that eye, and that fountaine of life and light; and in his light onely it is that wee see lightPsal. 36. 9: even as in this naturall Sun, we cannot see it but by its own light, and if we see it so, we cannot but see it for, and upon our selves; so that if we see Christ in any respect, in his own light, we cannot but see him for our owne consolation, (even in that respect, whatever it may be) yea and that in, and upon our selves; for the eye sees not, nor hath that life and sense of sight, but as it hath confluence with the body; even so, our Lord never manifested that life and spirit of his, which is the light and revelation of himselfe, but as hee hath confluence with that body given unto him, or eare bored thoroughPsal. 40. 6 Heb. 10. 5., by which he lives through death, and becomes light out of darknesse, which none but the Sonne of God himselfe can either be, or performe: and thence it is, that darknesse covering the face of the deep, in that great morning and early day in the beginning of the worldGen. 1. 2. Iob 38. 4. to 15. teacheth us what it is; for the Spirit of God to brood upon those vast waters of our nature, being in our selves no lesse then that deep mystery of iniquity; so that, as that word of command at the first, brought out light even out of that darknesse, say∣ing, Let there be light, and it was so, or rather by that oath of interposition (which is taught therein, even from the beginning) which giveth light in our Lord for ever; for the word translated [let] signifies so be it, or so it is, or shall be, or amon, or verily it is so, having in it the vertue of an oath, binding over the creature, in the vertue and power of the word of God, to be obedient and subject thereunto for ever; even so that spirit, that gives life by Jesus Christ, broods upon our nature, which in it selfe is corruptible (and in the
depth of death through our fall) brooding therein, and bringing forth that light of life that is by Iesus Christ2 Cor. 4. 6 Ioh. 1. 4, 5 wher∣by we are given to understand how to judge of that unity, and of those distinctions that are proper to that new creati∣on of God, whereof Christ is the beginning, or headRev. 3. 14, even as light gives ability to judge rightly of the forme and figure of all things in this present world; therefore the Apostle e∣legantly alludes unto that first worke in the creation of the world, in teaching of this doctrine, saying, God who comman∣ded the light to shine out of darknesse, hath shined in our hearts, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Je∣sus Christ2 Cor. 4. 6: So that the confluence of darknesse is the very production or propagation of light, the Sonne of God be∣coming that in us, which according to our light, is nothing but darknesse, wee become that in him that is no∣thing but light; therefore the Apostle saith, Ye were darknesse (or as the word will beare, ye are darknesse) but ye are made light in the Lord, walke therefore as children of lightEphes. 5. 8.. Yea this questioning, whether Christ be ours or no, at present, is no∣thing else but that grand question propounded in the begin∣ning, whether we have the image of God (making us corre∣spondent unto his will in all things) or no, but must seek out some tree and fruit to make us wise, that we may attaine it, yet our Apostle affirmes our Lord Iesus to bee the image of GodCol. 1. 15, and that he was made so in our nature, yea in and for usCol. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 18.; therefore the question is the same that ever it was, and also the demurres and debates about it, and how to attaine it, are those proper reasonings of the woman and the ser∣pent even to this dayGen. 3. 1. 6 2 Cor. 11. 3; as also the issues thereof are the sameGen. 3. 7, 8. Rev. 3. 17, 18. and that is always the subject matter of his doctrine, the way of his instruction and counsell, when the woman, the weaker vessell1 Pet. 3. 7, yea that wisdome of man, and not of God1 Cor. 2. 4 5. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 12 holds dispute and discourse in point of religion, but when the manchild is brought forth, so as the woman holds no dispute with the Serpent, no more then a woman can hold dispute with any whether her travell be neare or no, but apply her selfe to the present work, in the height and
greatest pang of her labourRev. 12. 2., then that instructing and tea∣ching (though shie and subtill serpent2 Cor. 11. 3.) becomes a fierce, bloody, red persecuting DragonRev. 12. 3, 4. to her and her seed whereso∣ver they goRev. 12. 17.; and so his doctrine is changed into discipline, seeking by that meanes to regulate and make perfect the world: see this point for the conclusion of it, in the simili∣tude of the operation of the minde of a wife to her hus∣band that is faithfull and true unto him, and also of one that hath broken the marriage bond; in case wee conceive, wee think we conceive and esteeme highly of Christ, but question whether his dignity and excellency be ours yea or no; for, a faithfull wife, hearing the praises of her husband, and his prowesse and vertues set forth, she rejoyceth, and it plea∣seth her better, then if she were commended her selfe, be∣cause his praises are hers, which in her selfe could not possi∣bly be so eminent, she being the weaker vessell, as also true love ever gives honour unto the party beloved, and not to it selfe, which shewes that matrimoniall and conjugall tie and bond to be upon her; even so it is in the spouse, in every par∣ticular believing soule, when Christ is praised in the Church, set forth and commended to be the chiefest of ten thousandCant. 5. 10, that onely and alone interpreter, that declares unto man his righ∣teousnese Iob 33. 23, that King of SaintsDeu. 3. 2, Prince of peaceHeb. 7. 2., Bishop of our soules1 Pet, 2. 25, that joy of the Lord, or that joy the Lord, (as the word isNeh. 2. 10) which is our strength, that beloved and delight∣ed in of the fatherPro. 8. 30, 31., that Lord our righteousnesseIer. 23. 6., that cap∣taine and high Priest of our professionHeb. 3. 1., yea the Lord hosts or armiesPsal. 46. 7 11.. When these things are given and ascribed unto the Sonne of God alone, in the Church, and unto none else whatsoever, then doth the heart of the Spouse delight it self in him, and it is more quickening and reviving to her, the (if it had been possible) these things might have been ascribed and attributed unto her selfe; for the very nature of this contract, faith, or conjugall love is such, that if Iohn Baptist be but yet in the wombe of Elizabeth, an alliance or consin unto the Virgin, hee cannot but spring in the wombe at the voice of the mother of our LordLuke 1. 41. 44,, speaking in commendation of that
Son of God conceived in her womb; yea this conjugall love takes not delight but in the praises of the party belovedCan. 4. Can. 5. 10. 16., so that it is onely the work of the Spouse to set forth the practises of Christ in her owne weaknesse, imbecility, and submission unto him in all things, and it is that part and worke that the Son of God hath taken upon himselfe to give testimony of his owne glory, workes and operations of himselfe in her, in all the waies wherein hee leads herIsa. 43. 1, 2, 3., therefore it is, that our Lord affirmeth, they that honour me, I will honour them1 Sam. 2. 30.: but the hearts of such as have broke the Covenant of GodPro. 2. 16, 17. and the faith of Marriage; whatever may be said of her husband it doth her no good, unlesse some commendation be given to her selfe, or to her harlot: thence it is, that the titles, offices, vertues and operations, that are in Jesus Christ are nothing unto us according to our owne naturall and carnall thoughts, unlesse we can have them of our owne creation, forming, fashioning, pollishing, and setting up in our selves, and others besides himselfe, and when we have adulterated, and given that to another which is peculiar unto himselfe alone, then we can delight in, and make merry with them, and never thinke too much of their praises, as the spirit of every Adultresse doth, which was the ground of apostatizing Israel of old, his dancing about the calfe when it was of that forme which the Leviticall Priest had set upon itExod. 32. 4, 5, 6., who was of that order of AaronHeb. 7. 11., and not of this order of our MelchizedeckHeb. 5. 10., who is onely instaled by this oath of interpossition, and never Ministers but by vertue of itHeb. 7. 21, 22, 23, 24., which doth infallibly and undeniably (according to the grounds of faith) binde God and man together through Christ, in whomsoever it speaks according to the testimony thereof, or else no judgement is passed in the house of God, according to the mistery of godlinesse, and thus much for the present, in way of explanation of the oath of interpo∣sition: the next thing noted in the Text, is the unchangeable nature of his oath of interposition, laid downe in these words:
And will not repent. That is to say,  will never change the nature and forme of this Oath, nor the manner and way of the administration of it; for it is never found but onely in one, namely in that unity that is between God and man in Jesus Christ, there∣fore he swears by nothing but by himselfe, that is, by that which is himselfe, for he cannot sweare by a greater, therefore he swears by himselfeHeb. 6. 13 14. 15., it is true also, and shall never change, that it is never ministred but in divers, and therefore it is an Oath of ConfirmationHeb. 6. 16, which implies that to be within the bounds of it, which by nature (in it selfe) is not sure and setledHeb. 6. 17, as also it is an end of all strifeHeb. 6. 16., which cannot be but with respect to more then one, so that it, is one in subsi∣stance in respect of the being of it, and it is also divers in the composition or natures found therein in the administra∣tion of it, so that whereas he is God, it is not without be∣ing made man, and if he be Spirit2 Cor. 3. 17., it is not without his be∣ing made fleshIohn 1. 14, if he be heavenly, it is not without his be∣coming earthly1 Cor. 15 49., if he be immortall, it is not without his be∣ing made mortall1 Cor. 15. 43, 44., if he be strength, it is not without his beco∣ming weaknesse1 Cor. 1. 25., if he be lifeIohn 1. 4., it is not without deathRev. 13. 8., so that it is ever one in respect of subsistance, and of this hee he never repents, or turnes from it, and he is divers in re∣spect of Administration, for if he set forth his Kingly Au∣thority, we are all submissive and objedient Subjects; if he ap∣peare as a Lord, we are all as servants, if as a Priest, wee all bring unto him that which is sacrificed and slaine, if as a Shep∣herd, we all heare his voice as a flokeIohn 10. 3, 4, 5., if as a Prophet, wee all are found sitting in silence to learnePsal. 65. 1, if as a Law-giver, we meekly sit at his feet to receive the word at his mouthDeu. 33. 3, if as one that heareth prayers, then all flesh comes unto himPsal. 65. 2 for we bring unto him nothing but our own infirmities and weaknesses, and this (being divers) in the Administration of this Priesthood he never changeth, repents, nor in the least turnes form it, in any age, in any person, or in any manner of thing that concernes itHeb. 7. 24 25., whatever he may by any, or in
any age take up and use for the conveyance of the know∣ledge and faith of this unto our souls, by acting in, or allu∣ding unto things obvious, and apt to take hold of these outward senses of ours, and whosoever taketh upon him to Minister unto the flocke of GodAct. 20. 28, as another person, thing, of∣fice, calling or estate, then is freely given unto, or put upon every one of the Saints by Jesus Christ, he never ministers by vertue of this unrepentant Oath that abideth for ever, but intrudes himselfe into that which is proper and pecu∣liar to the Son of God alone, according to that usurping spirit and power of Antichrist2 Thes. 2. 4., in what place or age soe∣ver he ministersIoh. 38. 45, nor can he propose himselfe unto God in his private studies as a learner of him, or in his prayers as one in absolute want and necessity, to be onely supplyed by him, or in any of his deliverances, as weake and fraile in himselfe to give the glory to God alone further the in all his Administrations in the house of God, he can reckon and account of himselfe, the very same in all respects with any of the flock of God, without which he cannto give the Son of God his due respect and glory, and as it is in the breach of the Law, he that transgresseth in one breakes allIam. 2. 10, so is it in this point of glory, if we detain it in one point, we detain it in all: from this ground it is, that our Apostle af∣firmes, that he is all things in all men, for so the word is right∣ly rendred1 Cor. 9. 22., that by all meanes or in all waies I might propose salvation, so as to take hold of one or other in every thing delivered, and this (saith he) I do for the Gospells sake, that I might partake of it together with you1 Cor. 9. 23.; so as that whatever you are, or have, I am and have the same with you, and what∣ever I have or am, you are and have the like; for they that run in a race run all, but one onely receives the price1 Cor. 9. 24.: so that we are all runners alike in our selves, by nature infinitely short of that gone, but one onely hath the glory of winning the gole, and that is Christ alone, and deserves and hath obtain∣ed like praise in all the Saints that he hath in any one and like in any one, that he hath done in allEph. 1. 22, 23. Eph. 4. 14, 15., therefore saith, the Apostle, so fight I, not as one beating the ayre1 Cor. 9. 26., as though
I struck at things upon uncertainties, as though I knew not that it is so with you as it is, as absolutely as I know what is in my selfe: But saith he, I beat downe (not another) but my body1 Cor. 9. 27., intimating, that whatever he toucht in them, he toucht also in himselfe, inso much as by nature he was the same, least saith he, whilest I preach to others, I my selfe should be a reprobate1 Cor. 9. 27., that is, rejected from, or excluded out of that grace which is propounded unto you, which I must necessa∣rily be in some thing, and then in all things, if I be not the same with you, and you with me in all things that concern the grace of the Gospell; such is that body which the Saints or Ministers of Christ doe beat downe, which gives to eve∣ry one the same image and forme by nature that it gives to any one, namely, that body of sin and of death which our Apo∣stle complaines ofRom. 7. 24., but in so complaining, seeth it adorn∣ed with the glory and Lordship of Jesus ChristRom. 7. 25, for without this body of infirmitie, the ornaments of the Son of God, could never be put upon us, for if we were not sin by nature, there could be no appearing of his righteousnesse2 Cor. 5. 21., no more then a garment can be worne for ornament without a ma∣teriall body, yea, if we were not folly in our selves1 Cor. 3. 18. 19., no way could be for that fulnesse of the manifold wisdome of God, to be exercised in usEph. 3. 10., if we were not weaknesse, no appea∣rance of his power upon us2 Cor. 21. 10., if we were not sorrow in our selves, the joyes of salvation could not finde place in our hearts, it we were not shame by nature, his glory and honour could not be lifted up and advanced in usIsa. 61. 2., if we were not death, no place for the life of the Son of God to make it selfe mani∣fest 2 Cor. 6. 9, 10., so that if any deny himselfe, any of those infirmities which mans nature is by sin subjected unto, he denies unto himselfe likewise, that long and beautifull white robe which is put upon all the Saints by Jesus ChristRev. 7. 9, 10, 13, 14., and if we deny un∣to any of the Saints any office, excellency, or dignity in the house of God, that others are sharers of, and exercised in, then do we also deny unto such that compleat body of in∣firmities, that all by nature are wrapped up inEph. 2. 3., which is the very way of putting on all the precious ornaments and ex∣ercises
of the Lord JesusRom. 13. 14., therefore it is, that in the disso∣lution of this earthly Tabernacle, we have a building not made with hands, but eternall in or of the heavens2 Cor. 5. 1, nor doe we de∣sire to be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality may bee swallowed up of life: that is, we doe not desire our weaknes∣ses and infirmities to be so anihilated as not to be, for then there were no body whereupon the heavenly ornaments are to bee put, out we desire to be so clothed upon, that nothing but the truth, power, holinesse, life and glory of the King∣dome of heaven may appeare upon us, which is the swal∣lowing up, devouring, or destruction of mortality by life2 Cor. 5. 4, of such nature is the ministration, that is unrepentant, being exercised according the office of our high Priest, entred within the vaile, yea into very heaven it selfeHeb. 9. 24 Heb. 6. 20., which is after the order of Melchizedeck, and all other waies of Priesthood and Ministration will find a time of repentance and change, being onely after the order of AaronHeb. 7. 11., making difference in the creature of the dignity and office of the Son of God in the Church, and so indeed speakes evill of dignities, or deny and vilifie the one dignity that is not found but in the Son of God aloneIude 8., which is only made manifest and multipli∣ed in our nature1 Pet. 1. 1, 2., which being lessened, or vilified in any one is so in all, for his seamlesse coat admits of no division, but according to lot, or proper and peculiar inheritance, goeth whole and entire, without the least fraction, to whomsoever it falsPsal. 22. 18 John 19. 24.; and hence it comes to passe, that the Lord can never repent of, change or alter this Priesthood and Ministrie, because his whole mind and will is fully completed and perfected, for ever in his Son, in whom or in what point soever this oath, office or Ministry appearethMat. 3. 16, 17. Iohn 17 18 2 Cor. 3 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6., for the Son holds correspon∣dency with the Father in all thingsIoh. 17. 21 22, 23., insomuch that the Fa∣ther may as well repent or change from being that which he is, as to repent of, or change this Oath and Ministrie, there∣fore our Saviour saith unto Philip, I and my Father are oneIohn 14. 9, 10., which this oath of interposition onely comprizeth, who are never without the product and bringing forth of the spi∣rit 1 Ioh. 5. 7.: But to conclude this point, when it is said, that God
repentethGen. 6. 6., we are to understand, that he who by nature ac∣cording to his creation, was made in the Image, yea, was made the Son of GodLu. 3. 38, insomuch that hee that was the Son of God, Child of peaceLuk, 10. 6, and Heire and Inheriter of lifeMut. 19. 29, is now changed; yea that person that by creation was the Son of GodLuk. 3. 38, is now become the son of perdition2 Thes. 2. 3, child of wrathEph. 2. 3., and inheriter of deathRom. 8 6., and thus turning from God, yea thus changing from righteousnesse unto sinEze. 18. 24., from life to deathRom. 7. 9., from the image of God unto SatanIsa. 14. 12 13, 14., making himselfe the very wickednesse and abomination of all the earth, as those were in the days of Noah, in whom this point of Gods repenting is taught and declared unto the world, which indeed is the wickednesse and destruction of that old worldGen. 6. 4, 5. This repentance of change is really true, not one∣ly in change of action, but of minde and will also, and is in all points ever to be repented of, in the way of that sonne of perdition, even as it is also really true, in that way of faith in the Sonne of God, that he was made of no repu∣tation Phil. 2. 7., a curseGal. 3. 13., sin2 Cor. 5. 21, deathPs. 22. 15., a man of sorrowesIsa. 53. 3., a scornePs. 22. 6. 7, a proverbePs. 69. 11., a by-wordPs. 44. 14., a hissingLam. 2. 15, 16., putting out of the lip, a nodding of the headPsal. 22. 7., an abjectPsal. 22. 6, a de∣rision and shame of the peoplePsal. 119. 51., even he is changed or tur∣ned from that estate, into all the gloryIoh. 1 14, righteousnesse1 Cor. 1. 30, wealthCol. 2. 3., peaceEph. 2. 14, honourHeb. 7. 26, and dignity of heavenIohn 1. 14, yea the glory of the onely begotten Sonne of God, full of grace and truth2 Cor. 7. 10, and this turning and change is also as absolute, re∣all and true, and is that change, or repentance never to bee repented of; yea it is the very oath and covenant that instals into this office and Priesthood, which can never bee altered, changed, or turned from; and therefore the forme of this oath is uttered in these words, Thou art a Priest for ever. Wherein are two things considerable:  First, the manner of installment, Thou art a Priest: Secondly, the continuation, or duration of it, that is, for ever. In the first, note the pe∣culiarity of the phrase, Thou art a Priest, which is as peculiar as this, the only begotten of the FatherIohn 1. 14., the first-borneRom. 8. 29, the
heire of all thingsCol. 1. 18. Heb. 1. 2., or the like; and therefore can be gi∣ven unto none but unto the Sonne of God alone. Againe, note the universality of it also; for it hath a like scope and universality in it, that such phrases have, as these, viz. Thou shalt have none other Gods before me, Thou shalt not make a graven image, Thou shalt not take the name of God in vaineExod. 20, 3. to 17., and the like; which phrase implies every one that will wor∣ship God aright: so is it here in this phrase, Thou art a Priest, for it is peculiar, and proper onely to Christ alone, and can be given to no other, no more then the keeping of e∣very Law of God can bee given to any but him alone: it is also common, and universally to be given to him, in whom∣soever the faith of the Sonne of God is found, without any restriction, exception or limitation, more then the Comman∣dement hath, to take hold of all that will be true worship∣pers, wherein wee may admit of none at all, upon paine of prevarication of the Law of God: so that the whole office of Priesthood (that is not according to the carnall Comamnde∣ment, but according to the power of an endlesse lifeHeb. 7. 16) depend∣eth solely upon the faith of the Son of God: And as none can take this Office upon himselfe, but he that is called of God, as AaronHeb. 5. 4., even so none can reject, nor put this office from himselfe, that hath the faith, subsistance, or calling of the Sonne of God, wherein hee himselfe commerceth, or is of the same calling, which is2 Tim. 1. 9 Heb. 3. 1. ever found in whomsoever Jesus is found as a Saviour; therefore the Apostle by an holy and trimme allusion unto David (noting thereby our spirituall David in his loynes,) declares what the proper ground of the Ministery of the Gospell is, and how the sonne of man, sub∣ject to death, infirmities and sore troubles (as David was) comes to make manifest that word of life, and minde of the Father of eternity, which is onely by faith or subsistance in the word of God, whereby that which is temporary, makes known the minde and will of Eternity; and therefore hee saith, as it is written2 Cor. 4. 13., He believed, and therefore he spake; that is, as it is translated, for so much the word, written signifies, to translate a thing from one to another, that is, Eternity is
translated, and made over unto that which is temporary and that which is temporary is translated and made over un∣to that which is eternall, so as the Son of Man believed, or had his being or subsistance in the word of God, by vertue whereof hee spake in such sort as being truly temporary, and in time, yet did he publish and make knowne the minde of eternity unto the world, which is before and after all time, whereupon our Apostle gathereth and concludeth assuming the same prerogative and priviledge unto himself, and the rest of the Apostles or Leaders of Christ in his members, we also beleeve, speaking in the plurall number, and therefore we speake, so that the singularity and also plurality that is in the faith of the Son of God, is one and the same in whomsoever it isIude 3. Eph. 4 5, 6., and therefore must necessarily worke into the same office, operation, dignity and revelation of the same Son of GodHeb. 13. 8., for we must either have the office, operation, dignity, and revellation of that which is in Christ Jesus the Son of God, or else we cannot be subjects, and injoyers of the Kingdome, blessednesse, and happinesse of God, no more then he could undergo the curse without taking unto himselfe, and being possessed of all that evill and misery that naturally is in us, in which act of taking our evills he overcomes and destroyes for ever, what naturally is in us, and in our being possessed of his blessednesse, wee deny our selves and live unto whatsoever is in him, so that there is one thing overcome in this Priesthood, that is our selves, and one thing revived and lived unto, which is God, which must of necessity be effected wherever Christ appears, and therefore the Priesthood is the same in every particular, (that it is in any one) that is of the faith of Jesus, in whom he makes himselfe manifest; and so much for the peculiari∣ty and generality of this office, noted in that phrase, Thou art a Priest: The second is the duration and continuation of it, noted in these words, a Priest for ever, or a sacrificer for ages, generations, as the words will bear, noting in the word the nature of his office, that is, to sacrifice and slay the flesh in all the lusts and affections thereofGal. 5. 24., that so
the Spirit may be saved in that day of the Lord Jesus1 Cor. 5. 5, name∣ly, that that spirituall frame and fabricke of the house of God may bee preserved, and maintained not after the lusts of men, but according to the good will of God1 Pet. 4. 1, 2., and this is upon oath to endure for ever, or in all ages and generations, for this manner of Sacrifice and Priesthood hath ever had the preheminence in the house of God, and amongst the Sons of God, in whomsoever have been of the race and ge∣neration, age or pilgrimage, of that beloved of the Father in this world through faith in his bloodPsal. 24. the whole Psalme., and therefore it is, that he brings in the orderly course and disposition of it to be according to the order of Melchizedeck noted in these words: After the order of Melchizedeck. Which words are taken out of the booke of GenesisGen. 14. 18,  or Generations of the world, to declare, that the same Priest and Priestood was in the daies of Abraham, which our Prophet applies to his owne times, prophecying also of the dayes of Jesus Christ, living upon the earth in the daies of Herod, and Pontius Pilate; and the Apostle unto the He∣brewesHeb. 7. Comments both upon the History in Genesis, and upon the Prophecy in this Psalme, applying all to live, and to be extant in his own daies, times and Ministrie, descri∣bing and setting out the true Ministry of Christ, from the condition or manner of his Person or being, which he saith, is without father, without mother, and without descent, having neither beginning of daies, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest for ever, or continually, so that according to the times, ages, and generations that the Son of God abides or remaines, whether past, present, or to come, of such duration hath this Priesthood been, and ever shall, for never was, nor shal be any other acceptable unto the Father, whatever men according to their owne naturall reason and wisdome of the flesh, seem to thinke, and em∣bolden themselves in, to speake of the changes and altera∣tions of it, which God himselfe by our Apostle affirmes as well as by this Prophet to be perpetuall, or without any inter∣mission
at all, (as the word signifies) so that such as the per∣son or being of Christ is, such also is his Office and Ministery; but the Person or being of Christ (our Melchizedek) is without father and mother, so also is his office and Mini∣stery: now the person or subsistance of Christ, is without father, (on this wise) for the holy and pure God never be∣got or produced any thing of the flesh, which the Word was madeIoh. 1. 14, and tooke it into unity with it solfe, without which Christ is not, that is, the father never produced or propagated any weaknesse, infirmity, or frailty which is properly that flesh that the word tooke into unity, for he bare our sins, and carried our sorrowesIsa. 53. 4., and was made subject to our frailties and infirmities which are not without, but in these materiall souls and bodies of oursMat. 26 38 Luke 24. 39 40. Psal. 22. 16, which heart∣sores, sicknesses, and sorrowesMat. 8. 17, God could never produce, who is the fountaine of lifePsal. 36. 9 Jer. 2. 13., no more then a pure fountaine can send out uncleane and corrupt watersIam. 11. 12.; therefore as he sustained our infirmities and weaknesses, he was without fa∣ther; for he was never produced, propagated, or generated after the flesh, nor received the least spirit or livelihood ac∣cording to the flesh, but altogether according to the spirit, For he was borne not of blood, nor of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GodIohn 3 6. Iohn 1. 13. Iohn 1. 14.: and therfore in regard of the flesh, which indeed he became, he was without father; for he never lived after it, nor was begotten nor brought forth according to the lusts and desires thereof. Now such as he is, such also is his Office and Ministerie; for any thing that may receive forme and being, preservation and continuation amongst men, by study, art, humane learning, tradition, or the like, it can be nothing of this Office and Ministerie, it is a higher seed, or generative vertue, that must produce and bring it forthIam. 1. 18, or els no Office nor Ministery of our high Priest at allLuk. 1. 35. He is also without mother, for he was made flesh, and yet that which he truly was, never did nor eve can conceive, cherish, or bring forth the Son of the living God; For, the flesh, or the naturall man, conceives not the things that are of God, for they are spiritually to bee conceived, discerneall and
brought forth1 Cor. 2. 14, which the flesh is not, neither can it doe it; so that the word of God ministreth nothing, in the being or subsistance of Christ, to add any thing unto the flesh, or unto that weaknesse which hee tooke upon him; for then weaknesse should naturally flow out of strength, as out of its proper fountain, which it cannot do; nor doth the flesh minister any thing unto the Word of God, in this bringing forth of Christ, in the conception or cherishing thereof, for then should it be a fountaine and cause of that, which is the fountaine and cause of all things: God then in the beget∣ting of his Sonne adds nothing at all in ministring unto the flesh, nor the Spouse in conceiving of Christ addeth nothing in ministring unto the spirit, nor in the diminution or anni∣hilating of the flesh; so that the great skill of the work is, to bring forth the one and the other, in direct opposition in all points, and that is the true forme of that infinite and e∣ternall Sonne of God, which can never be done, but by the light of the Spirit: for nature cannot conceive the Crea∣tor to bee at an infinite distance and disproportion with his owne work, nor can this be seen, but the unity of them both is concluded; for the condition of the one, having lost the image of God, is of infinite emptinesse and vastnesse, be∣cause the losse is of an infinite nature and value, and that royall perfection of the other (that ever abides the same, and knows how to bring gain and profit out of all things1 Tim. 6. 6) is of infinite fulnesse and validity, so that these two become the very proper centers, receptacles, dwelling, and abiding places of one another for everIohn 17. 21, 23., which is the swallowing up of mortality by life2 Cor. 5. 4, and that victory of faith that overcomes the world1 Ioh. 5. 4, and that wherein death is swallowed up for ever1 Cor. 15 54. 55, 56, 57., and of such nature is the office and ministery of Christ in the house of God, otherwise it is not of the nature of this Priesthood, that is after the order of Melchizedek; for Christ and his Priesthood, Christ and his Ministery, Christ and his worship, and Christ and his Gospell are of such neare affi∣nity and alliance, that if we take away the one, the other ceaseth, and therefore it is said, that he is without descent al∣so,
soHeb. 7. 3., or without pedegree, kindred, stock or race, because one can describe a Priest, Office or Ministery of the Gos∣pell, but it is properly a description of Christ himselfe, nor can any describe or delineate Christ Jesus, but in so doing he describes the Priesthood, Office, and Ministry of the Gos∣pell, they being inseparably involved each in another, there∣fore the Apostle describing the grace or Ministery of the Gospell, saith, It is Christ in you, the hope of gloryCol. 1. 27.; so that we cannot describe another of the same kin, stock, or pede∣gree, but we describe the same grace in case we speak accor∣ding to the faith of Gods ElectTitus 1. 1., therefore he is without stock or kindred, in regard it is not any other but one and the same that is ever, even in all ages set forth and proposed un∣to the world, therefore the word translated pedegree, or kindred, signifies as well the begetting of an Ancestor or Predecessor, as the begetting or bringing forth of a Succes∣sor, for Christ is brought forth in us (that are but of yester∣daies continuanceIob 8. 9. Psal. 90. 4.) in respect of his infirmity and frailty, and we are brought forth in him that is that great Ancestor from all eternityDan. 7. 9 13. 22., in respect of his wisdom, goodnesse, pow∣er, and glory, therefore it is, that Abraham that great An∣cestor and Father of the faithfullRom. 4. 11, in whom the very top or head of the generation of that Son of God takes its be∣ginning Mat. 1. 12., yet this Father Abraham who had the Promises or CovenantGen. 12. Rom. 9. 4. 5., as being the head and fountaine of it, yet even he himselfe paid Tythes unto this MelchizedekHeb. 7. 9., and was bles∣sed of him, and without all contradiction the lesse is blessed of the greaterHeb. 7. 6, 7., so that in our Father AhrahamActs 7. 2., or in our everlast∣ing FatherIsa. 9. 6., Iesus Christ, preached unto us in him, is conside∣red both this Predecessor and Successor, yea he that is the lesser or the least, and also the greatest, of yesterday, and also of eternity, even that beginning and ending, that first and lastRev. 22. 13., declared unto us in holy Scripture, and besides him there is none; so of no kindred, linage, or descent, therefore this of∣fice and Ministery is farre greater then the Leviticall Priest∣hood which is by Levi, who in the loynes of Abraham paid tythes himselfe, that is, any Priest or Priesthood that is after
the carnall commandement, and not after the power of an end∣lesse lifeHeb. 7. 16., or such Priests as are taken away by deathHeb. 7. 23, and such Ministries unto which a period must be put, and an end of it comeHeb. 7. 16: these are not that Ministery or Ministers, ac∣cording to this order, and therefore in such the grace of our Lord Jesus is not advanced nor set up, for he can in no wise be reckoned up, nor accounted among those kind of Priests who received tithes of him that is the father of themHeb. 7. 6.; nor can he be reckoned up or accounted without his Office and Mi∣nistery, therefore cannot be of their kin and pedigree, nei∣ther in the one, nor in the other; therefore their Office and Ministery must also be reckoned up, and accounted to be of another kind and stock, then he and his Ministery is, and ther∣fore must needs be barren, empty, destitute, and altogether void of him, who abideth a Priest for everHeb. 7. 24.; so that a Priest and a Ministery that will end both in the one, and in the o∣ther; yea a Priest and a Ministery that one may have a being without the use and exercise of the other, is not after the manner, nor according to the order of this our Melchize∣dek, but after the manner of man, and according to his art, skill, device and invention, which the wisdome of the Sonne of God permits not, nor approves of; neither can it be had in account, reckoning, genealogie, kindred, stock, pedegree; or in the least to be according to the descent, or proceed of it; but contrarily, as it is of man, so doth it tend unto man; breeding, or rather bringing forth meere humane principles, tending to the crucifying of the Sonne of God1 Cor. 2. 6 7, 8, 9., even as that Jewish Priesthood ever didPsal. 2. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 26. 3, 4. Iohn 12. 9, 10, 11., yea all Ministeries being of that kinde in the root, beare the same fruit unto this day; nor can they doe other∣wise, For men cannot gather grapes of thornes, nor figgs of thistles1 Mat. 7. 16, therefore is the Ministery of Christ further distinguished from them all, being the Priest, as also the Office are such, who neither have beginning of dayes, nor end of life; he hath no beginning of dayes, that is, though the word was made flesh, yet he never began, nor proposed a platform unto himselfe, to live, or give light unto the
world after the flesh, although the Son of God was made the Sonne of man, yet did, he never breath as to live after the will of man, for if that had in the least been, then had the Prince of this world found somthing in himIoh. 14. 30, whereupon to fasten and kindle his temptations, which is impossible to be found in the Sonne of God1 Pet. 1. 19: therefore is he truly said to be with∣out beginning of dayes, because however he was a man, yet did never live for a moment after the will and naturall desires of manLuk. 22. 42. Ioh. 1. 13., who alwayes lives unto himselfe, but alwayes lived according to the will and good pleasure of his FatherMat. 26. 34. 42. Mat. 6. 10., giving up himself wholly for the good of othersIoh. 17. 19 Ioh. 10. 15. 17.: and of such nature is his Office and Ministery, that however it is exercised in and by men, yet hath it not the least forme, Em∣brion, or beginning according to manPs. 139. 15, 16., that can come within the skill, art, or comprehension of any naturall man in the worldIsa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9.: therefore is it, that he saith by the Pro∣phet David, when I was formlesse, that is, void of forme in the naturall understanding of all menPs. 139. 16., (like unto that Chaos in the beginningGen. 1. 2., although all that treasury and cu∣rious workmanship of heaven and earth were in it) yet saith he, thine eye did see mePs. 139. 16., that is, the light of the Spirit ever gives a forme and being unto our Lord, and spirituall Da∣vidEzek. 34. 23. in the Church: therefore saith he, In thy register were all my members written, which were fashioned after the manner of curious needle-worke, or embroyderie (as the word signifiesPs. 45. 14) whilest as yet there was none of them: that is, none of them according to the flesh, or in such sort as the naturall art or understanding of man can give any forme or being unto them at all. And hence arise all those contentions that are about Christ in the world: for he is not in the least to be found, living, or giving light unto men for a day, no not for one moment, according to the flesh. And hence it is, that all are in contention in giving severall formes and figures for his production and bringing forth in the world: nor can a∣ny think or imagine, that any power and glory of his can greatly appeare in the Church, according to the apprehensi∣on of these contentious spirits, either till an ancient People
called Jewes, be raised up, and revived againe, whose parts they are playing, as those did to Christ, whilest they so ea∣gerly look after them, as the Jewes looked after him, or els that Christ must come, and live and reigne on the earth for a thousand yeares, in that person borne of the Virgin Mary; so that as they have given him an earthly and humane form, so also they are looking for an earthly and carnall kingdom, or els they look for the glory onely in that last day of judg∣ment, not knowing nor discerning in themselves, how the Prince of this world is judged alreadyIoh. 14. 30. Out of these distin∣ctions of times and Peoples in the worship of God (whilest God respects no placeIoh. 4. 19. to 24., timeGal. 4. 9, 10, 11., nor personAct. 10. 34, 35.) and out of these severall formes and prescriptions, of the manner of Gods worship, the men of the world make it too too mani∣fest, what manner of Gods they worship: for, having car∣nallized the Sonne of God unto themselves, they look af∣ter, and greatly contend for earthly and carnall formes and administrations in their worship; as for change of peoples and times, to perfect it and to bring it forth, even as though Israel of old should never have looked for familiarity with their God, his great wisdome, noble acts of power and glory to have appeared, and been made manifest amongst them, untill such time as there was a literall and historicall calling of the Nations, as also the incarnation of the Sonne of God in that wombe of the Virgin Mary; which had been all one, as to deny their owne salvation, untill such times as such things appeared, as those did that knew not the presence and power of themAct. 3. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psa. 78. 29, 30, 31., and is most evident in all ages, that those that stand upon formes, persons, times, and places, ever do2 Tim. 3. 5.: therfore when the Apostle saw that inscription written upon the Altar at Athens, he beheld their devotion, or as the word isAct. 17. 22, 23., he knew the Gods which they served, insomuch that outward rites, formes, and figures, and carnall ordinances described and brought in, which may be comprehended with∣in the mind of, and practised by a carnall and naturall man, ever declare, that such ignorantly serve and worship a God whom they know not, whom they have carnallized unto them∣selves,
in all the waies and manner of his Worship, and so are ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth2 Tim. 3. 5, 6, 7.; but as this order of Priesthood is without begin∣ing of daies, so is it also without end of life, that is, as Christ lives being a man, yet never lived according to the minde and will of man, but according to the will of God, so hee also dies being true God, but never dies unto the Spirit and Life of God, but onely dies unto that which is the proper Spirit and reasoning of that which is meerly carnall and humane in man1 Pet. 3. 18. Eph. 2. 15, 16., which naturally is mans onely life, Christ dies then (being the Son of GodIohn 3. 16 1 Cor. 2. 8.) in that he becomes, that which is death it selfe, having no life of God in it at allEphes. 2. 1., yet it is as impossible that the life of the Son of God should be extinct for a moment, as it is for God to cease to bee, who gives being unto all thingsIohn 1. 1, 2, 3. Acts 17. 27, 28., therefore must of ne∣cessity be without end of life: So Christ lives being a man, but as impossible to live after the will of man, or desires of the flesh, as it is that one onely Son of God should have two subsistences or beingsDeut. 6. 4. Gal. 3. 20. 1 Tim. 2. 5., or that one fountaine should send forth both sweet water and bitterIames 3. 11, 12.; or that the Son of God should admit of such an emptiness in himselfe, as that som∣thing besides himselfe must fill up and replenish: so that the death of the Son of God is properly in man, (but yet accor∣cording to that interchangeable Covenant, mutuall act and intercourse of the operation of faith) is translated and transferred unto God, otherwise death and sin could never be overcome, destroyed and swallowed upHos. 13. 14 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55.. The life also of the Son of mortall man is properly in God, but according to that forenamed mutual act & operation of faith, is translated and transferred even unto the Son of sorry manCol. 3. 3, 4 Phil. 3. 20, 21., otherwise could righteousness and peace never have gotten victory, nor the creature have attained an everlasting life and being with its CreatourIohn 4. 14. Rom. 6. 22, 23. Iohn 3. 36. Iohn 6. 40.: So that as hee never hath beginning, in re∣spect of the workes, waies, and devices of the flesh, so al∣so hee never hath end, in the operations and Ordinances, according to the wisdom of the Spirit, in which the mystery of the Gospel appears to be this, that the very act of destru∣ction
is the very act of restauration by Jesus Christ; for the death and destruction of the Son of God, according to the flesh in us, is our life and restauration in the Spirit through him, and this mystery lying hid, the very name of the Cross of Christ becomes a feare, a terrour, a reproach and a stumbling stone unto all the world, which comes to pass, by that being taught for the Cross of Christ, which is nothing else pro∣perly, but the jealousies, suspitions, feares, and terrours of Satan, concluding the Cross to be a hard, heavy, shameful and uncomfortable thing, which is indeed the most glorious act or thing that ever was, or shall be done, or brought forth by the Son of the eternall God to the glory of the Fa∣ther for ever: therfore the Apostle further describes him to be like the Son of GodHeb. 7. 3., or made like the Son of God, or reckoned unto, or made to bee the Son of God. Now as he is naturally the love and bosome of the Father, who is God, so he cannot be said, to be made, or reckoned, or accounted unto such a state, or thing, but in & by his cross, or taking our nature into unity with himself; he is made to be such a one, of that which by nature is a son of sorrow, a child of death, and so through the crosse becomes triumphant over all principalities and pow∣ers, and hath made a shew of them openlyCol. 2. 14, 15., which otherwise could never have appeared, and so continues a Priest for e∣ver; and therefore the Psalmist gives him that regall pow∣er and authority that pertaineth and belongeth unto his Kingly Office also, laid down in these words: 5. Vers. The Lord at thy right hand shall wound (or strike through) Kings in the day of his wrath. The Kingly power to execute vengeance,  and the Priestly office sacrificing to procure mercy, are never separated nor put asunder, of which we have an embleme in all naturall states and Ministeries; for the King is not willing to execute wrath without the counsell and advice of the Ministery, and the Priest is not willing nor free to Minister, to procure mer∣cy (in what way soever hee takes mercy to be attained in)
without the defence, maintenance, and protection of the Magistrate: and this place the Psalmist takes also, out of the fourteenth of GenesisGen. 14. 1., and here we must remember, that as there is a Kingly Priest, and a Priestly King sitting at the right hand of each other in honour, (as in the beginning of this Psalme) although in a diverse acceptation, so also there are Kings in the plurall number, that are subjected unto wrath, though in a diverse manner, being the Objects or Subjects of it, which are to be wounded, or struck through in the day thereof, as we see in that fore-named place in Ge∣nesis, for there is Amraphel King of Shiner, which is Babylon, or that confusion, as the word signifies, which is the proper seat or base of all wickednessZech. 5. 9, 10, 11., and he is not without great Associates and ConfederatesGen. 14. 1. 2 Rev. 12. 7.; and there is also Bera King of Sodome, that pleasant plaine, fruitfull and commodious in situationGen. 13. 10 of all delights and pleasures, which naturally the minde of man is taken up withall in this life, which is like the Garden of Eden, before it is destroyedEzek. 28. 13, 17, 18.; and this King of So∣dome is not without great allies and Confederates also, and these make warre one against another: sometimes one be∣ing servant and in subjection, and sometimes the other, yea even to the captivating of Lot so near an allie to AbrahamGen. 13. 8., and indeed are all against the father of the faithfull, or that high Father, as his name signifies, or Prince of many Nations, or Peoples, as also to that good Melchizedek, Priest of the most high God, that King of Salem, or Prince of peaceGen. 14. 18 Heb. 7. 1. 2., who rules in righteousness, and of his Kingdome there is no endDan. 4. 3., who meeteth Abraham coming from the slaughter of the fore∣named Kings, refreshing him with bread and wine, and blesseth him, unto whom Abraham gives tythes of all that he possesseth, shewing themselves to be equall sharers in the glory of the slaughter, and rescue now madeGen. 14. 18, 19, 20. Heb. 7. 1, 2., therefore Melchizedek refresheth, recovereth and reneweth Abrahams strength, which was weakned and lost in the Battell, and blesseth him with the blessing or blessedness of the most high GodGen. 14. 18. 19., possessor of heaven and earth, yea with the same blessing wherewith God himselfe is blessed: therefore saith Melchizedek (as
one that substaines the person and office of them both) blessed Abraham and blessed GodGen. 14. 19, 20., teaching that the state and con∣dition of twaine are made one blessing, or blessed condition in Christ; therefore as God hath delivered into Abrahams hand, so Abraham also gives Tythes of all that ever he pos∣sesseth, namely the tenth of every tenGen. 14. 20. Heb. 7. 2., that is to say, all in all, and for ever is given unto the LordCol. 3. 11., for so the word ten is taken in Scripture, as when the Lord will visit a people by famine, he saith, that ten women shall bake their bread in one oven, that is, all the women in that CityLevit. 26. 26., it is taken for e∣ver also, as when a bastard is not to enter into the Congregation of Israel, unto the tenth generationDeu. 23. 2, it is immediately ex∣pounded, that he shall not enter for everDeu. 23. 3; so that God gives all unto Abraham, in and by that good Melchizedek, by whose strength the enemies are given into his hand, in that rescue of that lost portion or inheritance of GodPs. 16 5, 6, and A∣braham also gives all unto God, in the same Melchizedek, Priest of the most high God, and Prince of peace, in whom he acknowledgeth God to bee all in all in the victory; and so is said, to give him the tenth of all, or gives him to be all in all in the worke for everEph. 1. 23.. Our Prophet here declaring the Kingly and Priestly office of Christ, from this History doth also allude unto it, to make it manifest by these fore-named Kings warring one against another, namely foure Kings a∣gainst five, and all against the Lord, and against his annointedPsal. 2. 2.; declares hereby that there is a two-fold condition, and state of mankind upon the earth, which is in continuall oppo∣sition in it selfe, making continuall warre one against the o∣ther with all their force and confederacy, each of them ha∣ving a Kingly and Princely power, or rather many being joyned together in one on both sides, which are all King∣ly, and yet both of them, or altogether in each party, stand in direct opposition against the Kingdome and Priesthood of our Lord Jesus Christ, exercised amongst the Saints, or those trained and armed Souldiers, who have the armour of God put upon themGen. 14. 14. Eph. 6. 11. to 18., or that Catechized and instructed people which are home borne, and brought up in the house or family of that one
father of all the faithfullEph. 3. 14. 15.; and these two adversaries which our Prophet tells us, that the Lord strikes through, are the prosperity and adversity that man is subject to attain unto, & liable to undergo in this present life, together with all those severall heads, or headships proper unto them both, which are at war in themselves in the men of this world; for som∣times a wicked prosperity gets the upper-hand with its con∣federates and severall headships therein combined together in oneGen. 14. 3, 4.: and sometimes also, a wicked, wretched, low and miserable state and condition, with its confederates and headships all conspiring together in one to make the con∣dition fullGen. 14. 4, 5., which things are Historically taught unto us in that twelve yeares subjection unto Chederlaomer, and in that thirteenth years rebellion, and his going out in the fourteenth yeer and smiting so many of them, insomuch that they do not only make one another prosperous & proud, as also wretch∣ed and miserable, but the very slime-pitsGe. 14. 10, yea and the taking of Lot alsoGen. 14. 2 13, 14., conspire together for such purposes; with Abrahams refusing and rejecting the receit of the spoiles of the King of SodomGen. 14. 21 22, 23., declaring thereby, that the Saints have greater riches and treasuresHeb. 11. 24, 25, 26. then any, or all wicked men can afford unto them. These two adversaries to the Kingdome and Priesthood of Jesus Christ stand in direct opposition unto his Crowne, as also unto his Cross, which are never se∣parated nor divided the one from the other, in any person, place, or time, but harmonize and lovingly consent and agree together in him who is the onely fulness and perfecti∣on both of the one and of the other in all his, in whatsoever time or place: But these two opposites hereunto, that is to say, a carnall and worldly prosperity and also adversity, can never be at concord, peace, or any agreement at all, yet both alike opposite to Christ, this our Prince of peace, who hath of twaine made one new manEph. 2. 15, slaying that enmity in himselfe; hunting therefore after a worldly prosperity, as riches, ho∣nours, pleasures, carnall friends, humane learning, and the like, as things whereby to beautifie and adorne Religion, de∣fend and preserve the faith of Christ, or as after such things,
wherein any part of the glory and power of the Kingdome of God consisteth, this stands in opposition to the King∣dome of ChristIoh. 18. 36 Rom. 14. 17., taking his Kingdome to be of this world, or to consist of things momentany and vanishing, which it doth not, and therefore his Souldiers do not contend nor strive for themIoh. 18. 36, but only those who instead of spirituallizing the things of man in the Son of GodMal. 4. 2, 3., have carnallized the things of God into the fading and corruptible things of vain manRom. 1. 21, 22, 23., and accordingly set up themselves in temporary things to advance an eternall Kingdom, labouring by as many meanes and waies of headship (to take the office) of Christ out of his hand) as there are infinite wayes in the heart of man to lift up and advance it self against his Creator, which is a depth and height of that deceit that nonë but God can know or finde outIer. 17. 9, 10., therefore the Dragon is said to have seaven heads, to declare that fulness, or innumerable wayes and begin∣nings of gathering head against ChristRev. 12. 3. Rev. 16. 14. that are found in the pride and policy of man, who ever is ready to looke upon the Sun in his strength, and the Moone in her brightnesseIob 31. 24, 25, 26., to kiss his hand if any thing prosper in itIob 31. 27, to sacrifice unto his owne net, and burne incense unto his yearne or dragHab. 1. 16, to advance himselfe and say, Is not this great Babell which I have built? and unto mee the honour and majesty thereof belongethDan. 4. 30. Thus doth a mis-conceived glory in humane excellencies oppose the Crowne of Jesus Christ, by denying him sole Pow∣er, Presence, Wisdome and Authority to maintaine, uphold, teach, rectifie, and order all things whatsoe∣ver pertaine unto this Kingdome which is spirituallIohn 4. 23, 24. Iohn 18. 26, and therefore none but hee alone who spake words onely that are spirit and lifeIohn 6. 63, can put forth a hand for the help, support, supply, comfort, and edification of the same1 Cor. 14. 3.; and this opposition of Christ, is that Sodomiticall power, that vexeth the righteous soule of Lot from day to day2 Pet. 2. 7, 8., and raigneth in all such (of what ranke, quality, sex, age or office soever they bee) that by reason of any thing that is momentany and must bee laid aside one
day, as either parts, place, office, or relation whatsoever, do lift up themselves thereby above others, as they stand in relation to God, as being nearer unto him, or more accepta∣ble to him, or usefull for him because thereof; and in this we rob our Priestly King of his dignity, taking up us the place of the Mediator to come between God and the crea∣ture Hos. 13. 2.; for if we hold our selves more acceptable to God, or useful for God, by the enjoyment of any human excellen∣cy, then any other human creature whatsoever is, then do we intrude our selves into that office and place of the Mediator, who is that only usefull and acceptable one, to and for the FatherMat. 3. 17, without whom he hath not, nor doth any thingIoh. 1. 3, 4; For all things are of him, and through him, and for him, to whom be glory for ever, AmenRom. 11. 36.. The other adversary is the adversi∣ties and miseries that man is naturally subjected unto in this present life; which miseries felt, heard of, or understood in a naturall, sensuall, and carnall manner, stand in direct opposi∣tion unto the crosse of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is abso∣lutely & really another thing, then the natural mind of man can comprehend or conceive of: for we naturally conceive, that those things which are penall, and troublesome unto man, vexations, griefs, perturbations, and anguishes felt, and painfully and burdensomly undergone, are the cross of Christ, yea sorrows and fears, and pinching and painfull re∣pentance, we naturally extol, as the only suffering that brings deliverance and joy unto us, which is the worlds great mi∣stake of the cross of Christ, from the beginning ever untill now. True it is, that all these things, and innumerably more are in repentance; but repentance is ever a change, wherein the Son of God is found, or els it cannot be repentance ne∣ver to be repented of1 Cor. 7. 10.: and if the Son of God be in the change, then doth he change and translate (as our sins, so also our griefs, sorrows, fears, pains, troubles, doubts, distrusts, and anguishes whatsoever man by nature is subjected under) unto himself, who being the Son of God, cannot but bear them all awayMat. 8. 17 Ier. 50. 20., els should he not continue to be himself, who is bee∣ing it self; and therefore cannot but remain the same: but
this is the portion which he takes unto himselfe, for the utter destruction of it, in that work of our salvationHos. 13. 14; even so al∣so doth he give and transfer unto us (in this exchange or tur∣ning from one condition unto another) his own righteous∣nesse, peace, ease, life, courage, confidence, joy, freedome, and li∣berty, out of all straits, difficulties, servitudes and intangle∣ments whatsoever, setting us in his own wisdom, & authority, inheritance and sonshipRom. 8. 16. 17. Gal. 4. 6., therefore is it said, As he is, so are we even in this world1 Ioh. 4. 17, which state and condition being put upon us, who are in our selves but finite creatures, must of necessity fill us, and replenish us with all consolations, having in it the fulnesse of him who is the Son of God, and therfore filleth all in allEph. 4. 23, so that no place can be left void in any way of Christ, for the works, fears, and terrors of the Law to take place in1 Ioh. 4. 18, which naturally all men presse upon the con∣science, in the way of their MinisteryMat. 23. 4 Luk. 11. 46, 47., but they may as well testifie of the Son of God, that he never became a man of sor∣rowes, nor was ever acquainted with infirmityIsa. 53. 4, 5, 6., (which is no less then to deny the Lord Jesus Christ in his death) as to pro∣claim unto the sons and daughters of men, that they ought so to be exercised, as to be perplexed with any such things in themselves, as being troubles, necessary sorrowes, and terrors unto them, which is also to deny the Lord Christ in that vi∣ctorious and triumphant way of his resurrection. They then that will have the paine, trouble, losse, shame and sorrow of the creature (as it is to it self a penalty, and takes hold of us unto hurt, dammage, feare and disquiet) to be the crosse of Christ, they set themselves in the place of the Son of God2 Thes. 2, 3, 4., as sufferers for sin, and so usurp the place of our high Priest, that only and alone sacrificer, yea that only and alone sacrifice, and offering made once for all those that come unto him1 Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 28., and be they never so poore, mean, seemingly humble and meek, plea∣ding for never so much liberty of conscience, and immunity from persecution, but yet hold the fores and sorrows of soul, and desolate place in the wildernesse, not being inhabitants in, nor heires of the house of God in present possession, to be the exercise of Christianity, they do no lesse hereby, but
sit downe in the very chaire and seat of Antichrist, assuming that great work of the suffering of the Son of God unto themselves,  then the which, greater pride and arrogancie cannot be: for, if a man do arrogate unto himselfe any part or point of trouble and bitternesse of the creature, so as to be the cross of Christ, then hath the Son of God died in vain, for he must either become all sorrow, or els none at all, so that the whole suffering belongs onely unto the Creator, that could not be overcome of deathAct. 2, 24, and the whole and full release belongs only unto the creature, for nothing else had any need thereof, nor could be released, but only that which was in feare and bondage in it selfe, subject to deathHeb. 2. 14 15., but by that death of the Son of God, and in the very same act, it is stated in his life and peace for everCol. 3. 3. Iohn 16. 33 Eph. 2. 14.; and yet we do not de∣nie in this point the sensible, or rather sensuall penalties and pinings of the creature, which man is subjected unto, with the rest of the animall parts of the creation, as being subject in this life to some things which other creatures are, even as to eat, drink, sleep, procreate, and the like; so also to have bo∣dily aches, sickness, sores, famine, weakness, and the like, which are troubles and disturbances to one creature, as well as to another (both of man and beast) till it come to death it self of the body, which things are naturall, or sensuall, yet in the Saints of God ordered so by God, as he hath use of them to preach and proclaim his praises here in this world2 Cor. 11. 23. to 33. 2 Cor. 6. 7. to 10.; therefore so prevents them, extenuates, or brings a quite contrary thing out of them, (as in the throwing of Daniels friends into the furnace of fireDor. 3. 20 to 28., and putting the people of Is∣rael into the red SeaExod. 14. 20. to 31., and the like) as the seeth good, for the safety and incouragement of his peoplePsal. 74. 14, or the destruction and hardening of his enemiesMat. 27. 43.: so that these things that properly have relation and passage betwixt creature and creature, do accidentally prove the cross of Christ, and that so far as they become joy, courage and consolation unto the SaintsGal. 6 14 Iames 1. 2., which in themselves to all flesh is grief, anguish, and sorrowHeb. 11. 12. Psal. 116. 3, even as the very comforts of this life, that the unreasonable creature tasts of, as well as man, are
a trouble unto the wicked, and become the terrors of hell when they see themselves foiled, overcome and subjected un∣to sin and death by themIam. 5. 2, 3 Luke 16. 19, 23, 24, 25. Luke 17. 32, though in themselves simply con∣sidered they are naturally no such thingsGen. 1. 31. 1 Tim. 4. 4.; so that the Cross of Christ is of a more eminent and transcendent nature then these temporary and fading things can reach unto; for that which is of an eternall nature, extent and value, cannot consist in temporall things, although it may be exercise and made known in that which in it self is temporary: the proper Cross of Christ then is that in man, which is peculiar and proper unto man alone, and cannot be found in any other creature whatsoever, and makes man to be that which by na∣ture he is, which no other creature can be such, that is, all that emnity and wrath, defection from God, and rebellion against him, which ariseth from the breach of that unity, covenant, and agreement that was between the Creator, and the crea∣ture in the first act of its creation; for none of the creatures being made in the Image of God but man alone, it was not possible that any could make a breach, or deprive it selfe of such an Image and being, but onely hee; and there∣fore man onely acquires and attracts such an enmity and wrath unto himselfe, as no other creature could ever doe but hee alone: So that which ariseth properly from a breach, that hath in it that which is eternall, is the Cross of Christ, but man onely hath an enmity and wrath naturally, that ariseth from a breach that is eternall, therefore none but man can participate in that which is properly the Cross of Christ, and he only and alone can do it, for in this breach God himself is the party falne from, cast off, and by adulterating the state and condition of the contract, utterly rejected; ther∣fore whatever ariseth hence, must needs be of an eternall na∣ture, because it hath ever respect unto him who is eternal, and of such nature is the Cross of Christ, in what point or particular soever it is taught unto us, or to be considered of by us in, which if that Son of eternity had not taken upon himself, never could any have extended himselfe therein, so as to have been a plenary satisfaction to God, or to the
conscience of the creatureAct. 20. 28 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2, but hee having taken it upon himselfe, who is infinite and eternall, must of nece∣ssity reach unto, and take in the utmost bounds of it in every point and tittle thereof, otherwise there would not be a place sufficient for that infinite love and garment of salvationIsa. 61. 10 to reside in, and put it self upon us, and take up an habitation for it selfe with us for everPsal. 68. 16, 18. Rom. 8. 9, 11. 2 Cor. 6. 16 Eph. 3. 17; therefore to preach any jot of the penalty of the Cross, as in griefe, sorrow, or perturbation, arising hence to be the proper portion of any creature, or at any time to have the soule oppressed with the displeasure and angry face of God, so much as for a mo∣ment, such persons offer no less indignity to the Son of God then to teach the proper terrours of Satan to be the Cross of our Lord Christ, and so do nullifie and make void the Cross of Christ unto the soules of men, teaching or appre∣hending it to be a quite contrary thing to that which indeed it is, and if the Cross have not its right forme given unto it in the preaching of the Gospell, it hath never its right and proper operations and workings in us, and so is the vaile ne∣ver rent in our hearts, but we are still kept out of the holy place (having the vaile upon our hearts) when Moses is read un∣to this day2 Cor. 3. 14, 15. Mat. 27. 51; so that the sorrowes of soule that men under∣go in this mortall flesh, conceived to be the Cross of Christ, are the very King of ShynerGen. 10. 8, 9, 10., or of BabylonGen. 14. 1. Ier. 20. 4., with his Asso∣ciates, and Confederates, that are as many as there are kinds of anguish of soule and trouble, and every one is a head or beginning of his Kingdome, whether it be Babell, Erech, Accad or Calney, they are all in the Land of ShynerGen. 10. 10, who is at perpetuall emnity with our holy King of Israel on the hill of SionPsal. 2. 1. to 6., labouring to demolish that spirituall house and Temple, (not made by the hands devise, or skill of manActs 4. 11 Psal. 118. 22., but is of an eternall and heavenly frame in Christ2 Cor. 5. 1.) and to lay it wast of all its boules, office, ornaments, and instruments, unto this day, as ever it was with those Kings of oldIer. 52. 17, 18, 19.: as the excellencies therefore of the creature, so also the defor∣mities and miseries of the creature are both alike enemies unto the Kingdome of Jesus Christ, and yet strive one a∣gainst
another, and would faine rid and lay wast the world one of another, and yet both alike against the Cross and Crowne of Christ, and are both alike prevalent and Kingly to captivate the soule, and to keep under one another accor∣ding as either of them doth prevail and bear sway wherever they come:1 King. 21. 25. 26. 27. so that the great humiliations of the world for feare of the wrath of GodIsa. 58. 4. Ier. 14. 12. Zech. 7. 5. Ier. 7. 6., and the great exaltations and executions of it, to put away, abate or keep back wrathMark 6. 21. to 28., are both alike Kingly, which the Lord will strike through or wound in the day of his wrath; and so much for the allu∣sion unto the story in Genesis, which our Prophet brings up, and gives it a being in his owne times, prophecying of the life and being of it also in times and ages to come: Now for the order and method of the words of this fift Verse, For God is a God of order, and not of confusion1 Cor. 14. 33., yea is com∣posed in the Lord Christ, of nothing else; but the order of God in and about the things of man, exercised in his word, works and waies, ever springs from such Principles as hold correspodency, and are compatible to the nature and being of the Son of God, and all tend to his exaltation, but the order of man, or of the world in and about the things of God, ever springs from principles seated naturally in the creature, and hold correspondency with its nature and be∣ing, and therefore ever tends to the exaltation and lifting up of man, and this distinction is warily to be had in remem∣brance in all our orderly courses propounded unto the sons of men in and about the things of God. Now the sum of these words, Verse 5. is a noble act of God, executed and done upon the fore-named mighties of nobles of the world, in which we may observe, First, his title, the Lord; Secondly, the place where it is done, in these words, at the right hand; Thirdly, the worke it selfe, on thing done, shall strike through Kings: Fourthly, the time when, that is, in the day of his wrath. For the first,  his name or title, the Lord, or Jehovah, the wond hath in it the force of that title given to ChristRev. 1. 4. Rev. 4. 8., that was that is, that is to come, or will bee the same for ever;
and signifies unto us, that the Lord was at the right hand of Abraham in those slaughters and victories (in the rescue of Lot in his day) of and over those great ones of the earth before-mentioned: the Lord is also at the right hand of Da∣vid in his victories, whereupon this Psalme was penned for the use and benefit of the ChurchPsal. 109. 31.; and the Lord will also be at the right hand of the poore for ever, as in the Verse go∣ing immediately before this Psalme, to save him from those fore-named Kings that would condemne his soule; so that he was, he is, and ever will be at the right hand of the poore for his deliverance, therefore the Psalmist prophecying of Christ, saith, (according to the words as they are truly ren∣dred Psal. 41. 1) O blessed is that man that prudently considereth the poor weakling, who is ever poore and weake in respect of any thing of the help of man, for the Lord is ever and altoge∣ther his help of and safety, as there it is expressedPsal. 41. 2 3., which be∣ing prudently looked upon, according to the wisdome of the Word of God, it is plainely seen, that the weakness of man is of no other use, but the very in-let of the almighty power and authority of the Son of God2 Cor. 12. 10. Rom. 8. 35, 36, 37., who is that one∣ly blessed man indeed, and happy state and condition where∣ever it is prudently seen and perceived; the word Lord therefore in this place, is interchangeably to bee taken and understood, (as in the first Verse of this Psalme is declared) for this Lordly Priest stands at the right hand of the King, who is that poore one, who without this Priestly sacrifice and death, had never appeared in his glory; nor could hee have been made manifest by being shaped or made in the lowermost parts of the earthPsal. 139. 15. Ephes. 4. 9., nor had hee brought forth those Riches and Trea∣sures of his love onely made manifest in his Saints through death, but by this Priestly Sacrifice: Even so also this Lordly King stands at the right hand of the Priest who is that poore weakling also, who be∣ing found in death1 Cor. 5. 7 1 Cor. 15. 3 and sacrificed, could never raise up himselfe from under such a curseGal. 3. 13. Deut. 21. 23, and out of such destructionPsal. 88. 11. Psal. 90. 3. Psal. 103. 4, but onely through that Spirit and Power,
life and authority of such a royal and potent KingPsa, 47, 1. Psa, 48. 2. Psa. 95. 3. Rev, 17. 14:; and in the one of these, and in the other, there is full and suffi∣ciency of supply, for the Lord is inriched in that it is made manifest what a glorious use himself can make of such an accursed thing, or condition, whereby he appears to be God alone, which otherwise had lien hid as it doth to all other creatures1 Cor, 2. 9. 1 Cor, 2, 14.; and man also is inriched in that, that in the death and absence of all his own glory and excellencies (that are humane and proper to a creature) the dignity and power of God becomes his2 Cor, 4. 6, to 11.; and thus is the word Lord inter∣changeably taken,  as also the poor one is, at whose right hand he stands: Now to be at the right hand hath divers significations; as first it signifies power, dignity, and autho∣rity Psa, 118, 15, 16.: therefore is the word by the Evangelists and Apo∣stles so varyed, as, at the right hand of GodMark 16. 19. Acts 5, 31.; so also, at the right hand of majestyHeb, 1, 3.: the right hand of the power, and the likeMark 14, 62: and sometimes it signifies skil and cunning usu∣ally exercised in arts, made manifest and brought forth by the right hand as the proper instrument; therefore it is said, If I forget thee. O Jerusalem, then let my right hand forget her cunning; that is, in all musical and artificial admini∣strations in the house of the SanctuaryPsae, 137. 5.: Again, It some∣times signifies ratification and confirmation of what passeth from one to another, and so it is taken, when the Lord swears by his right handIsa, 62. 8., and in that he saith, If Jeconiah were as the signet on my right hand, yet would I pluck him thenceJer, 22. 24.; as if he should say, though it be so neer unto me that I pass nothing under seal, or perform any thing without it, and many the like, But these may serve to manifest what is meant by being at the right hand in this place, (when it is said, the Lord at thy right hand,) that is, the Lord, as King, is the power and authority of the Priest; the Lord also, as King, is the wisdom and skil of the Priest; the Lord, as King, is the ratification and confirmation of the Priest, in the rescue and deliverance of him from all humane frailties and infirmitiesRom, 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.. Again translatively, the Lord, as Priest, is the power and authority of the King; the Lord, as Priest
also, is the wisdom and skil of the King; the Lord, as Priest, is the ratification and confirmation of the King, in sacrificing all human abilities and excellencies, that the Princely power and excellency of God only may appear: So as, that with∣out the one the other is not, nor can be known or found according to the way of the faith of Jesus Christ; insomuch that whatsoever the King doth in his regal authority, he doth it by the Priest, that is, by that power, and authority, wisdom, and curious device, and skil, as also by that seal and confirmation that is in that death and suffering of the Son of GodHeb. 2, 14, 2 Cor. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Col. 2. 14, 15.. Again, whatsoever the Priest doth in his office and ministry, he doth it by the King, that is, by the power, and authority, wisdom, curiosity, and skil; yea, and by that seal and confirmation that is in the life and resur∣rection of that Son of man the Lord Jesus ChristRom 8, 33. 34 Iohn 11, 25, 26 1 Pet. 1. 3. 1 Pet. 3. 21.: So that if the Word of God be opened to set forth the life of Christ, it sets it forth in and through his deathIsa. 26. 19. Ephes. 2. 1, 5, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19: and also if it be opened to set forth the death of Christ, it sets it forth only in his lifeRom. 6, 9. 10. 11. Rom. 6. 1, to 8.: For the one is not nor can be made known out of the otherRom. 8. 34. 2 Cor. 13. 4.: and they that go about to work any other way concerning the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ in the Church,  they can never effect nor perform that work that is here foretold, namely, to wound or strike through these forenamed and forementioned Kings; namely, a car∣nal prosperity, and also adversity, either of which being ta∣ken as the proper Cross or Crown of Christ Jesus, become therby meerly Idolatrous and Diabolical: The word translated in the future tense, shal wound, may also be read in the preter, hath wounded, or in the present tense, doth wound, to denote an act of continuation: We are here then to mind the acti∣on performed as a work extending to all times, for God is never out of the like operation, his work being one, even as his will is but one; so that whereever he, as King and Lord, sets forth his Lordship and Principality in his life and resurrection, he doth it in and by the death and sacrifice of the Priest, that man of his right handPsal. 0. 17.; that is, according to the multitudes of the operations and ways of the work∣ings
of death, hel, and sin in the natural heart of man (are) manifesting and bringing in his sorrow and wretchedness on every sideGen. 6. 4. Gal. 4. 24. Rom. 2, 5., which the Son of God having taken upon him∣self Mat. 8. 17.; must needs be without number, reckoning, or ac∣count Psal. 40, 12.; and therefore for weight intolerablePsal. 98, 4. Ioh 6, 2,, being none could stand under them, but he who is God himselfRom. 9, 5, Acts 20, 28.: even such are those supplies, fulfilments, revivals, and operations that are in the life and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, which do fulfil and replenish all and every of those ways and workings of death whatsoever; for if all this wretch∣edness and misery were contracted into one (as it was) and laid upon that one and only Son of the FatherPsal. 42, 7, Heb, 7, 27, Iohn 3, 16., which was indeed his deathIsa. 53, 5, 6,; then must it of necessity be such a death as is never vacant of life; so that the life, spirit, and power of God is in the very same act; for if it were not so, then should the life of the Son of God admit of a cessation, for some time, which can in no wise be granted, no not so much as for a momentIames 1, 17, Psal, 90, 1, 2,, therefore his life and death are both of them compleat in the same act; and thus doth the Lord through the death of the Son that man at his right hand, bring life to light, expelling all the ways of darkness and death whatsoeverEphes, 5, 8, Mat, 6, 22, Psal, 97, 11,, that they cannot fasten themselves nor take hold of that Saint of Israel, who is our life, and light, and by whom our darkness and death is done away1 Ioh, 5, 11, Mal, 4, 2, Isa 60, 1, 2,: And thus doth our Lord wound or strike through that King, or those Kings, of the miseries and wretched condition of mankind, which through infidelity do prevail and reign over so many in this world, having captivated them under themselvesIsa 61, 1, Luk 4, 18,, which our Lord in all that are his strikes through, which word (strikes through) hath affinity with that translated blaspheme) that is, to pierce or strike through so as to make liveless, and voyd of operation, that they can∣not take hold, operate, nor have the least power over him, so are the sins and sorrows which man by nature is subject unto, slain unto that Saint or holy One of Israel, in all that are his, even as the blasphemer is said to pierce or strike through the LordLevit, 24, 11, that is, makes him liveless and voyd
of all operations of his grace in and upon himself, and so is no other but a dead man in sins and trespasses, signified by his being stoned to death even as the Saints are dead to the sins and miseries of manRom, 6. 1, 2, 3, 4., but alive to grace, peace, and righte∣ousness in the blessing or bessedness of the Son of GodRom, 9, 5 Psa, 115, 15. Psa, 1, 1. Psa, 32, 1, 2.; and thereby is that other King, or Kings (in the plural number) pierced, blasphemed, or struck through by our Lord, in that man of his right hand, which is the pride, prosperity, osten∣tation, and arrogancy of the sonnes of men, attributing un∣to themselves that which is the right and due of the Son of God in the house and kingdom of God, and that is on this wise, our high Priest, or Sacrificer, makes manifest his death in the slaying and sacrificing of all the fat and the sweet, that is in the beauty, glory, excellency, and goodliness of man, no otherwise but in the King that son of his right hand; namely, in that life and resurrection of that Son of man, un∣to whom all power in heaven and in earth is given, because he is the Son of manIohn 5, 27. (else could it not be given, for as he is God he hath it, or is it from everlasting); and therefore is he over all God blessed for everRom. 9, 5.: So that according to that variety of life, spirit, principality, supereminency & excellency that is in the Son of man, even such is the death, shame, and dejection of the excellency and glory of man; therefore as the excellency and glory of him that is the Son of God must needs be infinite and boundless, even so must it necessarily follow, that the pride, glory, and goodliness of man must be in all points and at all times dryed up and altogether ex∣punged that it appear not in this way of life and resurrecti∣on of our King Christ: Therefore it is said, That all flesh is grass, and the goodliness of man as the flower of the field, the grass is withered and the flower faded, because the Spirit of the Lord hath blown or breathed upon itIsa, 40. 6, 7. Pet, 1. 23, 24: So that the death and humiliation of our high Priest, in all that are his, is cu∣riously wrought out and made manifest no other way but in the life, authority, and exaltation of the King, and according to the curiosity of that Regiment and Government, such is that noble death and sacrifice of our high Priest: So that the
death and life are one and the same acts and must needs be so, else had the Son of God injoyed life for a time without, death, which if once he had done so, he had then ever done so, for the Lord our righteousness changeth notJer, 23, 6: Mal. 3. 6., and then had he never dyed for our sins, we had yet remained in them1 Cor, 15. 16, 17., which far be it from us, or as it is translated, God forbidRom, 6, 15, that we should ever think; and thus doth our Lord strike through, pierce, or blaspheme the pride, prosperity, that the earthly excellency and goodliness of man leaving it alto∣gether liveless and voyd of any power to lay hold or to ope∣rate upon him who is the Son of God, as to move him in the least to speak great things in himself according to the arm of flesh: therefore it is that our Saviour repelled all those temptations, suggested by that great enemy of our salvationLuke 4, 13., so that none of them could in the least take hold of him; in which power and victory we only stand: and this is the work of our Lord and high Father Abraham in the slaughter of the Kings, together with our good Melchi∣sedech, who hath the truth of all; and it is a work that is done, and is ever in doing, for the work of God is ever the same, as truly as Christ both was, and is and is to comeExod, 3, 14. Rev, 1, 4.: and howsoever unto a natural eye and ear it seems to lay waste the house of God, of any actions or operations of the Saints at all, because it denies man his natural excellencies and abilities of the flesh (according to natural and humane wisdom to work by,) yet it is nothing else but an exchange of the things of man for the things and operations of the Son of God, in case we do but know how to put our talent into the bankery or to the exchangersMat, 25, 27., and not do as that unprofitable servant did, to hide it in a napkin: for the ta∣lent given is the mind, wisdom, or will of the Son of God unto mankind, and so is a gift which man, by art and na∣tural wisdom, finely wraps up, even as in a napkin, hiding it or keeping it apart by it self in those earthly thoughts and counsels of his own mind and understanding and puts it not into the bankery (which is) that unity of God and man in Jesus Christ; and so it doth not increase by exchange,
namely, of the things of man translated and made over unto God, as also the things of God translated and made over unto man, which is that abundant increase and multiplica∣tion of those great riches of our Lord that are found in the life and death of Jesus Christ (which is all one to do) namely to make one, to become many, by bringing it into the bankery, or putting it to the exchangers, which are di∣vers, and yet it is but one (in respect of unity) or else it cannot increase, even as to bring divers, or two, five, or ten into one bankery, or else if they be not made one, they can∣not multiply and increase; so that one talent is made known what it is in all the rest, in respect of its grace and riches, in multiplication and increase, and all the rest are made known in that one, in respect of that unity, and sume total they all amount unto; And unto whomsoever this mystery is not opened they cannot be fruitful nor profitable servants in the house of God. So that the operations, gifts, and offices in the Church unto a seeing eye are no less various, fruitful, beautiful, comely, costly, and glorious, then were of old those hangings, imbroideries, curtains, curious carvings, in∣gravings, offices, and officers in that Temple and Tabernacle of God in the comely honour of the Sanctuary, whenever, or wheresoever it appears: and also to a hearing ear, those edicts, expressions, and revelations of Jesus Christ are infinitly sweeter and more melodious then was all that mu∣sick in those many and sundry sorts of instruments, or could be in that material Temple, which indeed were nothing but carnal, further, then truly understood and considered in him, otherwise the musick of NebuchadnezzarDan, 3, 4, 5, 6 is as good and as harmonious as is the best musick and melody that can be made by backsliding IsraelIer, 3, 6, 8, Exod, 32, 6, 1 Cor, 10, 7,: yea the things of God, broke up in the house & temple of God like that box of oyntment or spiknardLuk 7, 37, 38 Iohn 12, 3, are as pleasant and fragrant to the sent of him that is spiritualas1 Cor, 2, 15, as ever that was of old; yea all his garments smel of mirrhe, alloes and cashia, when he comes in and out of that Ivory pallacePsal, 45, 7, 8 Can, 1, 13,: yea this great work of God in blas∣pheming or piercing these Kings, is like that mountain of
mirrhe and hils of spices, where those united and contracted espousals give each other their lovesCan, 7, 12,, which is loves in the plural number so multiplyed that it cannot be numbred, so strong, as death overcomes notCan, , 6,; so servent, as floods drown not; so deer and precious, as all substance cannot buy it outCan 1, 6, 7,: but to a natural mind these things cannot be so, no more then Christ can be the same to the wicked Jews that he is to his DisciplesIohn 8, 44, Iohn 17, 23, 24: For our Lord pierceth or blasphemeth the Kings, that is, leaves without breath, and makes liveless all the glorious and acceptable things of man, wherein natu∣rally man delights and takes pleasure, not permitting the workings, glory, or operations of any of them to appear, or to be of use in his house and sanctuary, whether they be his abilities to exercise himself in knowing, declaring, or practising any thing that concerns either the Cross or the Crown of Christ, the mystery whereof no natural man can possibly conceive; for the laying down of himself is death unto him; therefore that which tends to the setting up of the life, spirit, power, and order of the Son of God, seems unto him most vacant, and to have no order nor comeliness in it, therefore it is, that he hides himself, as it were, from ChristEsay 53, 2, 3, looking upon him as a formless thingIsa 52, 14,, for never had any his countenance so marred, in the eye of an unrege∣nerate man, as Christ hadIsa, 52, 14,, no though he be smitten and af∣flicted, so as to take away all stripes from us, yet he esteems him notIsa, 53, 3, 4,; for to have the natural workings and operations of mans mind to be pierced and left liveless he can in no wise endure,  but our Saviour tells us, that he that blas∣phemes the Son of man, that is, leaves him voyd or makes him liveless in all his own operations (which are all summed up in this, to seek himself in all things,) that man shal be forgiven, nay that is forgiveness it selfMat, 12, 32.: because it can∣not be done but by the life, and spirit, wisdom, and power of the Almighty himself; therefore our Saviour saith, whe∣ther is it easier to say thy sins are forgiven, or to say rise up and walkLuk 5, 23,, shewing that the operations of God, in our walking and acting, are no less then is his mercy, and good∣ness
in pardoning and forgiving our sins, they are both of like worth, value and grace in the house of God, so that where sins remain there pardon is excludedJohn 3 36. Exod, 34, 7. 1 Iohn 5, 16.; and so also where the operations of our own minds abide in the things of God, there also is the power and workings of God ex∣cluded; therefore it is, that he that blasphemes the holy Ghost shal not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to comeMat, 12, 31, 32.; that is, he that pierceth or strikes through that holy and spiritual frame and composition that is in our Lord Jesus, leaving it without life and operation in him∣self, his sin remains and abides upon him, both in that in∣stant opportunity of his so acting, intimated in that phrase (in this world) or this present world, that is in that present time or season, nor shal it be forgiven in the world to comeMat, 12 32; that is, in the succession and continuation of such operations for ever, which do succeed in the hearts of all wicked men, and are ever coming on as truly as they are also present. Now to speak against this spiritual state of Christ, cannot have pardon in it; it is not meant of speaking against the Holy ghost as a spirit abstracted from the Son of man, but in that Son of man, so that to speak of Christ aright is to speak of him spiritually, or else we pierce him and strike through the Spirit, that is, we leave that blessed operation of the Spirit (which is all one with pardon of sin) liveless unto our selves; therefore when sins are forgiven we rise up and walkLuk, 5, 23, 24, as having both pardon and power bestow∣ed upon and given unto us: And here we must note, that we speak not of Christ spiritually (but in way of piercing) when we speak of him as God, and that in the most acute and sublime manner that possibly art may bring forth, and yet debate upon him as a thing abstracted from humane na∣ture, and do not declare distinctly in all points how this God was made man, and dwelt, or tabernacled amongst us, or in us, as the word is, that is, in our nature: So also if we speak of him in his humane nature, if we had the skil of all Philosophers, or the most curious naturalists that ever were, to delineate and lay out the nature and constitution
of that nature which the word was madeIohn 1, 14., or became in us; and yet not declare in all points how it is made one with, or becomes the Son of the living God; we speak not spiritually of Jesus Christ, for nature doth afford most curious appre∣hensions and distinctions of attributes and operations, so be it they may be kept a part, separated and divided from the creature; so as to have his subsistance and being, as that which is another thing, apart from humane nature; so also man may attain to excellent knowledg of the creature to apprehend, and freely consent unto the nature of man, disposition, parts, faculties, properties, and operations, so be it, he may center the proper subsistance and being of them in the creature, and not in the Son of God; but this is not the wounding of Kings here spoken of, but to pierce the spiritual and holy composition that is in Jesus Christ; for the divine nature is never spoken of, according to that spirit of faith2 Cor, 4, 13. 1 Cor, 6, 17, Rom, 10, 8. 1 Cor, 12, 3., but as it hath respect unto our nature, comprehended in that Son of man; so as that, whatsoever it is, it is it in that our nature; nor is humanity ever spoken of according to that life of faith, but as it hath re∣spect in all things to that divine nature, comprehended, or con∣sidered in that Son of God, in whom it is, whatsoever it is, that is good and acceptable unto God; therefore to preach the way of the Gospel, the Cross of Christ, is a piercing, stri∣king through, and leaving destitute of life all the things that seem glorious in the eyes of man naturally, in the ways of God1 Pet, 23, 24, 25. 1 Cor, 29, 30, 31., whether they be things, that according to the judgment of man, recommend us unto God, in making us conformable; unto himGen, 3, 5, 6., or things of penalty, vexation, and sorrow, that according to humane apprehension serve to fit and prepare us, and make way for that which wil be approved of by him, for the Gospel leaves not any thing of the one nor of the other for man to shroud himself under, or to boast of, or to terrifie, or torment himself about; for the miseries of man being the hu∣miliation of the Son of God, must needs be done away; nor can the excellency, or the goodliness of man take place, because the glory of the Son of God in his exaltation must, and doth ap∣pear 2 Thes, 2,  Iohn 1, 14. 2 Cor, 3, 18, Isa, 4. 5.: and therefore the more distinct a Pharisee is in the
letter of the law, the more he thinks his God is blasphemed, when ever the Cross of Christ is preachedMark 14, 61, 62, 63, 64, Joh. 10, 32, 33. Mark 2, 6, 7. Luke 5, 21., not understand∣ing the spirituality of it: for when mens doings and sufferings are nullified in point of salvation, by the doings and sufferings of the Son of God, they hold themselves undone, yea the god whom they serve is pierced, which is the lord BaalRom, 11, 4. 1 Kings 19, 18. 1 Kings 18, 26 27, 28., and not the Lord JehovahDeut, 6, 4.: And hence it is that those men that have attained to greatest human learning, exercising it in the way of the Scriptures, not understanding the spirit and life of them, but are only Ministers of the Letter, but not of the Spirit; which ministry of the Letter kills and worketh death, and wrath in the souls of men; so also do they kill and work the death of mens bodies whenever they get power into their hands, and become the greatest persecutors in matter of con∣science, and worship of God that are in the world; yea it is they that in killing the Disciples and Apostles of our Lord, think they do God good serviceJohn 16, 1, 2: for all principles in nature and art, that human learning attaineth unto, is to give God and man not only a nature diverse, but also each of them a several subsistance and being, and what it may profess more is meerly had by tradition, not being acquainted with the true grounds and principles thereof in the least, but are as a house built upon the sand in whatever they sayMat, 7, 26, 27.; for flesh and blood cannot revail the things of the Kingdom unto themMat, 16, 17.: so that the unity (through his blood) of God and man, in the preaching of the Cross, is piercing or wounding unto them, and doth indeed incur wrath; therefore the time of the execution of this noble act is noted to be In the day of his wrath. Now the day of Gods wrath,  unto the world, is the day of his love unto his Saints2 Cor. 2, 15, 16, 17, Luk, 2, 25, 26, 27, 28,, and that is the day of the revela∣tion and manifestation of Jesus Christ, and it must needs be so; for the proper subject of wrath is man and not GodPsa, 76, 10. James 1, 20, Isa, 27, 4. Eccl, 7, 9.: as also the proper subject of the love and peace of the Elect is God and not manJoh. 16, 33. Eph, 2. 14.: Yet neither the one nor the other can
be said to be without its relative, in this way of salvation, as also in the way of destruction; for man is included, and not excluded, in this famous work of wounding of Kings, yet not any thing can be attributed unto manEph, 2, 9. Rom, 3, 27. 1 Cor, 1, 29, 30, 31., but all unto God in that noble work; so also God is included, and not excluded, in this point of wrath, and yet nothing of the nature of wrath or anger can be attributed unto GodIsa, 27, 4., but all the displeasure and wrath is properly in man, who is the proper fountain, seat, and original of itEccles, 7, 9.: for as the love of God in our salva∣tion is defused, shed abroad, and springing up in our nature through that his Son, though in our selves we have nothing of Gods love in us, which love taketh hold and kindleth it self upon no other thing then only our baseness, low estate, and infirmityEzek, 16, 3, to 8., which we behold in the day of the publication of the Cross of ChristIob 40, 4. Iob, 42, 5, 6. Mat, 24, 14, 15, when as he communicates his wis∣dom with us therein; for in his light we see lightPsa, 36, 9., and see∣ing by the spirit of the Son, we are transformed into the image and glory of the Son; for when Christ, which is our life, ap∣pears, then do we also appear with him in gloryCol, 3, 4.: Though in our selves we have no life nor glory, nor any such thing at all; but the wisdom of God makes use of our death, baseness, and infirmity to raise us up unto the glory and dignity of his only beloved Son, in whom we behold our selves having faith or subsistance in himCol 2, 10. Col, 4. 12. Eph, 1, 3. unto life and glory; and so are set down in heavenly places together with himEph, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7.: even so also there is wrath in man, which is not without respect and relation unto God, and yet no wrath or displeasure in God at all: For Christ Jesus being declared, then the discension of the Son of God into our nature is made manifest, in which he cannot appear, but he becomes the full and compleat glory and dignity of it, insomuch that the glory of the creature must needs fall and va∣nish away, which man beholding with a natural eye, that is, according to that wisdom of a creature which gives him his proper distinction and denomination from all other earthly crea∣tures in the world, so as to have the glory of a man upon him, which none else had, he is as loth to have this blasted and come to nought, or to become that which indeed is foolishness with
GodRom, 8, 6.; yea he is by the light of his own understanding so far from it as he is from desiring his own ruine and destruction, and we know that every creature naturally desires and endea∣vours the preservation of it self: and hence ariseth an enmity in his heart against that glory and grace that is in the death and resurrection of the Son of God; yet the glory of God he coveteth after in himself, but would have it spring up and flow out of this wisdom and device that naturally is in the creature, which is no less then to covet and seek after, that he himself, as he is a creature, should be God, which is the proper seat and state of Antichrist2 Thes, 2, 4., and the more he computes him∣self with, and compares himself unto God by this subtil and sly wisdom of his own, the more he must needs find a vast and infinite distance from, and difference with his Creatour, which ingendreth wrath and horrour in his soul, which is the proper place and seat of it, (and not God, who is only good∣ness and love); and by his own wisdom he makes such use of Gods grace and excellencies that they kindle and instant wrath in his soul; although in God there is no more wrath nor anger, then there is or can be peace and joy in our sinsPsa, 32, 3, 4. Gen, 4, 6, 7. Rom, 6, 23., which the wisdom of God in like manner makes use of for the exaltation of his Son for ever: even so doth man make use of the grace of God, through his own wisdom, to anger, torment and cast down himself for everGen, 4, 13, 14. Rev, 1, 7.: So that if we take away the wis∣dom of man in what he sets up to himself, as outward forms, figures, ways, and degrees of suffering, and humiliations, to prepare himself for, or to give some satisfaction unto God; as also the ways and means which his own wisdom deviseth for his exaltation and agreement with God, and then you strike through or pierce the Kings, that are so potent and puissant in the hearts of men, in all the world, which indeed ingen∣ders wrath and enmity in the hearts of all them who cleave unto them, as to their God, and wil not accept of the Cross of Jesus Christ, who was taken from prison, and from judgment, or as the Hebrew word (min) signifies (to) as well as (from) so was he taken, to prison, and to judg∣ment, that is, his imprisonment, as also his lifting
up unto the throne or seat of judgment are one and the same actIsa, 53, 8. Acts 8, 33.; for the act of imprisoning of the word in our nature is the very act of lifting up of our nature into the judgment and authority of the throne: therefore he saith, and who can de∣clare his ageIsa, 53, 8., that is, no wisdom of man can ever conceive how eternity should become time, and how time should be∣come eternity in one and the same act; yea he is cut off from the land of the livingIsa, ibid., and also stated in an everlasting pos∣session in the same act; therefore is his Cross his triumph, as it is said, he triumphed upon the CrossCol, 2, 15., which the wisdom of the creature knows not how to yeeld or consent unto, and so dare never commit it self to a way that it knows not, but stands in perpetual enmity with it, and opposition against it; and so doth make it a day of wrath unto himself, for that two such contrary things should be in the same act, the wisdom and deepest pollicy that is in man can never yeeld unto or find out, namely, that death should become life, and that life should be death; the revelation whereof is the day of his wrath, or of his nostril, as the word signifies, alluding unto that act in the Creation of man at the first, where it is said, that God breathed into his face, or nostrils the breath of livesGen, 2, 7.: For so the word is plurall, to signifie aplurallitie of lives, in∣cluded and comprised in that one act, not noly, in regard that all men that were to live upon the face of the earth, were o∣riginally in that man, nor only in respect of that plurallitie of lives, that are multiplyed in Jesus Christ, signified in that, But also to declare that there was, two different, ways of life, and generation, included in that one act, (as certainly, as there was both a man, and a woman included in it) the one direct in opposition unto the other, that is, there is a way life in that act, that hath nothing but death in it, and that is to live after the flesh, which hath nothing but the death of the spirit in it, Rom, 8, 13., which is simply the way, of wrath signified by the Nostrills, aluding unto such fierce and angry creatures, that manifest the same by snuffings, or snorting in the nose, for so the word may be translated nostrills, there is also in that act an other
way of life, in death, which is nothing but life, and that is The dying to the flesh, and a living unto the spiritRom. 8. 13. 14., which is also signified, in that the word may also be translated, face, as he breathed into his face shewing, that sweet agreement, and answerable condition, (even as in water, faceProv. 27. 19. answer∣eth to face) between the creator, and the creature, so that there is in this one act, that which conduceth unto several lives and that, the one, in direct opposition to the other, so that the way of the first Adam, and also the way of the second, are propounded unto us in this Scripture1 Cor. 15. 22., the way of earth, and the way of heaven1 Cor. 15. 45., and therefore the, spirit of God by the Apostle, teacheth both from this place, saying, the first man Adam, was made a souly soul, that is, nothing, but mortali∣ty and weaknessGen 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 45. 2 Cor. 3. 6., yea such acting as corrupts and destroyes in himself, the wisedome, and image of God, and the second is made alive makeing, or quickening Spirit, namely such a one, as gives spirit and life in himself, even, unto the dust or slime of the earth,2 Cor. 2. 15. 16. Mat. 25. 31. 46., so that whensoever the grace, countenance, or face of God appears, in Christ, by that publishing of the Gospell, in the very same act, doth this day of his Nostrills, or day of his wrath, make it self manifest in the world, in the Saints it is the day of peace, good news, of you and goodness Luk. 4. 18, 19 20. 21.. But in the wicked that very same thing, is the day of wrath, evil tidings, horror and anguishMat. 8. 29. Luk. 8. 28. Mark. 5. 7., So that the Cross of Christ, is the only wrath and blasphemy, in the eyes of the worldMat. 26. 65. Acts 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, For the Saints, are of God, and the world is of that wicked one,1 Iohn, 5, 19, and both these estates, and conditions thus oposite, do spring out of that, which at the first was made one, (even, as the man and the woman were at the first made one, and both of them had but one name)Gen, 5, 2,, namely the wisdome or image of God and the dust, or slime of the earth,Gen, 2, 7, Gen, 1, 27,, which are the two great, grand, and proper parents, of all the world (taught in that first man, and woman) out of whom comes the mistery of God, and the mistery of iniquitie, but, out of one and the same act, even, as that righteous Abell, and that wicked Cain, came out of the man, and the woman, in one, and the same act, of lawfull copulation, and therefore no men∣tion
is made, of the knowing of his wife, betwixt the bring∣ing forth of them bothGen. 4. 1. 2., and untill we perceive, that we are the same unto the sonne of God by nature, that Cain was to his, so near a Brother, Abell, that is, that we are his proper death, who only can dye in us, otherwise we can never come to acknowledg our, unity with, and life in him,Col. 3. 3, 4. 1 Ioh 4, 17,. For the day of the Captivity of Lot, or of that inheritance, or purchassed possession, that falleth unto every one by Lot, without any devi∣sion, of or respect unto, any ones person, either for his doing of good or evil,Psal. 16, 5, Col. 3, 25,, more or less then any other,Rom. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13., which our Father Abraham rescueth and redeemeth, which day of his rescue, and deliverance, and the day of his thraldome, and Captivitie, being made one poynt of time, (according to the unity, and simplicity, of that intire, and eternall act, of the word of God,) that is the day of Gods wrath, and execution of vengeance, which is only done, in the manifestation, and revelation of the Cross of Christ, upon which, not only the slaughter of his enemies dependeth, but also, that glorious rule and authority of his, exercised and executed, both in his house, and also in all the worldPsal. 59, 13, Psal. 103, 19, Psal. 2, 18, 9, Rev, 2, 26, 27.. which is layd down in the latter part at this psalme, wherein we are to observe these particu∣lers following. 1. First, in whom his authority is expressed, contained in these words, he shall Iudg among or in the hea∣then. 2. Secondly, by what, this his rule, and authority takes place, layd down in these words, he shall fill the places with dead bodyes. 3. Thirdly, the extent, of this his Government and judgment, In these words, he shall wound the heads over many Countries. 4. Fourthly, the way and manner of his repast in his persuits, and exercise of authority over his ene∣mys, contained in these words, he shall drink of the Brook in the way. 5. Fiftly, the issue event, summ, or result of all, in
these words, Therefore shall be Lift up his head. Breifly of each of these in order, and first of that, in whom this his rule and authority is exercised, and expressed, and that is in the heathen. The word here translated heathen, signifies an Alien, name∣ly, one, that is cut off, and far, removed from his ansestour, by corrupting his ways, from the life and course of his first ori∣ginal, or predecessour, like unto that man whom the Scripture wil not afford a name to begiven unto himRuth. 4. 1.. he that should have bought the parcel of land or possession, that was Ebime∣leches, which he was willing to injoy of it self, (as all men would inherit the priviledges that came by our Lord Jesus) But when he saw he must also have Ruth the Moabitish, to raise up seed to his dead Brother, which were to be called by his name, that so the name of the dead might only abide upon and live in the inheritance,Ruth. 4. 4. 5.. then he forsakes possession and all, and that before, and in the judgment of the Elders, of Israel,Ruth 4. 6.. degenerating and cutting himself off, from his true ancestour, and so from the lyne, and generation of Jesus Christ, who was begotten by Boas, of Ruth the Moabitish,Mat. 1. 5. even so it is with all the wicked of the world, they would consent to have the possessions, and priviledges that came by Christ,Mark 10. 17. 23. but when they must be one, with the Moabite, begotten in an act, of incestGen. 19, 32. to 37., and that all the seed of life, and immortality, must serve only to memorize the name of Christ, yea, in, and upon all the glory, upon which he only is the defence,Isa. 4. 5. 6. and may not rais up their own name, and glory thereby, but only the name of the dead, namely of him that dyed for our sins, Rom. 4. 25. 1 Cor, 15, 3, then do they neglect, and reject all, both possession, and posterity, and alianate, and cut off themselves from God, who is that ancestour, and fountain of all mankind, and there∣fore is the first man called the sonne of GodLuk, 3, 38, who was not made but in the life wisedome and image of GodGen, 1. 27, Gen, 2, 7, and there∣fore the cutting off becomes such an estrangment, and aliana∣tion, which must have an extent proportionable unto him, that was the alye, and ancestour which, is of an infinite nature,
though the Ancestor is no proper cause nor fountain there∣of, yet such an affinity is broken, in which God is a party, even as a faithfull husband having an adulterous wife, the Contract is wholly broken, though hee bee no meanes nor cause of the breach, but is altogether against it; even so the whole Covenant is broken between God and Man, but God is nothing in the furtherance or in any appro∣bation of the breach, but his whole will is against it, there∣fore it is, that his oath is firme and holy, when he saith, as I live I desire not the death of him that dies, turne yee, turne yee from your evill waies, for why will you die O house of IsraelEzek. 33. 11., in∣timating yea and plainely declaring by Protestation upon Oath, that it is their will to die, and not his, and as hee is nothing in the breach, no nor can bee no more then the holy and righteous one can bee a Sinner, no more is hee any thing in the continuation of this breach, which is the hoarding up and exercise of wrath in all unbelee∣vers Rom. 2. 5.; for the continuation is extended according to the duration of him from whom the alienation is, and therefore must needs be an eternall wrath, God himselfe being the Ancestor alienated from, from whom man had life, breath and being at the firstGen. 2. 7., and without whom he was notActs 17. 28, for of him and through him are all thingsRom. 11. 36., so that God raignes ever the wicked or Heathen, in wrath and displeasure, in their captivating under sinne and Satan for ever; and yet no wrath nor displeasure in him at all, but it is meerly in the wicked themselves, who most voluntarily and willingly subject themselves ther∣unto, without any cause or default in the Son of God at all, and thus he exerciseth rule and authority over the wicked, who are no part of his kingdome, jurisdiction, or people, un∣to whom he gives his royall Law, and heavenly EdictsJames 2. 8 Psal. 147. 19. 20., but are of the kingdome of Satan, and under the power and do∣minion of darknesse, subject onely unto that Law of sinne and deathIohn 8. 44. Luke 22. 53. Rom. 7. 25., utterly estranged from that law of the spirit and life, which is by Iesus ChristRom. 8. 2., man therefore in this rule and au∣thority is alienated from God, his first originall, predeces∣sor,
and ancestour, even so farre as eternall death and destru∣ction, is from eternall life and salvation; and therefore the state of the wicked is truly said to be a bottomlesse pitRev. 9. 2., which the Angell that came downe from God (or is a messen∣ger taught from the Kingdome of God) hath the key there∣of in his handRev. 20. 1., or ministerie, knowing how to shut it, and how to open it, to keep out the faithfull so, as there they cannot enterLuke 16. 26., and let in unbelievers so, as out of which they cannot escapeIude 6. ver.: and we know that there can be nothing without banks or bottome, but onely the Lord himselfe; and therefore it is not but with respect unto him, which the world knowes not of, neither will they understand;  for in this point lies that mystery of the devill, and of that first sin, and so the mystery of iniquity2 Thes. 2. 7, which the world hath so many conjectures, and divining cups to drink in, to come to the knowledge of it, and that they might finde it out, and yet know not the time of the creation of him, whom they say was first in sin, nor the manner of it, that is, whether all fell in one, or whether such a multitude were in the same minde in one act, or moment of time: nor know they the place where they fell, whether in heaven, being that sinne cannot be admitted there, no not for a mo∣ment, though but in the very conception of itPsal. 5. 4 Isa. 53. 9; and to cast him out before could not stand with justice, and to say they fell (being out of heaven) in the garden as Ministers unto man, it is all one as to affirme they fell, being out of their Creator, in whom all things consist, not having their being and subsistance in himCol. 1. 16, 17. Acts 17. 28, and if some of the Angells had their being out of him considered in Christ, then all had, and if once the good Angells had being out of Christ, then they ever have their being out of Christ; for his mysticall body cannot changeIam. 1. 16 17: and if they be not in him, then is not he the reconciler of all things in heaven and in earthCol. 1. 20; therefore the world conjectures and gropes in these things (namely in this point of the fall of Angells) onely in the dark: for the Scripture saith, the Angells that kept not their first estate, or principality (as the word isIude 6. verse.) are reserved in chaines of dark∣ness
unto the judgement of the great day. So that if in case they had principality, as the Spirit of God affirmes, then was there none above nor before that person, or being that first fell, no more then there was any ever below, or more deep in descention then that person or subsistance that is the first and prime in Resurrection and exaltation, and as that nature in the Son of God, wherein he had his descention, and depth of his humiliation, hath no cause of boasting or attributing unto it selfe any thing in that state of life and salvation1 Cor. 28, 29, so also that nature, wherein Satan or that Son of perdition had at the first his principality and domination (wherein he was in the beginning that Lucifer, son of the morning or day-starIsa. 14. 11 12, 13, 14, 15, a title given unto the Son of God himselfeRev. 22. 16 Rev. 2. 28.) hath no cause of guilt or staine in the least, in that fall of destruction and desolation, and therefore the know∣ledge of the Angells is another thing farre beyond that which our conjecturers or dreamers do dreame of or under∣stand; therefore it is that it is said, that he hath not put in subjection unto the Angells the world to come, whereof we speake, or are MinistersHeb. 2. 5. to prove that the Son of God is not onely an Angell or Messenger of the CovenantMal. 3. 1. (which notwith∣standing he is) but also the Lord and giver of the Covenant, whom none hath power to question or contradict, and if the first fruits of his Ministery and Kingdome be such, so is the whole lump and Administration of it alsoRom. 10. 15. Rom. 11. 16; for it hath not onely an Angelicall Message or Embassage in it as coming from anotherMal. 3. 1., but it hath also in it a Lordly edict and principality as from the Spirit and Person Royall himselfeIoh. 3. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Heb. 1 Chap., unto all others; and of this Argument in that first Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, our Apostle doth wholly insist, proving that Christ is not onely an Angell or Messen∣ger of the Covenant, but also the Lord and giver of it: So that as truly as Christ is a true Lord and giver of that Law of the SpiritIsa. 33. 22 Iam. 4. 12., so is he also a true Messenger or Minister of the SpiritLuk. 4. 17 18, 19. Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3.; so that if we will ever measure the Temple, House, or City of God with the true measuring line, or that golden reed appointed, and given by the Angell for that purpose;
so as to give every thing its due proportion, then as it is true, that if we will give the Man of God his due proportion in the House of the LordRev. 11. 1. Rev. 21. 15., we must not finde it else-where but in that Son of man Jesus ChristIoh. 5. 27. Ezek. 2. 1. 3, for further then wee hold proportion with him, we are not of God, for what we are to God we are in him, for he is that patterne revealed onely in the MountEzek. 42. 10. 11. Heb. 8. 5. Exod. 25. 9.: even so also, if we will describe an Angell of God by the same golden reed, we must have them hold proportion with that onely Angell of the Covenant, and further then we can declare how they do agree, we set forth no Angell or Messenger of God, for hee is the true patterne in that also; so that if we give the good Angells a nature, Ministery, and office besides, or otherwise then is found in the Angell of the Covenant, we wander from the rule, we have not the golden reed given unto us, nor have we been with Moses in that Mount of God to see, nor can we doe according to that patterne there givenHeb. 8. 5. Numb. 8. 4.; for with∣out the knowledge and faith of this point of the Angells, we can never understand and beleeve what it is for Michael and his Angels to fight against the Dragon and his AngelsRev. 12. 7.: nor indeed can the rest of the holy Scriptures be knowne or beleeved by us; for indeed the very forming of good An∣gells and bad, and their very appearance and bringing forth is the very root of the holy Scriptures, whereof (if wee bee darke) we erre, not knowing our way in any of those se∣verall branches that spring up, and are to be found written in the volumne of the the book, or Word of GodPsal. 40. 7 Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7.. What ever men may think or seem to profess they know of that good Word of God2 Kin. 20. 19. Isa. 39. 8., we know what we say, and the Lord give us under∣standing in all things2 Tim. 2. 7. Again, our Lord raigneth and governeth also in the Hea∣then in that way of his grace, and favour, which is peculiar unto his peoplePsal. 47. 8, 9. Psal. 93. 1. Psal. 97. 1., for they also are alienated, estranged and cut off from their proper Ancestor, even as Ruth was estran∣ged and cut off from her Ancestors the Moabites, and be∣came the Mother of our LordPsal. 83. 8. Mat. 1. 5. Ruth 1. 4., and (as it is said of Pharoah's daughter in the person of the whole Church) the Spouse of
our spirituall Solomon, that she was to forget her kindred and her fathers house, and so the King delights greatly in her beau∣ty Psal. 45. 10, 11.. For as it is true, that there was of the sons of men that were true and reall Progenitors of that body of Christ, who is the Son of GodRom. 9. 4. 5, and therefore the Psalmist saith in the person of Christ, our Fathers trusted in thee, and they were deliveredPsal. 22. 4; even so there is in man that which is a true Pro∣genitor and Ancestor to the Son of God, that gives him his beginning, even from the beginning of the world, from which time he is said to be a Lamb slainRev. 13. 8., not as a transient act, but as an act of eternity that reacheth and continueth even untill now, without the which Christ is not, nor can he take place in the soule of any without it, and that is the frailty, infir∣mity, and weakness of man, which onely gives being or real∣ty unto his death and suffering, without which he is not Je∣sus Christ2 Cor. 13. 3. 4., which death he vanquisheth even in the very en∣counter, and is alienated, estranged, and cut off from being any such thing as death isIohn 1. 4 1 Ioh. 1. 2. to 5., even as farre as the life of God is separated from being dead in sins and sorrowes, betwixt which there is an infinite distance and dispro∣portion. And as the Sonne of God reignes and go∣vernes by estranging himselfe from all the desires and incli∣nations of the fleshGal. 5. 24. Iohn 1. 12, 13., which by nature the whole lump of mankinde is subjected unto; For, We have all sinned, and are deprived of the glory of GodRom. 3. 23., in our selves, and there is not one that doth good, no not oneRom. 3. 12.: so also in the doing of it away, triumphing over it, mortifying and killing it, he turnes it to a use, quite contrary to the nature of it, raising up righteous∣nesse from sin, love out of enmity, yea joy out of sorrow, strength out of weaknesse, wisdome out of foolishnesse, glory out of shame, immortality out of mortality, and life out of death: this is that government, rule, authority, judgement, and discerning that our Lord exerciseth amongst all that are his, which is, that everlasting righteousnesse which he hath brought into the world, to be made manifest onely in his holy templeDan. 9. 24., which the Lord builds, and not man1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 1,: for the Saints by nature being all of that common parent and ancestor, the corruption and
lust of the fleshIsa. 64. 6, 7., they through this grace of God, are alie∣nated and estranged there from, as farre as the wayes of that holy Spirit are from the lusts and desires thereofGal. 5. 17, 18, 22, 23. 1 Pet. 1. 2.; and of such subjects, and none but such, consisteth the Kingdome and regiment of our Lord Christ, therefore it is said, Ye who were somtimes afarre off, are made neere by the blood of ChristEph. 2. 13; and you hath he quickened who were dead in tres∣passes and sinnesEph. 2. 1., and ye were darknesse, but now ye are light in the LordEph. 5. 8.; and now therefore ye are no more strangers and forraigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, (or with that Holy One) evon of that houshold of GodEp. 2. 19.; so that God reign∣eth over the heathen, and in them, he sits upon the throne of his holinessePsal. 47. 7, 8.; the Princes of the people (or of the Nations or Strangers) are gathered together; yea it is they that are be∣come the people of the God of AbrahamPsal. 47. 9; for the shields of the earth, or fortresse and guard of it is onely in GodPsal. 47 9: For, no government and protection of the world is proper to the house and kingdome of God, but onely in the Lord, of which all other governments are but characters drawne out by severall wayes of administration, according to principles founded in nature; therefore in his rule, government, and judgement, is he vehemently to be exaltedPsal. 47. 9; for, he alone it is, that judgeth, ruleth and governeth in the heathen, even in such as are estranged and alienated, and none elseRev. 2. 26 27. Rev. 3. 21. And here we may not neglect to speak a word of that great mistake that is in the world, in looking for some time of reformati∣on in the Church of God, which is such, as for the present is not, nor may be thought to be yet time to build in so glorious and excellent manner, as afterward it may be, which is ever the spirit of such as love to dwell in seiled houses in Baby∣lon Hag. 1. 3, 4 5, 6 rather then to returne, for the re-edifying of the TempleNehem. 2. 5., and that time (they say) is at the calling of the Jewes, and the coming in of the fulnesse of the Gentiles, when all Is∣rael shall be savedRom. 11. 25, 26: in which place is taught this alie∣nated, and Ancestour, wee have here spoken of: But this they gather, with no little confidence of the fulfil∣ment thereof (according to their way,) understanding
onely according to the letter, all the writings of the A∣postles, who allude frequently unto those ancient distin∣ctions and separations of other Nations from Israel of old, declaring the state and condition of peoples to be so divers and opposite, as those ancient records of the carriage, nature, and dispositions, and separations in for∣mer times, by the ancient histories of Scripture, are set forthDeut. 7. 1, 2, 3 Deut. 2. 25. Deut. 4. 6. 27 Deut. 18. 9 Zech. 7. 14 Zech. 12. 9, 10, which being a doctrine in those dayes, by the dif∣ferences of peoples and nations, to teach the mystery of Christ, even as in differences of meats, drinks, washings, leprosies, outward impurities, and the like, which are in∣numerable; the Apostles in their writings allude unto them, for the opening of them, as to the ArkeHeb. 9. 4 Mat. 24. 38 Rev. 11. 19, TabernacleHeb. 8. 2, Cloud in the Wildernesse1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Heb. 12. 1., Temple1 Cor. 3. 16, 17 2 Cor. 6. 16, and all outward formes and figures, set up, and used in former ages, that the glory of the Son of God might appeareIohn 3. 14, 15, and shew it selfe to be the glory and substance of them allIohn 6. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, so that to looke againe for the Jewes and Gentiles as a differing people kept both intire unto this day, as that people pro∣perly, by whom then God taught the world, as in that out∣ward figure of cleane and uncleane, separated, or united, and that they must come to build, re-edifie, and set up that holy Worship, before we can looke for it in the perfect pu∣rity, and glory thereof; we may as well conclude, that all things according to the Letter and Histories of the Scrip∣tures alluded unto by Christ, and his Apostles, must againe appeare in that worke, for the Apostle affirmes in as plaine termes (as of any other of these ancient things that are already past, and seem to bee at present laid a∣side) that Christ came to build up the Tabernacle of DavidAct. 15. 15. 16.: but this is alwaies that ancient errour of the piercing and persecuting Jew, that because Elia must come before that great and dreadfull day of the LordMal. 4, 5. Mat. 11. 14., they looke for the same man to come againe that had lived in former timesLuk. 9. 11., or else they thinke no great work can be looked for or seen even as at this day som look for Christ to come to raign as a great Monarch upon the earth, before they can injoy
or find peace, and true Religion together, which declares that it is a carnall peace, and an earthly Religion and King∣dome they so much adore and looke after: but we know that Christ told them, that Elias was then present, (according to the mind and sense of the Prophet) if they could have re∣ceived it,Mar. 9. 13 Mat. 11. 14., but it was a Mysterie hid from them, because the God of this world had blinded their eyes, least they should believe the glorious Gospell, and the light of it should shine unto them2 Cor: 4: 4. Such is the History, carriage, and practice of the Jew and Gentile, (in the true sense and scope of holy Scriptures) as that it is a Doctrine containing such a mystery as is ever pre∣sent and evidently appeares where ever Christ, that holy one of God, is declared, set forth, and opened what he is in our nature, which is from its first Originall (in him) alie∣nated and estranged from what naturally it is, therefore the Apostle teaching the very same Doctrine of the Jew and the Gentile, tels us, he would in no case have us ignorant of this MysteryRom. 11. 24, 25., least we be proud and arrogate somewhat unto our selvesRom. 11. 25.; so that the Doctrine of the Jew and the Gen∣tile is a mystery or hidden thing, which is onely truely open∣ed in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and not in seeing peo∣ple with a bodily eye to travell from one part of the world into another, in whom they are reconciled and made one, (e∣ven God and man, who by nature are at the greatest distance and separation) yea in him all are Israel and saved onesRom. 11, 26. who by nature are all concluded under sin, and children of wrath and of destructionEph. 2. 1. 2 Rom. 3, 9., therefore he saith, that the Redeemer comes out of Sion and turnes away ungodliness, not onely from the Gen∣tiles, and not from the holy people, but it is said from JacobRom. 11. 26. Isa. 59. 20., mentioning the Father of the twelve Tribes, as the fountain of that iniquity that the Redeemer doth turne away: So that the breaking downe of the partition wallEph. 2. 13 14. which separated Jew and Gentile, is that abolishing of that enmity in our flesh by Iesus ChristEph. 2, 15, 16,, even that Law of carnall Commandements and Ordinances, and reconciled both unto God in one body by his CrossEph. 2, 15, 16., making in himselfe of twaine one new man, so making peaceEph. 2. 15, 16, between Jew and Gentile, that is, between that holy
one of God and our nature, which in it selfe is estranged from, and at enmity with him, but being one in him, we bear the name of Israel, even of one, that as a Prince prevailes with GodGen. 32, 28., as Jacob beares the name of all iniquity, which the Redeemer turnes away, yea even at that time when the A∣postle is in the declaration of the holiness of the Jew, and prophaneness of the Gentile, all which amounts unto this sum, namely, to declare what the Son of God is made in us, and what we are made in him, for he is made sinne in us, as we are made righteousness in him2 Cor: 5: 21:, they hold corresponden∣cy in all points, and being declared accordingly, it is the ma∣king of, two to become one in all things whatsoever, yea e∣ven the greatest stranger to become the neerest home-born, euen the onely begotten of the father, and son of his loveIoh: 1: 14: Mat: 3: 17:. So that whilest we are looking with stretched-out necks into the peoples of the world, expecting some great worke and Reformation to appeare, we doe in the mean time neglect and reject those kind offers of mercy and solicitations of our soules which God (in that way of Christ) offers unto us onely through the knowledge and faith of him, the igno∣rance of whom deprives us of all his comforts and opera∣tions Eph. 4. 18.; but we must wander unto, looke after the calling of Jewes, and coming in of a fulness of Gentiles, to the fall of the Pope, and Christ his raigne upon the earth as a great Monarch, when as all these are in our hearts and in our mouthsRom. 10. 8., and yet through that unbeleefe which is in us, we see them not, but are climbing up to seek Christ, as though Elia was to come againeMark 9. 11., as also descending downe into the deep, as though Moses and Jonah were to appeare in like forme to the outward senses againeIona . 17., when as God shewes the same workes, yet as differing in the manner of them, to carnall reason, as far as there was difference between Jonah in the Whales belly, and the Son of God in the heart of the earth, and yet that was the signe of the Prophet JonahMat. 12. 40., and as there was in the peoples coming from Bashan and out of the depth of the Sea with MosesPsal. 68. 22., and the peoples carrying of the Ark out of the house of Obed-Edom up into Jerusalem
in Davids dayes, which he memorizeth as the same thing being then done againePsal. 68. 1, 2.: if they had stood gazing after the same acts to bedone in the view of a natural and carnall eye in the same manner and forme, they had before been manifested and made known in, or else to acknowledge no divine power, or heavenly evidence of the operation of God therein in the present dispensation, then had they ne∣ver acknowledged God aright in his wonderfull workes, but had denyed his power and handy-worke amongst them, even as the Jewes did in the dayes of our Lord; so in like manner if we stand gazing after an old people of the Jewes to bring us truth, and the fulnesse of the Gentiles to bring us peace, in calling of the Nations so as to settle an earthly and temporary peace, and in the meane time neglect the my∣stery of the one and of the other, yea, the very truth and substance of them all, though secret and hidden from the world in that way of Christ, as all our life and light isCol. 3. 3, 4. Iohn 1. 4. to 9. we shall prove such, as upon whom the vertue and power of that Son of God doth not appear, nor make it selfe manifest, but shall be opposers of his gracious and spirituall presence, when ever he is truly revealed and opened among us, though in the meane time we are puffed up by a fleshly mindeCol. 2. 18. through carnall speculations of things that are past, and vaine hopes and expectations of things to come, which serve to no o∣ther use but meerly to flatter our selves in a loose and licen∣tious liberty, bearing our selves and others in hand with such things as shall never in that forme (which we propound them unto our selves in) nor in that sense which we under∣stand and take them in, appeare nor manifest themselves nei∣ther unto our selves nor unto others; therefore it is, that God hath so varied the outward forme of the expressing of himselfe in his Word from first to last, till at the length he hath so propounded himself unto us, that all the men in the world cannot give the outward forme of it to resemble it in the least, but a meer carnall eye can see it is deceit, and cannot be the same, as in that Booke of the Revelations it doth so evidently appeare, or else we had had (by the decei∣vers
of this world) all the seven Trumpets sounded long ago, as also that new Jerusalem erected and set up, which now wee fall short of, and according to their understanding of the Word of God ever must, and so must ever drive it some cer∣taine yeares before them, as so long they have done to the deceiving and deluding of so many that are gone downe in the meane time into Hades: nor shall these persons or Spectators, looking after things at such a distance of time, from them, attaine their hopes, no more then the Jewes did in having Elia appeare againe unto them in that forme, or in that sense which they understood the Prophet in; so that such waiters and expectors for great things in after times, (but lay the Saints wast of them at the present) they doe ever waite with the same Spirit which the Jewes did, and whilst they are looking for other Jews, are performing that ancient office of the Jewe; themselves, and of the Gentiles al∣so Psal. 2. 1, 2, 3. Acts 4. 23. to 27., who both of them went in that hot pursuit of the hinde of the morning when he appearedPsal. 22. see the title., even as so many dogs compas∣sing him to pierce his hands and his feetPsal. 22. 16.; So that in this point of Gods Government, Dominion, and Rule in his Saints which are said here to be the Heathen or the Aliens, there is that which in it selfe is death, darknesse, slavery and subjection unto the least and worst things in the world, yet is it aliena∣ted, estranged, and cut off therefrom, and hath nothing ex∣ercised in it but life, light, liberty and dominion over all Principalities and Powers of the Prince and God of this worldEph. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 4. 4., and are nothing at all of such a thing as by nature in them∣selves they are; so that as God is nothing to the wicked but what he is onely in and by them, and therefore hee is no∣thing in them, for God is not in all their thoughtsPsal. 10. 4, even so the Saints are nothing to God, but onely what they are in him which is all things, and therefore in the multitude of their thoughts within them, they are all his comforts which de∣lights their soulesPsal. 94. 19.. So that in Gods Rule and Domi∣nation, in the wicked there is nothing of him but what springeth and cometh of themselves, who are nothing of God at all, and in Gods rule and domination, in the god∣ly
there is nothing in them but what is of him who is no∣thing in himselfe, that is in respect of his owne nature, that is any thing of them at all, this therefore is that great Mystery of the Gospell which hath laine hidden from the world in Ages that are past, that God who in his owne na∣ture cannot be more excellent and glorious in one place, person, or action, then in another, yet in his wisdome hath so provided in Christ, that the place wherein he hath appointed to meet with his people, and to speake with them in, doth farre excell in glory all other places, persons and actions in the worldExod. 29. 42. Psal. 87. 1, 2. Exod. 25. 22. Exod. 30. 6. 36., whose goings and comely honor in the Sanctuary are not elsewhere to bee seen or met withPsal. 63. 1, 2. Psal. 68. 24, 25, 26., but onely in that place, or Sanctuary wherein his honour dwellethPsal. 26. 8, which onely is sanctified and set apart from the rest of the worldIsa. 28. 5. 1 Cor. 3. 16 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19, even as the place of his onely residence, and the aparition and ma∣nifestation of his presence, power, and gloryExod. 9. 6. Levit. 16. 2 Psal. 102. 16, so likewise that God who in his owne nature, cannot bee absent from, or leave destitute of his presence one place or thing more then another, yet through his wisdome in Christ, hath so provi∣ded that the men and operations of this world are altoge∣ther vacant, void, and laid empty and wast of him, not in∣joying the least jot of his presence at allPsal. 10. 4 Mat. 25. 4. Psal. 58. 3., which is a Myste∣ry not considered nor looked into, it being of the same se∣crecie and also as conspicuous as Christ himselfe is, and of no other ambiguity or certainty the one then is the other unto us2 Thes. 2. 7 1 Tim. 3. 16, and hence is that other particular in his rule and au∣thority brought in by our Prophet, that is by what hee judgeth, which is said to be this: By filling the places with dead bodies, or (as some translate it) hee shall fill up with ruines. The Word translated fill,  signifies to fulfill or to fill up, that is, to make a thing full by expending, or pas∣sing away another; for nothing can bee filled with two things, to have its fullnesse of each of them, but if it bee filled up, or made full with any one thing,
all other things must bee expunged, expended, and put out or passed away, or an end must bee made of them, as the word will beare, and therefore so much is in the words, as perfectly to plead a cause so as to put an end to all hopes of ever impleading to the contrary, with any advantage, and so doth give life unto him, in whose behalf it is impleaded, for it comes of a word that signifies to live, the word translated dead bodies, or ruins, destruction, losse or misery, comes of a word that signifies to fall, or to be dead, or come into extream decay, that is decay even unto the uttermost, so that the sense runs thus: hee shall fill up with ruines, or hee shall perfectly plead, to recover with losse; or he shall cause to live by death, or to rise by the fall, or to restore all things by an ut∣ter decay of them; and in this the Prophet alludes unto that death, destruction, and way of the fall of man in the beginning, without which, man had never lived the life of God in Iesus ChristGer. 3. 3. Gen. 3. 9 to 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21; nor had hee beene saved and re∣stored from an utter destruction and decay: nay with∣out which fall Hee had never beene raised and lifted up un∣to the glory of the FatherEph. 4. 9, 10.: So that wee cannot looke upon the fall with an eye of faith in the wisdome of God, but wee must of necessity behold Christ the image and wisdome of the Father in it, from which man fell, no more then wee can behold the resurrection by faith in the SONNE OF GOD; but wee must behold the fall in it, from which man is delivered, raised up, and resto∣red Isa. 26. 19 Isa. 60. 1, 2.: So that however the fall is properly taught in the first man that was, yet not without respect unto the death and resurrection of JESUS CHRIST; so also the re∣surrection is properly taught in the Lord JESUS, yet not without respect unto that aspiring spirit of man at the first, which is his destructionGen. 3. 5, 6. Psal. 82. 6, 7., as is declared in those severall temptations, wherewith the SONNE OF GOD was assaultedMat. 4. 1. to 10.: So that in the fall of man, the humiliation and life of the SONNE OF GOD is involved, so as death is swallow∣ed up of victory, and in the exaltation of the Sonne of God,
that aspiring spirit and life of man is involved, whereby man by nature corrupteth and destroyeth himselfeGen. 3. 5, 6 Hos. 13. 9.: Now the fall of man is the death and humiliation of the Son of God on this wise, the Son of God according to the wisdome of God, (which he is) cannot admit of any thing into unity with himselfe that hath in it selfe any life or excellency be∣sides that which is in the very nature and being of the Son of God, therefore he consisting of God and Man, must needs take unto himselfe that which is humbled, and in it selfe ac∣cursed, vaine, sinfull, and made void and empty of that which is all things2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 2. 7, 8. Psal. 22. 6, 7.; which is the very fall and defection of man it selfe, otherwise he could not be the righteousnesse, re∣surrection, life, blessing, and fulnesse of it, for he must bee all, or else not any thing in that which is made one with him, as man was at the first, even so the exaltation and life of the Son of man, according to the life, light, and wis∣dome of a creature, made one with God, cannot admit of any thing into unity with it selfe whose life and excellency is not the same with that which is in it selfe, for the nature of man being made one with the Image or Son of GodGen. 1. 27. Gen. 4. 1, 2., cannot propose it selfe unto it selfe in its native excellen∣cy below, or inferiour unto God, for the nature of man being made one with God, according to the best perfections and wisdome of a creature, wherein he was as truly made as in the wisdome and perfections of God, and according to that humane wisdome of his, he cannot admit of any thing in, himselfe (that is in his owne nature) to bee lesse then the excellencies of the Creator, being he was made in his Image, and so he sets himselfe in the place and seat of God, for the excellencies of God cannot be in the nature of the creature, but the creature must be God, which it can ne∣ver be. And therefore by this meanes he makes a nullity of God, and so in himself becomes the God of this world2 Cor. 4. 4. or that Antichrist1 Ioh. 2. 18 22. 1 Iohn 4. 3. 2 Iohn 7., and where he finds his owne nature to fall short of the excellencies and glory of God, in wisdome, power, authority, peace, and the like, being restrained from some particular thee or other, in that kind, or that one tree in
generall, so that he cannot eat in that manner that he would, then all his wisdome, art and skill, is put forth to eat, or communicate in the things of this life, or in the things of that life of man, to make himselfe in his owne nature, like unto GodGen. 3. 5.  for the wisdome of man can never satisfie it selfe by having its excellency in way of union, and not to be in it selfe, the very thing it selfe, therefore it is in nature that man and wife can never have full satisfaction in the excel∣lencies of each other in way of union, or contract, unlesse they become the same person or thing that each other is, namely in their seed and off-spring, for in them they are pro∣perly made one flesh, and in a child they twaine are made one individuallEph. 5. 31 32, 33.: Hence it is that man not being contented with excellency in way of union, that all those conspira∣cies, warres, controversies, and enmity breake out, and are seen in the world among the sons of men; for King and Subject have each others perfections in respect of unity, but when any excellency appeares in one that the other hath not in himself, where the feare of God and the knowledge of the excellency of unity in Christ is not, they never rest till they either pull it down, or in some way or other trans∣plant and assume it unto themselves, so it was in the people towards Moses, who was King in JeshurunDeut. 33. 4. 5., for they would have leaders of their owne device and making, like unto other NationsExod. 32. 1 Acts 7. 39. 40, 41., to go before them into Canaan: so it was in the dayes of Samuel, they would have a Saul to rule over them1 Sam. 8. 5 6. 7.; and so it is now in the Ministerie betwixt Priest and people, as it was in that Corah and his company towards AaronNumb. 16. 1, 2, 3., and so it is between man and man of all sorts and degrees, though they be one by union being all of one fleshActs 17. 26., yet where any excellency appeares in one that another hath not in himselfe, that is, in his owne personall condition, presently enmity appeares if (by his industry, or eating of one tree or o∣ther) he cannot attaine itGen. 4. 3, 4. 5.; nothing therefore but the ex∣cellency that comes by union can unite truly man and man together in any estate, that is, when he can count and rec∣kon upon the excellencies of another as his owne, but es∣pecially
this is the way, and no other, that unites and brings together. God and the creatureIohn 17. 20, 21., even so nothing but self∣excellency breeds debate, and separates man and man in all relations, but that & nothing else breeds debate and enmity, especially between God & man, which is the root, originall, & fountain of al other debates, separations, controversies, en∣mity & hatred, which moves that wicked one (in all ages) to kill and murder his brother1 Iohn 3. 12., not acknowledging that excellency that is in unity to be such, as one is the keeper and preservation of anotherGen. 4 9, 10. Acts 20. 28. Iohn 2. 2. Rev. 13. 8. the superiour preserves the inferiour; for, without a superiour an inferiour could not be: and the in∣feriour preserves the superiour; for, without an inferiour a superiour could not be: the nature of man preserves, and gives being unto the death of Christ; for, without the nature of man united unto God, a death of an eternall race and vertue could never be: the nature of the Sonne of God preserves, and gives being unto the life of the sonne of man: for with∣out the nature of the Sonne of God being united unto man, a life of an eternall race and vertue could never be in man, or in a creatureIohn 17. 3 Rom. 6. 23. 1 Ioh. 5. 11. Titus 3. 7.; the death and fall of man therefore, according to the wisdome of God, is the very way of transmitting of the life and excellencies of God over unto another, in whom there is, otherwise, no such life and dignity1 Iohn 5. 11, 12., and the exal∣tation of the sonne of man, by and in that life and dignity, according to the wisdome of man, or of a creature, is the way of arrogating that unto himselfe, which is proper and peculiar unto God alone, in whom there can be no such cor∣ruptible, momentanie, and fading life and dignity, as the mind and wisdome of man so valueth and apprizeth of; and these two being the grand parents of all the world, were both in perfection in man in the first act of his creation, and that without any fault, defect, or imperfection at all: nay the work in it selfe was vehemently goodEccles. 7. 29. Gen. 1. 31. But no longer then the wisdome of God can be without manifestation in ma∣king of such a wonderfull work, in giving glory to the Cre∣ator, whose word hath made it, and given being unto it, which must needs be in the very act, of the making and being of it,
no longer can the wisdome of man, wherein the weaknesse of man (signified in the woman being in the transgression, and not the man1 Pet. 3. 1 Tim. 2. 14, as also the very subtilty of the Serpent appeareth) can be without the manifestation of it selfe in questioning (and so denying) the nature and glory of the workGen. 3. 1., which is all one to deny the Creator, whose wisdome and image is in it, even as the Jewes denying Christ to be the Son of God, did in so doing deny God himselfeIohn 14. 7. to 11., and so crucified the Lord of glory1 Cor. 2. 8.. These two then are the two great Parents of all the world (namely the wisdome of God, and the wis∣dome of the flesh) at the first made upright and innocentEccles. 7. 29., and the one cannot appeare glorious but as it hath respect unto shame and infirmity, nor can the other appeare shame∣full and weake, but as it hath respect unto honour and dig∣nity, yet neither of them the cause but onely the occasion of each other,  this is taught in the man, and the woman in that they are both naked and are not ashamedGen. 2. 25.: For in the man (simply considered) there is no cause of shame in him to have such a wife, and there is no cause in such a wife (simply con∣sidered) to be ashamed of such a husband, there is no cause in such a God to be ashamed of such worke, nor is there a∣ny cause in such a worke to be ashamed of such a worker, no cause that such a creature should be ashamed of such a crea∣ture, no cause that such a creature should be ashamed of such a Creator; thus it is, as the worke is simply considered, the work and the worker being made one. But when they have recourse each to other, and converse one with the other in that way of the woman, or wisdome of man, (taught therein as it hath relation to God) wherein is included the wisdome of the Serpent, teaching, that such a thing as the fall is, comes not to passe but by having recourse to another who is the wisest of the beasts of the field, and is called the SerpentGen. 3. 1.; the Hebrew word Nacash, translated there Serpent, signifies to know by experience, as though man expostulating with God by his owne wisdome, thingking to find out the deep things of God, and by that his owne wisdome to know and to feele them in himselfe as of himselfe, and in his owne na∣ture,
and so maintaines his owne abilities in this his recourse unto and conversing with the Word of God; but in so do∣ing transformes the VVord of God into such subtilty unto him∣self, that it hath the voice, sting, death, horror and feare of a Serpent in it unto him, even as the wisdome of God conver∣sing with our infirmity (in that way of Christ) as sin, srrow, and shame, turnes them into strength, righteousnesse, joy and honour in himselfe: and when man thus converseth with the Word of God in his owne wisdome, namely in that wis∣dome which such a creature doth affoord and none other, then doe they both become naked, as having respect one unto the other, and are both now ashamedGen. 3. 7.. For the wisdome and act of man makes the Son of God ashamed, stripping him of that robe of our infirmities and frailties, not knowing how to put them rightly upon him, which is the nakednesse and onely shame of the Son of God, for they are the only robes which he honoureth and dignifies himselfe by, they being the onely sufferings whereby the Captaine of our salvation is made perfectHeb. 2. 10., it also makes the son of man ashamed, (signified in the woman) who through his owne wisdome denies our na∣ture, that glory and dignity which God hath put upon it, not knowing how to make the glory of God to be the on∣ly and alone dignity of the creature, and to deprive the crea∣ture of, and deny it the glory of the Creator in all things by this its unity with him in Christ is also the very naked∣nesse and shame of man, who never had any other ornament or robe to cover and adorne himselfe with in any way of acceptation or comelinesse before God but onely that, and not standing in that according to the way of faith, and work of creation, he cannot possibly have an eye unto God, but in the way of shame, even as hee puts the Lord Jesus to shame by denying unto him his infirmities, through which is declared that victory, triumph, and glory of his death1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. Heb. 6. 6.. Man therefore in his owne wisdome cannot have recourse unto the dignity and glory of his estate in the Son of God, but in the way of shame and confusion brought upon himselfe, (which is and ever hath been that spirituall Babylon, mother
of whoredoms, City and seat of all wickednesse even untill nowRev. 17. 5 Zech. 5. 7. 8. 9, 10, 11.) nor can the Son of God according to the wisdome of God, behold the sin and shame of the fall but in the way of righ∣teousnesse and glorification; for by the wisdome of God the fall cannot be seen, but there is a restauration in it, and by the wisdome of the flesh, the restauration cannot be seen, but there is death and destruction in it, for if we looke up∣on the fall in the wisdome of the Spirit, then doe we see the extent of it, and take it complete and full according to the nature thereof, which if we doe, then we see not only eat∣ing but sin, not onely sin but death, not onely death, but the curse, and not the full curse but the blessing also; other∣wise death, sin, and the curse are not perfected by us, (un∣to soundnesse of Doctrine, and edification of the Church, for the perfecting of the body of ChristEph. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14.) but we hide them in our selves and others under lying lipsPro. 10. 18. Pro. 12. 22.; for if we take death in its extent to say rightly (as Christ did) it is finished, then do we see the fulnesse of the curse which his hanging on the tree doth teach unto usGal. 3. 13. Deut. 21. 23, which is according to that which God hath revealed (in that his not only expostulating with the man and the woman in the beginningGen. 3. 16, 17.) but also he de∣scends downe unto the Serpent, the deepest of that subtilty that transformed the truth of God into a lieRom. 1. 25, shewing how the curse is upon him for that destruction of the worldGen. 3. 14, 15., which curse doth never appeare as it is, but the blessing and safety of the world is in it, and therefore if the curse of the Serpent appear, his head is broken, the seed of the woman comes forth, yea salvation is attainedGal. 3. 13, 14., which appears in (and neither before nor after) the depth of the curse upon the Serpent, even then and there is his head brokenGen. 3. 13, 14., and then sing Moses and Miriam and all the Host of GodExod. 15. 1, to 21., for when the head of Le∣viathan is broken, then is Israel Gods first-borne, even his onely son called out of EgyptHos. 11. 1., for then Herod is deadMat. 2. 19, 20., who glori∣ously and victoriously cometh up out of the red Sea, or as the word is rightly rendred, according to the Hebrew phrase, out of Edomes Sea, that is, out of all blood and wrathfull displea∣sure (or Esau that first-borne after the flesh) whatsoeverExod. 15. 4, 22.;
who then appeared and plaid his part in Pharoah, and after had the same name given unto him that is given to this ra∣ging SeaGen. 25. 30. Gen. 36. 1. which swallowed up Pharoah and all his host, but delivered Israel, Selah. Yea, when the curse appeares, signi∣fied by those customes of the Law, when Christ was brought into the Temple to have them performed upon himLuke 2. 27 to 32., shewing thereby that he was made a curse for us, even then doth the promised seed the child Jesus appear also, and then sing old Simeon and Hanna the Prophetesse with great satisfaction and consolationLuk. 2. 34 to 38., yea the Angells and all those heavenly Armies sing and rejoyce exceedingly, when the curse and the blessing, sin and righteousnesse meet and are brought together in that Child Jesus, that only begotten of God in the worldLuke 2. 13 14. Iohn 3. 16., for then is sin de∣voured and swallowed up1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57., and righteousnesse sheweth forth her pleasant face from on highPsal. 85. 10, 11, 12, 13, yea then is the curse turned in∣to blessednesse it selfe, which looseth and setteth at liberty all hearts and tongues to rejoyce and singLuke 4. 18, 19.; but the wisdome of man not reaching the nature and extent of the curse can never finde out nor tast of the blessing, not knowing the way of sin he can never know the way of righteousnesse: these two then (namely the wisdome of the flesh and the wis∣dome of the spirit) are those two great roots from which all the severall branches of life (as also of death) do spring, even those two great parents that bring forth all the world divided into two sorts, namely the seed of the woman and the seed of the SerpentGen. 3. 15, and yet neither produceth his generation but with respect unto both; for the wisdome of God bring∣ing sin and righteousnesse together, there is nothing but righ∣teousnesse and peace kissing each otherPsal. 85. 10. Rom. 2. 10., rejoycing the heart of him in whom they arePsal. 32. 11., but the wisdome of man bringing sinne and righteousnesse together there is nothing but sin and death at an utter variance, troubling and tormenting the heart of him in whom they areTit. 1. 15. Rom. 2. 8, 9. Gen. 4. 6, 13 14., and according to these two roots and generations is the act of our Lord in his way of Judge∣ment and Government exercised, in that it is said, that he fills up with ruines, for there is a fulnesse of sin in that man of sinGen. 15. 16. who is composed of nothing else: which filling up is
by nothing else but by the ruine and destruction of the Son of God in that man in whom no life, nor spirit, nor power of Christ appeareth, for his filling up is the desolation and laying of himselfe wast of all heavenly vertues and excel∣lencies that come from God, and are of himHeb. 6. 6. Gen. 6. 5.: there is also a filling up or fulnesse of righteousnesse in that Son of God, which is by the ruine and destruction of all sinne and wic∣kednesse in that man of God or righteous man Jesus ChristCol. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9. Eph. 2. 15. 16., who cleanseth and purifieth himselfe of all guilt, stain, pol∣lution, or filthinesse of the flesh whatsoever, that is and co∣meth of the Devill, in whom Satan finds nothing of himselfeHeb. 9. 14 1 Pet. 1. 19. Ioh. 14. 30., and therefore can lay no claime nor title to him at all, for he never found any thing in him nor ever shall, so that here is a fulnesse also or filling up by an utter ruine and desolation of the Devill, the world, sin, the workes of the flesh, and all carnall Commandements whatsoeverCol. 2. 14, 15, 16. Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23.. Observe here there∣fore, that sinne and righteousnesse are manifested in their fulnesse no other way but in the utter ruin and destruction of each other, in whomsoever the one or the other dwel∣leth, and that out of that one act or great worke of God in the creation of mankind the one in that way of the fall made manifest in that first man, the other in the way of the resurrection declared and made manifest in Jesus Christ; we are to consider therefore that sinne and righteousnesse are nei∣ther of them any created thing, yet both of them made manifest by generation, in which generation that which is eternal in it selfe becomes temporary through or in another, and that which is temporary in it selfe becomes eternall in or by an∣other: sin is no created thing, for God made all things good, yea, vehemently good, as the word is, and even so was that workmanship of mankind created in Adam, in whom was both the wisdome of a creature being made of the earthGen. 2. 7., as also the wisdome of God in whose Image he was likewise madeGen 1. 27.: Now this worke of God in the wisdome and un∣derstanding of a creature was able to judge of and find out the nature of any creature, over whom hee was set as LordGen. 2. 19, 20, 23., and therefore their names were as the man called them, who
knew the nature of them, and for whom they were createdGen. 1. 29, 30., but amonst them all, he finds not a help proportionable unto himselfeGen. 2. 20., and therefore consulting with God in this tem∣porary and created wisdome, and measuring himselfe with God, as he had done with all the workes of Gods hand, (besides that workmanship of himselfe in whom the woman wasGen. 2. 21. 22. Gen. 5. 1, 2.) falls infinitely short of holding proportion with God, even as the rest of the creatures fell short of holding proporti∣on with himselfe, and hereby degenerating from God pro∣pagates and begets sin, wrath, death and hell in his soule, and thereby becomes a sonne of death and perditionIoh. 17. 12 1 Tim. 6. 9. 2 Thes. 2, 3., made and fil∣led up by the ruine and destruction of that Image of God in himselfe, in which he was so happily made, and gene∣rates and begets sinne in himselfe as he is a creature, no other way but through that righteousnesse and holinesse that is in his Creator, that being the occasion, (as hath been said) but no proper cause at all, no not in the least: so that sinne is not but as it is propagated in and by a creature, and yet not with∣out respect unto that righteousnesse that is in the Creator, consulting with and about it according to the capacity and principles of a creature, and not according to the light and revelation, wisdome and principles of the Creator, even that holy word or minde of the Lord made manifest in the fleshGen. 3. 3, 4 5. 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 2. 4. to 11. 1 Tim. 3. 16. Righteousnesse also is no created thing, for it is that blessed and increat being that gives being unto all things and this also propagates, begets and generates it selfe in the way of the Sonne of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made in the similitude of sinfull flesh, and by that which is sin in it self, condemnes sin in the fleshIam. 1. 17, 13. 1 Iohn 5. 18, 19. Rom. 8. 3, 4., yea he was made sin in us, that knew no sin in himselfe2 Cor. 5. 21.; that is, he was made that which in it self is nothing but si, if by it selfe, it intermeddle with the righ∣teousnesse of God, and hereby doth righteousnesse generate and propagate it selfe in and with respect unto us, for righte∣ousnesse consulting with our infirmities by those principles, and according to that wisdome that is in God, thereby be∣gets and generates that holy and innocent Son of GodLuke 1. 34 35. Iam 1. 21. Gen. 18 9. to 15., who o∣therwise could never be made knowne nor manifested unto
us; but hereby he makes himselfe righteous in time (for all creatures are in time) who is also from eternity, else time and eternity could not be propagated in that one act of our salvation: even so also the creature that is in time, making it selfe sin, by that righteousnesse that is in God makes it selfe an eternall sinner, who otherwise could not bring forth sin and death of such a race, and in the one and the other there is a filling of the places with dead bodies, or a filling up by ru∣ines, and these ruines are multiplied both in the one and in the other, according to the diversities of glory that appears in the Revelation of the Son of God, and hence the ex∣tence of his Government and Judgement is brought in, in these words: He shall wound the heads over many Countreyes, or he doth wound the head over or in a great Countrey.— The word here translated wound, signifies to wound to death, till, blast, cause to wither and bring to nought: the word head is read either in the singlar or plurall number, and signifies the chiefe or principle, the life or beginning of a thing, as the head or beginning of a Fountaine which is the life of the streames, or the top or head of any thing that springs up, as also the root of any things that growes in the earth; the word great signifies either great in quantity or great in multitude: great in quantity comprizing all things in one, and so there is one Prince of the power of the ayreEph. 2. 2., one God of this world who blinds the eyes of such as be∣lieve not2. Cor. 4. 4., and great in multitude also, an one being trans∣fused into all, and so his name is Legion for he is manyMark 5. 9. Luke 8. 30., and so the word translated Countrey signifies either the whole world or any particular Nation, Countrey, confine, parcell or tract of ground, circumscribed and bounded within it selfe; our Lord therefore wounds or causeth to wither that head or heads, yea root and branch of that great and mul∣tiplyed one that is in the world in generall, and in every particular of it, and here our Prophet alludes unto all those
Kings of Canaan, situate in that one Nation, discomfited and overcome by Josua even as one, as also to all the heads of the Nations round about them, into whom the very same spirit was diffused, by which they became enemies unto Israel, for when the most high divided unto the Nations their inheritance, when he separated the Sons of Adam he set the bounds of the people, according to the number of the children of IsraelDeut, 32. 8.: So that in whatsoever the Son of God is honored, lifted up and advanced by, in the very same thing appeares the dishonor shame and confusion of the Nations, even the men of this world: For, if the inheritance of the Saints in the Sonne of God be made manifest, and rightfully distributed and given unto them, then doe the Nations, and men of this world appeare to be intruders and usurpers in all that ever they do or may possesse, in any thing wherein they seem to stand in relation unto, or to have any respect unto God therein, but for the severall relations betwixt creature and creature, the Saints of God doe in no case disregard nor neglect, and hence it is, that their warfare is spirituall2. Cor. 10. 14., onely seeking to advance the Son of God in the Kingdome of God, and not to deprive any man of his orderly interest of whatsoever he enjoyes of the things that appertaine unto this lifePsal. 115. 16. Mat. 22. 18. to 22., yea the division of tongues in that confusion of languages, or in the beginning of the Kingdome of that mighty hunter which is Babell, Erech, Acad, and Calney, in the land of ShynerGen. 10. 10. is nothing else but the advancement of this Kingdome of our Lord, when those cloven or those dividing, distributing and fiery tongues sit upon our Apostle and high Priest of our por∣fession, speaking unto every man in his owne language, uttering the very same speech that himselfe speaketh in his owne heartRom. 10. 6. 7, 8. Deut. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14., condescending and coming downe, yea taking up the very lip or language which we naturally speake in our selves, the reby to open and interpret that one heavenly lan∣guage and speech of the Father unto the Son in the variety and severall waies, wherein it hath infinitely expressed it selfe unto us, therefore is the Spirit expressed in that place in the plurall number, cloven and fiery tongues, and in the
singular also, and it sate upon every one of them, to declare that all of them are of one lip and language, as all the earth was before the divisionActs 2. 2, 3, 4. Gen. 11. 1., yea, even that division that was made in Adam at the firstGen. 3. 12, 13., and that every one of them hath all, so as to be able to speake to all sorts, estates and condi∣tions of men, and is made able to preach the Gospell toMark 16. 15., or as the word may be read (in) every creature, so that it shall become either a savour of life or else a savour of death unto all, and therefore must either finde a voluntary submission unto it selfe in the forsaking of all the waies of sinfull fleshGal. 5. 24, 25, 26. Luke 14. 33, or else they will appeare mockers, maliciously dispiting, and casting grosse aspersions upon that Spirit of Grace, by which it speaketh and uttereth it selfe unto themMat. 12. 24 to 28, though they judge themselves unworthy or discern themselves unmeet for the King∣dome of GodAct. 17. 32. Act. 13. 45, 46.. Our Lord therefore wounds the DragonIsa. 51. 9., and breaks the bead of LeviathanPsal. 74. 14. in a two fold respect;  first, as hee is a Priest, secondly, as he is King: as he is a Priest he blasteth and causeth to wither the head or heads of that Son of per∣dition, even that righteousnesse of man, or all excellencies of the creature in the way or waies of God, in what man∣ner time, place or person soever they might seem to put forth themselves; his root therefore which is caused to wi∣ther is this, namely, his interposing of some creature, action, accident, time or thing between God and himselfe, looking upon that tree (so rooted) to be pleasant, desirable and fit to make one wiseGen. 3. 6., that is, to beget and bring forth a wisdome where∣by the creature may have another wisdome in the things of God besides that which is in God himselfe, and this root (when our Lord appears) must needs be blasted, wither and come to nought; for, there is nothing in the creature that can cause to grow or spring up unto God, for nothing can go beyond that which it is in it selfe, and that proper sphere wherein it naturally worketh, and therefore the creature not being in its owne nature the CreatourIsi. 55. 8, 9 Ezek. 28. 9. Isa. 31. 3., it is impossible that ever it should worke it selfe or any other unto GodIsa. 2. 22. Ier. 10. 23. Iohn 6. 44., who is in himselfe infinitely beyond and above the reach of itIob 38. the whole chapt. 1 Cor. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 2. 14.,
and therefore it is, that when that uncleane spirit goeth out of the man whoever interposeth somewhat between God and himselfe that he may grow up to God by it, ever walketh a∣broad and wandreth through dry places, namely such as have no moisture or unction found in them to effect his ends in making himselfe to be at ease and excellent, but is seeking rest and finds none, onely returnes multiplyed into his own house againe worse then he went out, for the end of that man is worse then his beginningIok. 12. 43; and this is the very root of that man of sinne, who at the first rise of him interposed somewhat between God and himselfe, to make himselfe thereby excel∣lent and acceptable to God, besides that which properly flowes from God himselfeGen. 3. 5, 6, which root takes place in all naturall mens hearts unto this day, and is that root of bitter∣nesse that where ever it springs up hath troubleHeb. 12. 15, yea pierceth through with many sorrowes1 Tim. 6. 10., and this Christ causeth to wi∣ther or dries up, so as it growes not, nor hath place in his KingdomeIsa. 35. 10 Isa. 51. 11.. Againe, the top or branch of this man of sin is this, name∣ly, hereby he would grow up to be like,  and to hold corre∣spondency with God2 Thes. 2. 4, but when he by these things comes to measure himselfe by, and to compare himselfe with God, then doth it serve for no other end but to kindle wrath in himselfe, and God becomes a consuming fire unto himHeb. 12. 29., even so as both root and branch are burned upMal. 4. 1. Isa. 5. 24., and this office doth Christ as he is a Priest, offering up (burning and consuming) all the fat and the sweet, the beauty, glory, and excellency of the creatureLevit, 3. 3 4. 5. Levit. 9. 10. Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8., which is a thing most acceptable unto the Spirit of God in the hearts of all the Saints2 Cor. 4. 7, who have their eyes opened to see their glory to consist in another and not in themselvesCol. 3. 3, 4 which is a farre transcendent and above the glory of a creature as the Creatour is above the worke of his hand, the builder of the house above the house that is builtHeb. 3. 3, 4: But it is most miserable, and a thing not tollerable to behold by any carnall or corrupt heart and mind, who judge of all things according to the flesh and the principles of a creature, for the life and glory of the Son of God must needs bee
death and destruction unto the flesh, yea to all carnall con∣ceptions and practises which in themselves would be the glory and excellency; for take away the beauty and glory of a creature unto the eye and view of a creature, and no∣thing but feare, sorrow, shame and sin implanteth it selfe in the soule, looking upon it selfe so stript, laid wast, and bereaved of his own proper excellencies, even as he is a crea∣ture in the very own and proper nature thereofGen. 3. 10. Gen. 4. 5. 14; and this our Lord doth In many Countreyes or in all Continents, as the word will beare. That is, in whatsoever the glory of man (as he is pro∣perly a creature) may appeare, or in what it might be con∣tained or circumscribed, the glory of the Son of God blasts it, and brings it to nought: if his excellency might appeare in power, it is withered and becomes weaknesse when God appearesDan. 5. 1. to 6.; if in righteousnesse Pharasaicall it is blasted and becomes sin when Christ appearesMat. 5. 20 Luke 15. 16; if in wisdome, it is wounded and becomes foolishnesse when that wisdome of the Son of God is brought forth1 Cor. 3. 18., and so in all things that appertaines unto man, and every one of these heads in their severall Continents is so wounded, as having all the rest in it, and all of them are so vanquished and overcome, as they doe but onely bring downe that one head of that one man of sin and son of perdition2 Thes. 2, 3.; and hence ariseth that wonder in corrup∣ted Israel, that every one doth sheath his sword in his brothers sideExod. 32. 27.: The severall wayes of headship in the going forth and exercise of that man of sin, worketh strife, debate, and dissention even in himselfe, for as he is multiplied in head∣ships, even so is he in opposition within himselfe, and that unto the devouring and destruction within himselfe in and by each otherGen. 14. 1. to 11., whilest Israel the first-borne of God, stands still and onely appeares in fightExod. 14. 13, standing on the Sea-shore singing triumphantly unto the overthrowExod. 14. 30, 31. Exod. 15. 1.: Againe, the Lord Christ wounds and causeth to wither both root and branch, even
the head or heads in many or in all Countreyes, or Conti∣nents, as he is King of SaintsRev. 15. 3, as well as he doth as hee is Priest of the most high; for when the fat and the sweet is burned up and consumed in the creature, as he is a creature, nothing but misery and wretchednesse can appeare unto the sight and view of any naturall eye, and this wretchednesse hath its head or heads also, yea its top and its bottome, its root and branch: the root of it is this, namely, that the creature hath no bottome, being or subsistance in it selfeCol. 1. 17. Act. 17. 25, 28., which in the eye of a creature is most miserable, for in a naturall eye and according to naturall principles, man is hereby made more miserable then any other creature what∣soever; for all other creatures may (in a sense) be truly said, to have their motion, life and being in themselves and not in God, though God give it unto them, yet so as unto things abstracted from that life and being, which is in him∣selfe and is himselfeIohn 1. 1, 2 3, 4., even as we see a man gives forme and being unto a watch, and winds up the springs to move to such a period, so that the watch all that time is in motion, but it can in no wise be affirmed to be the motion of that man, although his art and skill have given unto it that moti∣tion, even so the sun, moon, and stars have their motion, but it cannot be said, that their moving is the motion of the Son of God, so also the plants, beasts, and foules of the ayre have their being, life, and motion to a certaine period given unto them by God, but it cannot be said that that is the life, being, and motion of the Son of God, for then it were a like sin violently to take away the life and motion of them, as it was in Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jewes to take away the life and motion of Jesus ChristAct. 4. 25, 26, 27.: But there cannot be any creature in heaven or earth, or under the earth found in the life, being and motion of the Son of God, but onely man, no more then there is any found crea∣ted in the image of God but man alone, for it is impossible that there should be any more Images of God then one, for there can be no more images of a thing then there is of substances and beings in that thing, therefore God being oneDeut. 6. 4 1 Tim. 2. 5.,
his Image is onely one; there cannot be more shadowes then there are substances, but the substance is one, therefore the sha∣dow is but one, and onely to be found in man alone, who is the modell, epitomy, or breviary of all other creatures, and in him onely God is truly said to be one with all his workesCol. 1. 17., and that all things are reconciled together, both things in heaven and in the earthCol. 1. 20.; added further, that there is no image or simi∣litude of God proposed unto the creature consisting of any thing that is excellent besides himself, for his image is his wis∣dome Pro. 8. 12. to 31. compared with Col. 1. 15., and his wisdome is himselfe, so is Christ said to bee the brightnesse of his glory, and the ingraven or expresse forme, fa∣shion, or face of his subsistance or beingHeb. 1. 3., and of that can no resemblance be framed or made, but it is an Idoll whatever it be, or in what age of the world soever brought forth, ere∣cted or set up, therefore it is said, take heed unto your selves for yee saw no image when the Lord spake unto you in Horeb out of the midest of the fireDeut. 4. 15, and tells them, that if any man∣ner of similitude be made, it is the corrupting of themselvesDeut. 4. 16 to 19., for God himselfe is the cause, matter, subject and manner of his owne Image, and out of him, or abstracted from him, can none be made nor ever was, (that can be pleasing unto him) no more then the Son of God can be propagated out of or abstracted from the FatherIohn 1. 1, 2, 3. Iohn 17. 21., which if he should hee could not then be GodIohn 14. 7. 8, 9., as he is; so that God is the matter and subject of his owne Image, even as man is the matter, cause and subject of his owne sin, yet neither of them are made knowne in their operations but with respect unto the other, for sin hath not its operation but with respect unto, God, nor doe Gods operations appeare to be but with re∣spect unto sinfull man: So that there is nothing in man (that is in his owne nature) that is any jot of image, or simi∣litude, shadow, type, or resemblance of God, no further then as it stands in direct opposition unto God, and so be∣comes a direct dissimilitude unto him, which can be proper unto no other creature but unto man alone, because hee judgeth of nothing concerning himselfe but with respect unto God, unto whom he naturally tendeth, even as the
sparkes fly upwardIob 5. 7. Isa. 50. 11. through that secret propensity that is in his nature, by vertue of that first act of his creation, where∣in God was made the proper center of his soule, yea even he in whom he had his being in that glorious worke of his creation, and therefore must looke unto him in all actions, and for all happinesse, even as the earth inclineth after the heavens for heat and moisture to make her selfe fruitfull, though so farre remote in nature and divers from themHos. 2. 21. Ier. 14. 4. Psal. 65. 9. to 13. Psal. 143. 6., and hereby judging of God and of the things of God, ac∣cording to the eye or sight of a naturall mind1 Cor. 2. 14., brings him∣selfe into opposition against God in all things, for there is no excellency in the creature, unto which the heart of man can goe forth, but he in the pursuit of it (if grace pre∣vent not) sets it in the place and room of God, expecting some excellency from it whereby to commend himself unto God, and so worships the creature and idolizeth it, attributing some excellency unto it, as it (with himselfe) hath relation and respect unto God, therefore it is, that we must not only leave and forsake, but even hate father and mother, and wife and chil∣dren for Christ's sake, if we will be his DisciplesLuk. 14. 26, that is, wee are to hate them in respect of the height of that love and affection which naturally runs out unto them, which is ne∣ver to stay till it idolize and set them in the place of God unto our selves, so that as wee must hate Idolatry, so also them and all other things in that respect, and if wee look at the creatures as to be a type or image of God in their operations and excellencies, as they have respect unto each other, so as that we are prevented by grace from the pur∣suit of them, in climbing up unto that which the minde of man naturally leads unto, then by a Christian and enlighten∣ed mind they are brought into competition with that which is the truth and durable substance it selfe, else they doe not appeare as a type or shadow,1 Pet. 1. 23. 24. Rom. 14. 17 and if so wee behold them, then doth their glory and beauty fade, even as the flower of the field, yea they wither like grasse, and perish in the Kingdome of our God is and prove vaine, yea lighter then vanity, only the word of the Lord that abides for ever1 Pet. 1. 25. taking its forme and
figure, yea raising up it selfe in its owne image and operati∣tions out of nothing in our nature, but onely from that which in it selfe is in direct opposition unto that Image and durable Word of God, that so the Kingdome, power and glory may be of himMat. 6. 13., and through him, and to him for ever, AmenRom. 11. 33, 34, 35, 36., Therefore the proper types, figures and characters that are found in our nature in the way of the Kingdome of God, are no better then such as were found in those Fathers after the flesh, who fell in the wildernesse1 Cor. 10. 1. to 11., which our Apostle tells us, that they are written for our admonition or instruction, up∣on whom the ends or finishings, or dyings of the world (that is in all its glory) are come: The word come signifies to come from high to low, yea to fall downe as a thing brought to nought, when ever the glory of God appeares in his Saints; hence it is that our Prophet David sees an end of all perfecti∣on whatsoever (proper unto the nature of a creaturePsal. 119. 96.) onely the Commandement or that Law of the Spirit that is in Jesus ChristRom. 8. 2. is exceeding broadPsal. 119. 96., large, and extensive in all its dimentions, reaching unto all times and places, which the mind of a creature (not being able to comprehend that glory and extent that is in the word of God) alwayes pro∣pounds God unto it selfe as another thing then that which inded he is, in that way of Christ, and so falls short in all things of that which is the proper being of the creature, and thence he makes himselfe miserable and restlesse, even as a thing that hath no stay or substance to rest upon, and in it selfe is ponderous, even like unto a man upon a steep and high place proposeth a thing unto himselfe to stand upon as a substance, adventuring his whole waight thereon and it proves but a meere shadow, so that it comes to passe hee tumbleth himselfe downe in such sort as he is ever falling, and this is the branch that springeth out of the above na∣med root in this miserable state and condition of man, namely, a defection, fall or motion from God, even unto the utmost point of despaire, and that irrecoverably in or with respect unto any thing that is in or of himselfe, or in any or in all the creatures, which makes his misery to bee
such as being ever in the terror of the fall, so as he never comes unto any bottome, for it is become a bottomelesse pit which onely the Angell that descendeth downe from heaven having a key in his hand, can open or shutRev. 9. 1, 2. Rev. 20. 1., yea he can open it so as that wicked one, ye a all the wicked of the world shall goe downe into it, even all Nations that forget GodPsal. 9. 16 17., and he can so shut it that they can never come out againe, neither can any of the sons of God enter thereinto, who are redeemed by the bloud of the LambLuke 16, 23, 24, 25, 26., who hath overcome it1 Cor. 15. 55.: This miserable state and condition of man in the head or in the root and branch, our King Christ withereth and vanquisheth when he appeareth, yea when that princely ChampionPsal. 19. 4 5, 6. or son of righte∣ousnesse ariseth, who hath healings in his wings or in all his mo∣tions in usMal. 4. 2, 3, communicating his light with usIohn 1. 4. Psal. 36. 9., then do we behold things as he beholds them, that is, we see them then to be such as they are, and as he hath made them to be, and then must we behold the glory of mans subsistance or being to be in his Creator in that way of Christ, and not to be in himself as abstracted from God as the rest of the creatures, who were never made in that image of his, nor had their proper being and subsistance in him, so as to be but one intire workEphes. 2. 10. Rev. 3. 14.; and thus we see the root of this misery withered, and blasted, (yea dried up like unto that great river Eu∣phrates Rev. 16. 12.) when we perceive our selves to be set in that heaven∣ly and stedfast place or places in our God through ChristEph. 1. 3. Eph. 2. 6., so that as our life is hid with Christ in God, even so are all things in and of a Christian, which he may be said to have, or to be from the eyes of the world; for hereby our King Christ ga∣thereth us up into unity and community with himself, which is the onely glory of this Kingdome, namely, to loose the pri∣soners and let the oppressed and captives go free, to feed the hun∣gry, and refresh and comfort the feeble and mournefull souleIsa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Luke 4. 18, 19., and herein is that branch of our misery also withered and dried up, as well as the root, for out of our defection and depth of such a fall we grow up into perfection in that glory, dignity, and perfection of the Son of God, or of Sons of GodGal. 4. 5, 6 Heb. 2. 10., so that our glory, Resurrection and exaltation in the
things of God can never be fathmed or found outRom. 11. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35., but are of like extent with the fall into that bottomelesse pit, for this exaltation of the Son of God, is a making of him higher then the heavensHeb. 7. 26., which could not be but from this ground, for the hea∣vens are highnesse or heights in themselves, but he is made height out of a bottomelesse gulfe, to the praise of the riches of his grace for ever, even as the state of the wicked is made or be∣comes a bottomelesse pit by falling from such a height of ma∣jesty and infinite glory, which by his creation he was made in, so that we can cry out with admiration,Rom. 11. 33. oh the height yea and the depth also of that love of God in us through Jesus ChristRom. 5. 5. Rom. 8. 39. 1 Iohn 2. 5.! Mans misery therefore by Christ our King, is wounded or caused to wither both in root and branch, and that in many or in all Coun∣treyes, or Continents, that is, even in all things wherein the mise∣ry of man is contained, or can any way appeare, for he being that wherein the creature hath its subsistance, who is infinite in himselfe in all excellencies and glory, must needs gather it up and fetch it out of all its infirmities and frailties, for being in∣finite he cannot but extend himselfe unto them, and according∣ly exercise his Power, Kingdome, headship and domination, in the deliverance and release (of that which is become himselfe) from them all, mans nature having no other being or subsi∣stance, but what it hath in him aloneActs 17. 28., neither hath the Son of God any motin or operation either in respect of ascention or descention, but what he hath in mans nature alone; and hence is the manner of his repast, brought in by our Prophet in his pursuit of and exercise of authority over his enemies, laid downe in these words: He shall drinke of the brooke in the way, as also the issue and e∣vent, the sum and result of all in these words, therefore shall he lift up his head, or therefore shall he lift up heads, for the word is plurall, and answers to those heads that are spo∣ken of before, which are wounded or killed, or withered. But this or these are revived or lifted up; these words there∣fore by atrim or elegant allusion unto Gideon and his Souldiers going out against that great Army of the MidianitesIudges 7. the whole chapt., doe set
Forth and declare the way of the humiliation and exaltation of Jesus Christ the Son of God, that Judge of IsraelPsal. 72. 1 2, 3, 4. yea that high Priest and Captaine of our salvationHeb. 2. 10., in his vanquishing and destruction of all the enemies thereof in Gideon and his souldi∣ers set out plurally, as in many, even in three hundred, and here set out as in that one only begotten of the Father the Son of God, who treads the wine-presse alone, and none but he to helpIohn 3. 16 Iohn 1. 14. Isa. 63. 3.; Gideons souldiers drinke of the water to declare the weaknesse of that whereby they are tried, or of that wherein their triall lies, as they descend downe into the valley, where the Army of the Midia∣nites lay even as grashoppersIudges 6. 5 Iudges 7. 12, not onely in a low descent as in a valley, but fortified with the hills and mountaines of this pre∣sent world against Israel, as the word valley signifies not onely a low place, but fortification also, even as a valley is fortified with hills: Now we know that water is weake in it selfeEzek. 7. 17 Lam. 2. 19., and therefore our Apostle adviseth Timothy to drinke no longer water but a little wine, because of his stomacks often infirmities1 Tim. 5. 23. shew∣ing thereby (by an allusion unto water, and a weake stomack) what he ought to doe in the course of his Ministery, that is, that weaknesse and infirmity is not to be applyed unto weak∣nesse and infirmity, but strength (signified by wine) is to be ap∣plied unto infirmity, and so comes the cure of it, that is, the weake things of man are not to be applied unto man, but unto the Son of God, whereby they receive strength and cure: So saith the Baptist, I indeed baptize with water, that is, my Bap∣tisme hath no life nor spirit in it at all, teaching what our na∣ture is that the Word of God comes downe into, but the life, spirit and power is in the Baptisme of him that comes after me, that is greater then I, whose shooe latchet I am not worthy to looseIohn 1. 26, 27., teaching thereby the authority, power and strength that our nature is taken into, and ascendeth up unto in that Word and Spirit descending upon it, and uttering it selfe unto itMat. 3. 16 17.; so also the Prophet Ezekiel telling of the weaknesse of all flesh, saith, that all knees shall be feeble or faile as waterEzek. 7. 17: So that Gideons Soul∣diers are to drinke of weaknesse for their triall,  in that their descent to destroy the Adversary; so is our Lord Christ also said to drinke of the brooke in his descent, in wounding the heads of all Continents, yea all Adversaries in whatever they
may be made manifest. By brook here signifying the same thing that those waters doe which Gideons souldiers drinke of, one∣ly the word used here for brook, signifies a streame that runs swift and abundantly, occasioned by some great fall of snow or raine from an high, even so as the brook of our infirmities arising from our fall, from that happy condition man was made in at the first. In this point, three sorts of Gideons souldiers are to be no∣ted, First, such as out of feare turned backe, and of them were two and twenty thousand, these were such as conceived their owne weaknesses would be their fall and ruineIudges 7. 3, for the adver∣saries had nothing but the arme of flesh to come against them with; so that in their owne feares they exalted and set up the arme of flesh, which power their adversaries onely had and no more, which to feare is a like sinne as to trust in it, and so equally shares in the curseIer. 17. 5. Rev. 21. 8.. The second sort were such as would go on, but they conceived and concluded that weaknesse in themselves (intimated in those waters) was a defect and hindrance unto them, in that worke of the pursuit and overcoming of the ad∣versary, and so they make use of it, bowing and kneeling downe to it, to make use of it, as in its naturall place as it runs in the ri∣ver, and must of necessity breake that method and order in march which our Gideon had and hath set his souldiers in, and by that were discarded seven thousand. The third sort were such as lapt up the water with their hands as they passed a∣long, as no breach of ranks nor any hindrance in their march at all, that is, they took or doe take up this water or weaknesse out of its naturall place, lapping it up with their hands even as a dog doth water with his tongue, that is, they take it up into uni∣ty according to that art, skill, device or Ministery, (signified by the handPsal. 77. 20. Psal. 137. 5. Isa. 53. 10.) wherein or whereby the Son of God hath taken our infirmities into unity with himselfe, even so as by taking it hee devoures and destroyes it as these souldiers devouring the wa∣ter by their hand, taking it out of its naturall place so as it be∣comes no hindrance but a refreshment and an incouragement in their pursuit of the adversary, yea so as it gives them intelli∣gence of the certainty of the overthrow of them, even as that dreame of that poore and weake barley cake discovered unto
them the spirit of feare and terror that was in that mighty host of the MidianitesIudg. 7. 13 14., even so doth the frailty and infirmity of mans nature (taken away by Christ) discover the strength or rather the weaknesse, feares and troubles that are in all such (be they never so many) who have not the strength, courage, and consolations of the God of Israel amongst themPsal. 29. 11. Psal. 68 34. Psal. 46. 1 Psal. 8 5, for hee onely knowes how to carry his people out against all adversaries, so as they shall never faile in successeIsa. 41. 1. to 14. Isa. 43. 1, 2 3., but are like unto Joseph, who though the archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, yet his how abides in strength and the arms of his hands are made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, from thence is the Shepheard or feeder the stone of IsraelGen. 49. 23, 24.: Thus doth our Prophet here in looking back at an act formerly done in the view of men, declare and fore-tell what is and shall come to passe, as that which is the very life and spirit of that for∣mer act concerning our Lord Jesus, how he drinkes of the brooke in the way, that is, the Son of God descending into our nature takes our weaknesses and infirmities upon himselfe, even out of that stream and currant and from that proper place wherein by nature they run, (so taking them up in his hand, that is, by his wisdome, skill, ordination, office and Ministery, as he is a Priest for ever for that purpose) as that they become the infirmities of the Son of God, even as truly and really as his power and righ∣teousnesse is made ours, and becomes the righteousnesse and power of the Saints, and therefore of necessity must be de∣voured, destroyed, and caused to vanish away for ever, for no frailty or infirmity can possibly abide upon that holy and harm∣lesse one, but are disposed of for the benefit and incourage∣ment of all his in the pursuit of the adversary, for by death he overcomes him that hath the power of deathHeb. 2. 14, and by sin condemnes sin in the fleshRom. 8. 3., casting it so in its cause by its owne arguments, that it can never implead against us any moreRom. 8. 33, 34.  Cor. 15. 55, 56. Rom. 6. 17, 18. Rom. 6. 14.; and this is as naturall and proper for that hand, laid on in his ordination and Ministery, as it is for the tongue of a dog to lap or take up wa∣ter out of its proper place unto himselfe, and this is done in the way, that is, in the way of his humiliation without any stay, stop or hindrance of his exaltation at all in the destruction of his enemies: The word translated way, signifies such a way
wherein is order and method, as to march in rank, so that the Son of God our high Priest in this his way of humiliation keeps his ranke, order, and method with the Father, not failing to hold correspondency with him in wisdome, power, glory, eter∣nity, emensity and all manner of dignities, no not for a mo∣ment, for then he should cease to be God, and so to be a Savi∣our, for salvation belongs onely to the LordPsal. 3. 8. Psal. 68. 19 20. Psal. 144. 0, so as to save, and the creature is only the saved of him, once and for everHeb. 10. 10. Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 25, 26. 27. 28.; the way then of the humiliation of the Son of God is his descent into our nature, which is the going downe of our spirituall Gideon into the valley to vanquish all Israels adversaries, in which hee drinks of that great brook or streame of our weaknesses and in∣firmities, whereby he refresheth himselfe in the devouring and taking of them away,  for he destroyes and takes them away, as he is and hath the power and vertue of the Son of God, upon whom they cannot tarry, nor against whom prevaile: so alse is he refreshed, as he is and hath the infirmities and weak∣nesses of the son of man, from which nature these are taken and carried awayIsa. 53. 4. Ier. 50. 20. in the abolishing of themEph. 2. 15., removing themPsal. 103. 3., and purgation of our natureHeb. 1. 3. from all sin and uncleannesse, putrifacti∣on and corruption whatsoeverEph. 5. 27, and that at once in one offering of himselfe for everHeb 10. 10, and hence it is, that he sits downe at the right hand of GodHeb. 10. 12, 13., which is the lifting up of his head in this place, or in the plurall number heads, noting hereby that various and multiplied way of exercise of his authority and headship in all the world, both in the subduing of his enemies, and wonder∣full advancement of his Saints, and thus the humiliation of our Lord Christ becomes no lesse then his exaltation and lifting up for ever, for in the very same act of the Son of God his descention into our nature, and becoming a poore and fraile man, yea a creature in us, who in himselfe is the Creator, in that very act reciprocally and interchangeably is the nature of poor, silly and weak man advanced and raised up into the state and dignity of that holy and eternall Son of God, therefore the Prophet saith, he was taken from prison and from judgementIsa. 53. 8., or as the word is in the Hebrew, from a narrow strait, or to an narrow strait, for the word min signifies either to or from, therefore that which the Prophet reads to, the Apostle reads
From, the Redeemer shall come to Sion, saith our ProphetIsa. 59. 20; and to them that turne from iniquity in Jacob, which our Apostle alled∣ging saith, the redeemer shall come from Sion and turne ungodli∣nesse from JacobRom. 11. 26. so that to a narrow strait of infringement from all dignity and glory is he taken, as he assumeth our na∣ture and condition: but in this is he also taken to judgement, or into a large place of dominion, or of discerning of all things, as our nature is made one with that potent and all-seing eye of the Word of God, and so our Apostle expounds that place of the Prophet, saying, in his humiliation his judgement is exaltedActs 8. 33, or in this strait and narrow place is the place of his freedome and inlargement, or in his humiliation is his exaltation; for as hee makes himselfe strong through our weaknesse, so doth he in∣large himselfe through our narrow and straight condition, and exalts himselfe through our basenesse, and in that shewes him∣selfe to be the Son of God, for man cannot performe works of that nature, man onely can honour himselfe by things which in the esteeme of man are honourable, but out of things that are base and vile he cannot doe it, and upon this ground our Apostle affirmes of him, saying, thou madest him a little lower then the Angells, crownedst, or in the present tence, crowning him with glory and greatnesseHeb. 2. 7. as a continued and perpetuated act, or as the word will beare, without straining it, thou diminish∣ing him makest him great, therefore the ProphetPsal. 8. 5. (whence our Apostle takes the phrase) saith, thou madest him a little lower then God, for the word there is Elohim, so that to make the Son of God lesse then God, is to diminish him, and make him to bee that which in it selfe is nothing of God, so that by how much the son of sorry man is made higher and above the condition of a meere creature in Christ Jesus, being stated in the dignity of the Son of God in his exaltation, even by so much is that glorious Son or Word of God, debased below the condition of a creature, in that way of his humiliation, for all creatures in the act of creation are vehemently goodGen. 1. 31., but he becomes in us, sin2 Cor. 5. 21., sorrowIsa. 53. 3., deathHos. 13. 14, hellPsal. 16 10 and a curseGal. 3. 13., in his redeeming and delivering of us from that state of our degeneration, and therefore that which is properly the humiliation of the Son of God must be the glory and exaltation of the Son of man, the
nature divine considered in the one, and the nature humane in the other, without unity of which two no Christ that ever was, nor that ever shall, therefore when ever the vertue and power of our sin takes hold on him in this unity (without which unity our sinne cannot become his) in that very same act and moment the vertue and power of God takes hold on us, and the spirit of grace and glory rests upon us2 Cor. 12. 9. 1 Pet. 4. 14. or abides in our na∣ture Iohn 14. 16 in that his suffering, without which his dignity cannot be∣come or bee made oursHeb. 2 9, 10, 11., therefore his drinking of the brook in the way is the exaltation and lifting up of his head.  Hence appea∣reth a great mistake in the Ministrations of this world in our time and age, for the Gospell is not to be preached simply as to a creature, which is a meer creature, no more then it is to be received and accepted of as simply coming from a creature, for it is the Gospell of God1 Thes. 2. 2., which is neither received from man, nor yet by manGal. 1. 11, 12., therefore those are much mistaken in that Scripture which saith, goe and preach the Gospell to every creatureMark 16. 15.; sup∣poseth from thence that the Gospell brings every creature a∣like unto God in the same happy estate, (according to their capacity,) for the word is, goe and preach the Gospell in every creature, that is in every creature, as in the life and spirit of it it centreth in man, for as every creature was made for man, and with respect to man, so also every creature centers in man, according to the scope, drift, aime, life and spirit of it, as it is eternized and shall endure and abide for ever; but the drift, scope, life, and spirit of man centreth not nor resumeth unto it selfe all, no nor any of them to rest satisfied in, therefore in naming of and seeing into the nature of every one of them at the creation, he finds not a help amongst them all fit or meet for himGen. 2. 19. 20.: So that the scope, drift, life and spirit of man, onely centreth in God, in whom he must have rest, strength, stay and stedfastnessePsal. 27. 1 Psal. 46. 1. Ioel 3. 16. Psal. 140. 7., or else he wandreth in weaknesse and is unstable, and full of tumult and trouble for everIam. 1. 6. 7. 8., the Gospell then is preached in every creature, as all of them are centered and considered in man, who is the end of them all, and hath in him the very na∣ture and vertue or that which sympathizeth and holds a corre∣spondency with them all and every particular, so that as to his well being he cannot thinke of an utter anihilation of any one
of them, for so even in man God assumeth and uniteth himself unto his whole worke, as it is considered in him alone and no other wise, for in man is the perfection of all Gods worke and la∣bour, as also the cessation of it, and perfection of rest, for God ceas∣eth from his workeHeb. 4. 10, in that he becomes poore, weak, and silly son of man, or dust of the earthGen. 2. 7. Gen. 5. 1, 2., which is farre from perfor∣ming and doing the worke of an eternall GodPsal. 30. 9 Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8., man also ceas∣eth from his owne workesHeb. 4 10., as he is made in the Image of God, yea the Son of the living GodLuk. 3. 38, who can doe nothing after the will of man, or frailty of the fleshIohn 3. 13, but according to the will and power of God worketh effectually in all manner of workes and operations, suting and agreeing with the life and dignity of the Son of GodJohn. 9. 3, 4 John 10 37, 38., in whom both labour and rest are fully consummated and perfe∣cted once and for everHeb. 9. 12. Heb. 1. 27. even as labour and rest were in the crea∣tion of the world at the beginningGen. 2. 1, 2) therefore as the Ministery of the Gospell hath not its root and originall in any that is a meere creature, but in him who is the Son of the eternall God, yea God himselfe blessed for everRom. 1. 6 Rom. 9. 5., and therefore is it called the Gos∣pell of God1 Thes. 2. 2, and is not from man but from God, even so the pro∣per object of this Ministery (to whom it goeth forth) is not a meere creature upon whom it worketh and hath its effect, in whomsoever it becomes a Saviour unto2 Cor. 2. 14, 16., for the object of it in the chosen of God, to whom it gives intelligence, and upon whom it naturally and effectually worketh, are onely such as are innobled with a state and condition above a meere creature, being made the Sons of God through Iesus ChristGal. 4. 6. Rom. 8. 15, 16, 17., so that it find∣eth and discovereth a spirit in them of reception, correspon∣dent unto, yea even the same with that which doth declare and divulge it, which must be the same which at the first inspired them, that spake it2 Pet. 1. 20., which is a spirit surpassing the spirit of a meere creature, for it is the Spirit of God, for holy men spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost2 Pet. 1. 21, and in such onely it is savour of life unto life2 Cor. 2. 16, and such onely are the distributers and dis∣pensers of it as goe forth to preach in and by that Spirit which raised up Jesus from the dead, and in which hee was quickned and went and preached also to the spirits that are in prison, who were disobedient when once the long-suffering of God abode in the dayes of Noah1 Pet. 3. 18 19, 20.; so that the object of the Ministery of the Gospell
in those to whom it is a savour of death unto death2 Cor. 2. 16., upon whom it also worketh effectually though not naturally, as from it selfe, as a proper cause but accidentally or occasionally, the true and proper cause, of death being in and from themselvesHos. 13. 9 Mat. 15. 11 Mar. 7. 21, 22, 23., unto whom it becometh such and not in the Gospell, so that it doth also discover a spirit in such, that is as far below a creature as the spirit of the Saint and holy one of God is above a creatureMar. 13. 11 Luke 11. 13, that being the spirit of God1 Cor. 3. 16, and the other the spirit of Satan2 Cor. 4. 4, the one the spirit of ChristRom. 8. 9., the other the spirit of AntichristEph. 2. 2., the one the wisdome of God1 Iohn 4. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 7., the other the wisdome of the Serpent2 Cor. 11. 3., for the wisdome, art and skill of man in looking upon and judg∣ing of the things of God in its owne light, is so subtill and guilefull that it turnes truth into a lie unto it selfeRom. 1. 25, righteousnesse into sinRom. 7. 8. to 14., and so is not onely a Serpent to beguile it selfe and o∣thers 2 Cor. 11. 3, but also a Dragon to destroy and devoure both it selfe and o∣thers Rev. 12. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 5. 8., for it was never the ordination and appointment of God (in the way of Christ) that man should behold and judge of the matters of God by the light and wisdome of a creature, but by the light and wisdome of the CreatourIsa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10., no more then Iohn was appointed or sent of God to be the light of the world, but came onely to beare witnesse of that lightIohn 1. 6, 7, 8, 9., or then the hand was ap∣pointed to see for the body, and yet it is of the body1 Cor. 12 15, 16., or for it selfe by vertue of any thing that is in it selfe, but onely by that vertue that is in the eye, with which it hath union, and by which it perfectly seeth, though in it felfe it is not an eye nor hath any light at all but onely by vertue of the confluence of that which is properly in the eye it selfeMat. 6. 22.. The Son of God thererefore descending into this low estate, yea, lower then simply to be made a creature, for he was made a curseGal. 3. 13., which no creature in its creation isGen. 1. 31., hereby overcomes and takes away the curse, else could it never have been taken away from us, no more then we can bee blessed but onely by having unity with him through faithHeb. 10. 39. Heb. 11. 2., who is blessednesse it selfeRom. 9. 5., and in this act of humiliation, he saith, thou wilt not leave my soule in hell, or in Sheol, that corrupting pitPsal. 16. 10, neither wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption, but wilt teach me the way of life, that is, death or this humbled condition could not hold him, no not for a mo∣ment of time, but in that very way or act (wherein he becomes
subject to be taught, as under a tutor or governourGal. 4. 1, 2) he sees life, and is set at the right hand of God, where are pleasures for ever morePsal. 16. 11, and so doth he drink of the brook in the way, and in that he doth lift up his head or is exalted for ever, farre above all prin∣cipalities and powers, and hath a name, or authority given unto him in or at the which every knee shall bowPhil. 2. 9, 10., both of things in hea∣ven and in the earth, yea and under the earth, yea even such as are made lower then properly the earthly or naturall condition of a creature isIude 10. verse. 2 Pet. 2. 12., and hence it is, that our Apostle reason from that eighth Psalm, thou hast put all things in subjection under his feetPsal. 8. 6.: now in that he saith, all things are put under, he left nothing, or nothing was exempted that was not put under himHeb. 2. 7, 8; so that the exaltation of Christ is that wherewith the Son of man or the humane nature is dignified, otherwise it could not be a putting of things under him, if in case they were so by nature; for all things are under him by nature, as he is GodIohn 1. 1, 2, 3. Rom. 9. 5. Gen. 1. 1., and therefore in that respect cannot admit of an action of putting them or ma∣king them to be so, for it is impossible that the Creator should be otherwise in himselfe but above the workes of his handIsa. 45. 11 12., as our Apostle reasons from Moses and Christ, that as he that builds the house is greater and more honourable then that which is builtHeb. 3. 3, 4, so is it in this case, for nothing can be said to be put under Christ as he is God, seeing all things are so (without gain saying) by nature, therefore the exaltation is properly of the humani∣ty and not of the Divinity which indeed is height it selfeHeb. 7. 26., though it be exalted onely in and by the Divinity, even as the humiliation is properly of the divine nature and not of the humane, for the humane nature cannot be lower then it is by nature in it selfe, being in the fall become a curseGal. 3. 13. 2 Cor. 15. 22., but the di∣vine nature is onely humbled and made low in and by the hu∣mane nature, for in it selfe it can admit of no such thingMal. 3. 6., and therefore the humiliation is of an infinite value and extent, which makes our Apostle to adde those words, and yet we see not all things put under himHeb. 2. 8., which to a naturall eye or eare seems a plaine contradiction, the words are, we see not all things, or we see not any particular thing whatsoever under or below him, for it being the humiliation of the Son of God it was to the greatest and utmost degree of debasement, so that nothing was
or could be lower then that condition was, which he tooke up∣on him, for if there had, then had he fallen short of a perfect and absolute overcoming and vanquishing of sin and death, and then had our salvation failed, therefore saith our Apostle, Christ was made a little lower then the Angells, and in suffering of death crowned with glory and honourHeb. 2. 9., that he by the grace, favour, or mutuall imbracings of God, as the word signifies, might in man, that is, in our nature taste and feel death in all, or in every par∣ticular part, way, or kinde of itHeb. 2. 9., being made so low as no∣thing can be lower, therefore he adds, that the Captaine of our salvation is made perfect through sufferingsHeb. 2. 10.: Such and so many and great as the glory of his exaltation is in bringing sons to glory answerable to that is his debasement in that condition, out of which he fetcheth and taketh them, therefore in the way of his humiliation doth he lift up his head, and is exalted for ever. To this comes that of the Apostle, when hee saith then or henceforth the end, finishing, accomplishment or per∣fection (as the word translated end signifies and denotes unto us) when he shall deliver up the Kingdome to God even the father1 Cor. 15. 24., or when he hath given up or put into the hands, put into trust or yeelded all regallity and Soveraignty to be in and onely be∣long unto him, who is the father of all dignity, excellencie, and power, at which time or in that very act of yeelding or giving all unto God, he doth evacuate, empty, or make void the crea∣ture of all rule, authority, and power in all things whatsoever that concernes the glory and dignity of the Kingdom of God, for he must or it is expedient and needfull, yea he doth raigne still, or1 Cor. 15. 25. to the end to put downe all his enemies under his feet, this is the very end of his raigne to put all Gods enemies under foot, now whatsoever is in man by nature, is an adversary, yea is in hostility, as the word signifies, against God, therefore the reign of Christ must of necessity bring under, or else he were not a perfect victor, overcomer, and conquerour over all, and then could not he obtaine the glory of the Son of God, therefore he adds, that the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death1 Cor. 15. 26.; by this word last is meant the basest or the lowest of enemies, and it is the lowest and basest in that it destroyes, ruinates and ut∣terly spoiles it selfe, therefore the word translated destroy, sig∣nifies
unthriftinesse, to the undoing and losse of it selfe, for the Son of God is made so low by the suffering of death, as that the death comes into competition and ingagement with the life of the Son of God, and so must of necessity consume, waste, ruinate, and loose it selfe, being that the Son of God must live eternally, else he were not God, and so death is swal∣lowed up in victory1 Cor. 15. 54., hence it is that the Psalmist speakes so ele∣gantly, thou hast put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and the beast of the field, foules of the ayre, and fish in the sea, that passe through the paths of itPsal. 8. 6, 7, 8., this is mans Lordship, and according to the naturall workings of his mind and under∣standing hee perceives his dominion as he is a man, when hee comes into competiton with the inferiour, sensuall and terrene creatures, they serving to this end, namely to give dimention, and to manifest the nobility and excellency of that spirit which the Creator had indued him withall, by which he saw that Lord∣ship, and dominion which he had over them all, being they were all made in subjection unto him, and farre under and be∣neath him, therefore could he not finde a fit companion or consoci∣ate for himselfe amongst them allGen. 2. 20.; this man can doe by that naturall and common understanding which he hath implanted in him, even as he is a creature, and in this death doth not pro∣perly consist, therefore no speech of death whilst he is said to be conversant in and about these things, that is simply to re∣spect the creature in his thoughts, words, or actions: but when this naturall understanding (proper unto man simply as he is a creature) workes upon and is conversant in and about the things of the Creator, then by how much the more hee would be like his Creator which so farre transcends and is above all the creatures in the world, by so much is he debased, and made under and below all creatures in the world, and this is that death which is destroyedHos. 13. 14 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57., for being a death of that na∣ture, when ever wee looke upon it by that light and re∣velation of the Spirit, that comes onely from that Father of lights, then is it in this, as in that former way of nature, so now in this way of grace, for this death, serves to no other end,  but to mete out, as with a metwand or measuring lineRev. 11. 1., to give dimension unto that life that is in the Son of God, where∣by
by he sees the height of his Soveraignty, dominion and Lord∣ship for ever, which without it could never appeare, nor bee made manifest in a creature, but must of necessity have been hid and lodged in himselfe for ever; and then had not his goodnesse appearedTit. 2. 11. Psal. 39. 19. 19.; and if not his goodnesse, then not his light1 Ioh. 1. 5., and that light which appeares not is darknesseMat. 6. 23.; and if God should not be light, he were no God at all1 Ioh. 2. 9, 10, 11.: and thus uncontrouleable, and without all controversie, doubt or scruple, doth God convince our hearts of that breaking forth, and revelation of himselfe un∣to us in the face of Jesus Christ2 Cor. 4. 6: and hereby doth death, being made so low, extinguish, put out, vanquish, and destroy it selfe for ever, in that it sets out that life and light, which is in that faith of the Sonne of God, which otherwise could not appeare to, or in the Saints: and of such use is that unto the Saints, and chosen of God, as to lift them up unto life, and light, of com∣fort for ever, through that wisdome which is in God, which is nothing els but the King of terrour to all the men of the world, who look upon the things of God with a naturall and carnall eyeIob. 18. 5. to 21.; for Christ by drinking of the brooke in the way, is exalted as head, governour and ruler over all, which thing the world is not aware of, neither will it know and understand, and there∣fore can never give Christ the honour of his death, nor confesse the excellency, glory, fruit, profit and comfort of the crosse of our LordGal 6. 14 Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 12 9 10. Rom. 8. 35, 36, 37.. The exaltation then of the Son of God is the be∣holding of himselfe, from the depth of that low estate of his humiliation, which he hath onely in man, which gives dimension unto it, in its height, for ever; and the humiliation of the Son of man is the beholding of himselfe, in or from the height and dignity which he hath in God, and that gives dimension to his low estate, out of which he riseth, and silenceth the flesh from uttering or conceiving of the least cause of boasting for ever1 Cor. 1. 27. to 31.: Therefore the Psalmist when he beholds the heavens, the worke of the finger of God, the moone and the starres, which thou hast crea∣tedPsal. 8. 3.; from the consideration of the heavenly bodies, and works of God for him, or in him; thence doth arise his humiliation and abasements, therefore he saith, what is man, (or, what is it man) in way of admiration, that thou considerest him, or remem∣brest himPsal. 8. 4.? For the word signifies to memorize, or begin
againe: as if he should say, dost thou that art so high and glo∣rious, yea so full of varieties of excellencies, and glory, even as the Moone and the Starres are in themselves1 Cor. 15. 41.: Dost thou re∣member, or take thy beginning in man? for as the Son of God is eternall, and so without beginning, or time, as he is God, so is he also in time, and takes a beginning as he is man, and this puts man to silence, for ever opening his mouth in any excellencies of the creature, in the things of God, when once he sees how the Eternall takes a beginning in himPsal. 8. 4.; and so (as the word will beare) memorizeth and eternizeth himselfe in such a fraile and momentany thing as man is, even as the heavens are monu∣mentized in the earth, without which their vertue, glory and o∣peration, could never be seene, nor made knowneHos. 2. 21, 22. Psal. 65. 9. to 13.; therefore he adds those words, visitest him, or makest him the object of thy constant act, of sight, and aspect, even as the Sun looks forth upon the earth, for the continuall revivall, refreshment, fruitfulnesse, and glory of it, without which it were altogether barren and undone. Yea the Apostle adds further, He hath put all things under his feetHeb. 2. 8.: Now if all things be put under him, it is evident that he is excepted, that did subject them, and put them under: yea, he must be such a one, that doth subject them, who is over all: so that all things in that lost estate by mankinde, are infinitely below, and beneath Christ as he is God, and all things as they are in God, are infinitely above Christ Jesus as he is man, and so sustaines the nature of that lost condition: and there∣fore both the humiliation and exaltation are complete and per∣fect in him alone: For when all things are made subject unto, and subdued under him, as he is man, by another, which is God, blessed for everRom. 9. 5.; that is, by another, in nature, not in subsistence and being. Now he that subjects and brings all things under, must needs in himselfe be above all things, and so above him, unto whom they are subjected, as he is man; and therefore cannot in the least (as he is man) subject, or subdue, no more then God himselfe can be brought low or under, in respect of himselfe, or his owne nature: no more can the nature of man subdue the e∣nemies of our salvation, by any thing that is in, or of himselfe, that is, in, or of his own nature: As a creature therefore must needs be subject in himselfe, unto him that subdues all things;
and so the Son himselfe, as he is man, is subject unto the Father as he is God1 Cor. 17 27, 28.; and yet the submission, or subjection of the Son is not, but in the Father; nor is the authority and rule of the Father, but onely in the Son; so that the submission and autho∣rity are not found elswhere, but onely in one and the same sub∣sistance and being, and hence it is, that God is all in all in every one of the Saints, and they onely passive in themselves or in their owne natureIsa. 30. 7. Phil. 2. 13., but powerfull and operative in their Lord, or in and through that nature divine for ever, even as he is on∣ly active in himselfe and his owne nature, but became passive in them or in their nature, and subject to death, which in him∣selfe could never be, and yet is the one and the other reall and true, the operation, life, and resurrection that is in that Word and Son of the Father, is as really and truly ours, and we worke and live, and rise from the dead by itCol. 2. 13. Rom. 8. 11. Rom. 4. 17.; as or weaknesse, death, and low estate is really his, so as he suffered death and descended in and by it, and therefore our Apostle affirmes, that he that as∣cends is the same that descends into the lowermost parts of the earthEphes. 4. 9, and this is the humiliation and exaltation of our Lord made one, no lesse absolute and true then that the divine and humane nature are one Christ, or one subsistance and Son of God the Saviour of the world, and therefore the Apostle saith, else what shall they do, or (as the word may be read) what shall he do that is bap∣tized for dead, if the dead rise not1 Cor. 15 29., or as the meaning is, if death be not life, the descention the resurrection, what shall he doe? or how can he be the Son of God? for if death be not made life in the very act of it, in that way of Christ, otherwise the Son could never be baptized with the baptisme of deathLuke 12. 50., if that death were not in that very act transformed into life, he could not be the Son of God, for he cannot be held of death no not for a momentActs 2. 24, for then he were not God, therefore doth our spi∣rituall Gideon and all his souldiers in him or with him, yea our King Christ, as in this Text, and all that he hath made Kings to God the Father with himRev. 1. 5, 6 or in him, doe drink of this brook in the way of the humiliation, and in that very act is his exaltation, yea the lifting up of his head, or of their heads for ever, in the sight and knowledge of which, shall all sing HalalujahPsal. 15 1, 6., that is, being interpreted, praise ye Jah, or praise we the Lord. AMEN. FINIS.
