G662 10586050 45288
A Consolatory Poem Humbly Address'd TO Her ROYAL HIGHNESS. UPON The much Lamented DEATH OF His Most Illustrious HIGHNESS, WILLIAM, Duke of Glocester. By Dr. Gibbs. LONDON, Printed for John Hartley, over-against Grays-Inn in Holborn, and Sold by John Nutt near Sta∣tioner's-Hall, 1700.
A Consolatory Poem Humbly Address'd TO Her ROYAL HIGHNESS. IF e're Harmonious Numbers can dispense To Wounded Minds a Healing Influence: If Grief, the reigning Passion in our Breast, Can thus be sooth'd, or mod'rately supprest: You, the most Skilful of the Sacred Train, Come, and Unite in one Harmonious Strain:
With Powerful Charms your flowing Numbers fill, A Mourning PRINCESS now demands your Skill: Condoling You the Royal Grief may share, Or with your Tuneful Song divert her Care. But vain's th'Attempt, I fear, to bring Relief, 'Tis hard to stop so Great, so Just a Grief: If by this Means kind Heav'n ordain'd a Cure For the sad Ills and Sorrows we endure, Thro' all the Land should the Rich Cordial go, And be as Universal as our Woe. But we in vain would in this Art excell, We hardly can our own Affliction tell, And how can Harmony with such Confusion dwell! But tho', Great Princess! our Endeavors fail, Your own Illustrious Vertues may prevail, Just Heav'n already has approv'd the rest, Your Patience now stands the severest Test:
But Noblest Minds the Greatest Ills can bear, And You in Calm Submission persevere: Thus your Perfections, tho' for Empire fit, To Heav'ns Decrees encline You to submit. Then let the softer Passions be confin'd To their just Bounds by Fortitude of Mind: Think not on what so lately You have lost, The Hopeful Prince, Three Nations once could boast: When so much Danger in your Grief we view, How can we bear to mourn for Him and You! Affect not then Your Sorrows to renew. Reflect not on the Dismal Scene of Woe, What Pains the God-like Youth did undergo: For His Disease kind Heav'ns ordain'd so strong, Impatient They or He should suffer long. Strive not to recollect each Charming Grace, That once adorn'd his Beauteous Heav'nly Face,
And what a young Heroic Air did shine In all his Actions and his Form Divine. Remember not how gratefull still did seem Your own Lov'd Vertues copy'd out in Him; Such were the great Perfections of his Mind, His Reason Strong, and yet his Temper Kind, That here soft Love with Majesty combin'd. But if you can't these fixt Ideas quit, (For who can such Endearments e're forget!) Tho' hence remov'd, lament him not, as lost: Just Heav'n has all those Vertues now engrost. And since they were to such Perfection grown, Prevents the future with a Brighter Crown; Unwilling they for their Reward should wait, Which both deserve and fit th' Angelic State: Not Flames with surer Instinct upward tend, Than all Perfections do to Heav'n ascend.
And here caress'd by the Coelestial Choir, What Joys do his Immortal Breast inspire! With Dawning Beams does the new Saint arise, And with fresh Glory Heav'n it self surprize: His God-like Ancestours descending meet The Beauteous Youth, and their lov'd Offspring greet; Then with Officious care they lead him on, Thro' Realms of Bliss, to his appointed Throne: The Heav'nly Courtiers view their welcome Guest, And own their Joys and Number both encreast. And thus, Great Princess, moderate your Sighs, Tho' the Delightful Object of Your Eyes From Earth retires, in Heav'n Your pious Mind Him, where You most converse, will always find. Thus when the Patriarch did News receive, That his Lamented Son was yet alive, And that he was advanc'd to high Command, And Regal Honours in a Foreign Land;
Supported thus, he did His Absence bear, In hopes to see him, and his Glory share. But how shall We our raging Griefs compose, And with what Hopes allay our present Woes! Since no Relief from Earth or Heav'n appears, To calm our Sighs, and stop a Nations Tears▪ In vain we all in one Affliction joyn, Which, tho' united thus, we can't sustain; For like the Soul, which now we feel opprest, 'Tis all in All, and all in every Breast. Vast and Important is the mighty Weight Of Earthly Kingdoms, and infirm the State; How apt to fall! and still expos'd a Prey To Foreign Force, or Homebred Treachery! How hard 'tis to assert the Publick Cause, And from the Lawless guard the Sacred Laws! And yet secure did we our selves presume, Pleas'd with a Prospect of the Times to come:
The distant Joys thus charm'd our ravisht Sight: But since the Rising Sun withdraws his Light, We fear Confusion and approaching Night. How is our Universal Comfort fled! Our Hopes are lost, a Future Monarch dead; And (if Propitious Heav'n had so decreed,) How justly might he reign, how worthily succeed! But, O Illustrious Princess! how our Fears And Griefs increase, to see your Royal Tears! For when the pleasant Streams no longer flow, We for Relief, must to the Fountain go. And tho' we dread some future Ills to bear, Those, while You live, nor You, nor We can fear. And why shou'd You or We so much despair? Heav'n kindly promises another Heir, Which You, the Country's Parent, yet shall bear.
The Great and Gracious GOD, whom we adore, Whose Gift resum'd we now so much deplore, To recompense our Loss has Blessings yet in store. O, may they on Your Royal Head descend! And to th' Afflicted Nations thence extend: That a New Race of Princes yet unborn May Your Great Line continue and adorn, Who always may the Vacant Throne supply, And guard us from approaching Anarchy. THE END.
