G498 R218830 99830387 34838
THE General-Excise Consider'd. IR, I Am glad to hear the Members of Parlia∣ment for your Countrey are in the Dis∣position you speak of, that they cease being Enemies, as sensible they must y their Countrey, or become just Friends upport its Interest. It is time those un∣y Names of Parties be laid aside; and  one common Term of eternal Reproach ew coin'd for them of either side, that ect the Duty of true English men in this al Meeting. hus far we agree; but it was unreasona∣ in you by one Question in so short a Let∣ to put me to the necessity of a Volume in . It was fit onely to be ask'd a Dealer  Revelations, What shall we do to sup∣ the Honour and Interest of the Nation?  our End of the Town, by good luck,  Question is resolved in as few words as  proposed it; Give a General Excise. This  single Expedient, and the onely Reason hsafed for it is, You can support the Go∣ment no other way. This is the Chimical State-Remedy inten∣ to all our Diseases, which I think my self ged to give you notice of, not so much  what I can say, as to put you and all sober  thinking, that they may not wink like sh Women, and let their Blood be drawn  them in such a manner, as will not one∣ eaken their own, but certainly destroy  publick Constitution. t but that I own our Supplies for next  must be to the utmost of what the Na∣ can bear: In this I shall agree with a mmissioner of the Treasury, or a Chair∣ of a Money-Bill, though I may differ  him in the Ways of raising it, and per∣ in the Manner of laying it out. The End  great Taxes must be the Support of the ernment against its Enemies; but if the  proposed for raising them more certain∣  estroy it than those Foes can do, I must  leave to seek for other Methods. Now this, and nothing less, I take to be the Case, if Moneys be raised by a General Excise; and it is undeniable, that whatever Summ is so levied, shall cost the People near a fourth part more than shall come to the Service of the Government, and that whatsoever is pre∣tended to the contrary, the Burthen of this Tax does and must fall upon the Men of E∣states in Lands. But before I go on, I must endeavour to shew the necessity of an Union between those that differ perhaps in little things, yet agree in their Concern for the Well-being, Honor, and Safety of the Nation; our onely hope is in the Good-understanding of this Parliament, and I am convinced it was mistaking one ano∣ther begun those Feuds, which are carried on (I fear) by some that pretend to Moderation. It must be allowed of King Charles II. that the divided Interest of Protestant and Papist was what he encouraged, not so much out of Inclination to either, as always preferring those that were for his present Purposes, when that is out of doors, a divided Interest amongst Protestants may be managed to the same ends, it might ptrhaps be suspected, if it were pos∣sible to think the great Men in Affairs now, could have the like apprehension of Things with those that influenced in the last Reigns. But it may easily be discerned by any Bo∣dy honestly inquisitive, whether a sincere U∣nion be intended by those that govern, to∣wards reconciling Mankind to a publick Good, or whether the Business be to obtain their Ends upon a divided People. The last Government has left us fresh Ideas of such a Scaramuchi Administration, where the Managers, drest like Harlequin, one Side Spaniard, th'other French, have always half a Face ready for every Faction, but a Heart steady to nothing but their own Designs: A thousand Instances might be given, to serve for the discovering the like, whenever they are afcot; but I shall onely mention some few, which may easily be discovered.
First, When Men are examined by the Pro∣ject, and not the Project by the Men. Secondly, When the Liberty of Parliament is awed▪ And, Lastly, When the Integrity of its Members is attempted by Crruption. To make my self rightly understood: As to the first, I will suppose, That this Notion of a General Excise, so much talk'd of at pre∣sent, had been a State Project in the thoughts of the late King onely; and some Foreigner, a Dada snt from Rome, or a Barillon from France; they might justly have concluded, such a Fund would enable them to carry on their Designs without Parliaments: And who doubts then whether the Privy Council had had been troubled with such a Business, or whether without more consideration, it had not been immediately set up for a Touch∣stone of Men's Inclinations to the Govern∣ment, and the subject Matter for Closetting, the Consequence of which had been, Every Man had lost his Employment, that had not approved and promised it, and any new Face received in to them, who had but heartily engaged. One may say this Project had been thus managed in the last Reign, since in Relation to the est-Act the same Methods were taken, these Pactices gave the just Disgust of the last Court: And as they were the certain Signs of the Game I have mentioned, so what ever the Matter in question be, it is this Man∣ner of Managing of it betrays the like Design. This is fundamentally subverting the Consti∣tution, in my Opinion, to force Men to act against their Conscience, or be undone, to prostitute the Places of Profit and Honour designed as Encouragements and Reward, for those that labour to support the Government, to such onely as can be found most ready to comply with whatsoever is expected from them. This is the trying Men by the Project (as I call it,) these are the infalible Symptoms of an over ruling Ambition, that must be sa∣tisfied by any Means, by any Men, that will rather deal with known Enemies, that pro∣fess Compliance, than trust to tried Friends, that have any Reserves or Scruples. But to the second Point I mentioned, that of Imposing upon Parliaments, or by any means Awing that Parliamentary Liberty and Authority, which I take to be the Life of our Government. For Examples I must always revert to t late Reigns, to which we all allow the De∣signs I have spoken of: For what concerns th future I shall need repeat it no more, that take it for granted, in all Cases from the like Premisses, we are to expct the like Conclu∣sions, from the like Men the same Design from the like Management the same Thing intended. The Closetting then about the Test-Act  King James, must be allowed the most n¦torious Attempt upon Parliamentary Libe¦ties that ever was made, but at the same time the weakest. It was below a King to askin that manner, since it was beneath a Subject to own he would comply, though it were  Opinion; the Folly of it was sufficiently ma event at that time, for it struck off fro his Interest a number of Men, who had ac¦companied his Designs till then with the ut¦most Vigour. Should he have made a Pill too big for them to swallow, that (Saviours of the Nati∣on) had baffled the Popish Plot, and sup∣ported the Protestant one, that by one Blow worthy of their Parts, had struck at all t Liberties of England by the single Project  the Chartres. Should the Dose have been made such a those Stomachs could not bear, that could diget their Dinner in a place where Gibbe were erected, and Men executed for their Entertainment. Should they have been balk'd, who (tho' zealous Churchmen) could nevertheless, a Membrs of the high Commission Court, sus∣pend Bishops, and disincorporate Colledges, and for no other Crime than their unwilling∣ness to promote the Designs of the Papists. But the damn'd Project failing in the main, had this unexpected and fatal consequence; numbers of these Men made a full Stop, fore∣seeing that Popery would spoil all, and chu∣sing rather to quit than to embarque in so mad a Game, they became Martyrs to the late King, and by that Merit are now let ¦so a Reforming Government, that for it foundation declares against all those Practice their whole Lives have been engaged in; th consequence of which I ned not explain. But, as I was saying, this Closetting w the most unlikely way could be thought o to obtain what was aimed at▪ by King Jame Nothing so fatal to Authority as Contempt and Princes of all things ought to avoid De∣nials.
It was highly impolitick to refuse to is artfull Knaves the pretence of Honesty; hich such publick peremptory Summons to Obedience did do, to such as could comply with them. We saw how many he lost by it: Lyns have their Jack calls to raise their Prey; the Lords of Men should have theirs, to spread their Notions: This telling to one at a time his Mind, was not a Majestick way, proper for Monarchs to use, who need not make their Subjects hear from their own Mouths, but feel the Effects of not apprehending quick∣ly, and complying faster. Though there are different ways used to the same Designs, yet something at last will betray them to be alike. We have seen Men lose their Emploiments, and they have been told for what: We have seen Men lose their Emploiments, and no reason given why. We have seen impudent Promisers, and noisey Undertakers, received with open Armes. We have seen those in fashion who could silently obey, and ask no Questions. And can it be supposed these different Pra∣ctices had the same View? This doubtless makes it evident they had, that no former Merits or Services could keep Men in the pub∣lick Stations they were in, that they had this common Fate under the different Manage∣ment, the oldest Servants, the most deserving Friends, were forced to make way for a new Adoption; and with Reason; for in truth when a Project is once resolved on, those must be found out that wil undertake it, or at least will insignificantly sit still, whilst others transact in it. But as to the last Point, the Corruption used in Parliaments, it is not to be doubted, that where Menaces are used, Rewards are likewise offered to induce Men to comply, but neither being necessary to persuade Men to their common Interests, Threats and Pre∣ferments can never be made use of to Parlia∣ment Men for a good Design. But, good God! May we not say there has been a Trade amongst us, as well known as any other, that I mean of a Parliament Man; and when shall we be happy enough to have it otherwise? It was Masanissa's Expression of Rome, Venalis esses, si Emptorem inveniris: I am sure there is no Man can sell his Coun∣trey, but there must be a Purchaser. We happened once to know remarkably; who bought, who sold, and what was paid: It may often be perceived, though seldom so luckily made out. But to conclude with something positive, and with agreeable Notions, after so many ugly ones, this being a time of great Expec∣tation for Reformation, we will determine that Government to be free from any Suspi∣tion of such Aims or Designs as have been spoken of, When there are no particular Projects so hatch'd and prepar'd for Parliaments, as that it is expected aforehand they should be com∣ply'd with. When they are not given out in an Atha∣nasian Way, whosoever does not doe thus and thus, shall neither be thought Friend to King nor Kingdom. When honest Men are not dispossest of their Places, till some notorious Miscarriage makes the World sensible they are justly removed, or some good Reason be given for it. When Men of Integrity are not Project∣hanged, and their Places disposed of to any sort of Tools, who are ready to serve the Government, (as they call it,) and must need in some time the Shelter of the Crown to de∣fend them from Parliaments, if they want it not already. When notorious Offenders against the fun∣damental Constitution are punished, or at least not countenanced. When those in Places of Trust may be de∣pended upon, and that the Secrets and Fate of the Nation are not put into Mens hands by way of Experiment, upon the efined Poli∣ticks of Making Friends. When it is not thought more expedient to trust Complying Enemies, than Plain-deal∣ing Friend, especially when the one have the common Consent of Merit, the other the Marks of publick Censure upon them. When there is no Parliamentary Traffick a foot, and that no Places are held in the ca∣pacity of able Men in the House of Commons, to which they could no other ways be en∣tituled. When Men of steady Principles are not ex∣posed to reproachful Titles by silly Flatterers, and that Men always in communion with the Church of England, are not called with as little reason Fanaticks, as those that gave a Crown Commonwealthsmen.
Lastly, When a Spade is called a Spade, and not an ambitious Staesman the Support of the Church, or a covetous old flattering Fanatick a Patriot; for such miraculously have we seen in season at the same time. But now that God has so miraculously blest our Arms in the Recovery of our own, I hope he will make the Blessing complete, by re∣conciling us amongst our selves; I hope those that are to consult for our future Establish∣ment, are now out of danger of being swayed by vain Fears, or influenced by any thing but Right Reason. These three Years have made us acquain∣ted with one another, and are sufficient to let wise Men know what they have to expect. The King is acquainted with his People, the People with their King; they know the Ha∣ards he is willing to expose his Person to, against the publick Enemy; he (I hope) is so well satisfied of the Fidelity and Courage of his Subjects, as to be convinced this is the proper time to lay that Tie and promis'd Ob∣ligation upon them, of dismissing the foreign Troops according to his Declaration. I expect with great hopes a happy Union of Parties, on which I think our future Hap∣piness depends, since the great Point that first divided us, was Regency, or Election; and I believe the Prejudices on both sides are aba∣ted upon just Ground. Those that in their Apprehension of what they might expect from the late King for the Nation and themselves, were zealous to have a Crown'd Head to protect both, can hardly be wondred at; but some of the most emi∣nent of them have so plainly shewed by their Actions since, they were incapable of com∣plementing in a publick Concern, that I am confident all the World does and must agree, That what they did was according to their Judgments for the publick Good. And I am of opinion, that the other Party who feard the Regency, was onely proposed in favor of the late King, are convinced since there were publick spirited Men of that Sen∣timent, who acted upon no such Design, but expecting more Agreement in such a Settle∣ment, and as great a Reformation upon that Foundation. However, it were ridiculous now to quar∣rel with those as Enemies to the King's Inte∣rest upon that account, on whom he has con∣ferred such Favors, placing so many of them in publick Employments, that rather those have reason to think themselves unfortunate, that were not of that Judgment too. This makes me flatter my self; these Dis∣putes will cease, and that all will agree hearti∣ly in their Endeavors to support K. William and the Government, the King, the Customs the Laws; this whole I call the Constitution, which stitution whoever is weary of, let him give a general Excise: For I doubt not but plain∣ly to demonstrate all I have said concerning it, and to prove, that it entirely destroys the pre∣sent Form of Government; Those that will shew us the better one they intend to pro∣duce in the Room of it, I think should be heard, and to that point onely, in Parliament, though it is dangerous to change in most things, and I hope we shall be most of all unwilling to try Experiments in this. I would desire to know whether a Parlia∣ment be onely necessary in England, for gi∣ving of Moneys, though it has been too often used, as if it were so; yet that wili hardly be maintained. There are many Uses of Parliaments, of which I shall speak presently, which makes them essential to the whole, not to say that they really are a part of our Constitution: but if it be onely in the King's Power, to call or dismiss them at his Pleasure; I ask then, They that give such a Fund as may support the Crown in all the Exigencies of War, as well as Peace, Have they not put that part of the Government, essential to us upon so many Accounts, in a possibility of being laid aside, during the pleasure of any Minister? What is this then but an Alteration of the Constitution, if Parliaments are a part of it, and the Supplies which I allow, may this way be provided for, be not what onely makes them necessary. I shall now take the Liberty to shew why, and in what, Parliaments are indispensably ne∣cessary to the Being of our Government, and that will more evidently shew such a Tax to be the very destruction of it; and I shall not fail to answer, in the first place, the Excuse they make for themselves who would agree to such a Tax, That they would onely give it for a Time. Are not Parliaments necessary to make sea∣sonable and wholesome Laws, and as necessary to unmake some, as make others? The Act of Conformity had no Effects suitable to its Designs; and the Utility expected from the Test Act did not answer Expectation, for
Papists were admitted into Employments af∣terwards; nay Men turn'd Papists to have em. But I hope this good will be found  ever, in the repeal of one of them, that  Protestants amongst us may live unper∣cuted. But now sure, more than ever, it must be bw'd, That Parliaments are necessary to p Ministers in a we, to examine and re∣m Abuses in Government, and Violations  Law; since the present King, when Prince of Orange, did refer in his Declaration all ose Grievances, and the Promoters of them o Parliament, as the proper place to have ose Irregularities red, ess'd, which made his y to the Crown. But we must speak plainly under a good ng, who is but imperfectly so, if he do t help us to provide against a bad one;  we must say that the Essential use of Par∣ment, is to prevent the Nation being op∣press'd by unnecessary Taxes, and to provide  the good Disposition of them when given. It is impossible to suppose a People un∣willing to contribute to their own Security; e Danger is not on that side; but we may ppose (for we have seen already) an ill use de of what has been given for their Pre∣servation: The Supplies, Revenues, and Taxes given to the late King, were never design'd (re) to pay Pensions to Father Petre, to support Embassies to Rome, to introduce Po∣pery, and suppress the Protestant Religion. If then, in plain English, the whole Bal∣lance of the Government on the People's side, if that which only makes it a limitted Monar∣chy, and not the Tyranny of France, be that Parliaments must meet to the terrour of Mi∣nisters, and redress of Grievances; And why must they meet? Because sooner or later the necessity of Affairs will require it; if this be a known Truth, Must we not own, that whatsoever takes off this Necessity of Parli∣ment destroys our Government? The Argument of a good Prince is no∣thing to the purpose, nor can any Necessity be  good one under the most despotick Govern∣ment: The Administration may be Gentle and Just in one Reign, and return to its Vio∣lence in another; nor can any Necessity make Men reasonably avoid one Danger by running into a greater. Shall this give us Satisfaction, being told to allay our Fears, that such a Tax under the ictest Penalties shall be confined to a time. I will suppose any thing under the present Government, though it was honestly and wisely said of a great Man, that I fear will be wanted, and was well known in Parliament, That he could suppose nothing where the Nation was concern'd; but if this General Excise should be given for some Years only, those Princes are Mortal we have such Confi∣dence in, and the continuation of the addi∣tional Customs expired with the Life of King Charles, yet notwithstanding were Collected by the late King's command, does plainly shew what we might expect upon the like occasion; Did he not force the Payment of that Tax against Law? Did he not force it, when without an Army? And can any Man believe, even in the bearing Humour this Na∣tion has long been in, That King James durst have levied a new Tax without consent of Par∣liament, but the continuance of what already has been in practice, of what the People have been used to comply with, we know has been successfully ventured upon, though against Law. I must confess the Ministers, who pre∣tend, long since to have foreseen the Ne∣cessity of this General-Excise for a time, should (whoever had escap'd) have made some Examples of those who acted in the il∣legal Collection of those Duties, ceasing to be due by Law, if they would have had us believe at any time, that such a sufficient Pro∣vision, once in a way of being Collected, should ever cease. But I have other Reasons to make me con∣clude this Tax, once established, would ne∣ver dye. I remember those Verses in Hudi∣brass. But when the date of was Nock out, Off drop'd the sympathetick Snout. When the date of this Tax were out, so many sympathising Officers would be set a drift again. That I dare Answer for it, the diligence these Excise Men would use for their own Preservation, would not fail to pro∣cure an Excise Parliament; the influence they have is well known in their Management of one Branch, and how they make use of it; and the certain succession that would inevi∣tably ensue, no doubt would prove a great Blessing to the Nation. This Excise would beget such a number of Officers, such Officers would procure such
Parliament Men, such Parliament Men would give such Votes, such Votes would deserve such Pentions, such Pentions would be so well paid upon such a Fund, that who can doubt of its continuance. But whenever this Tax is vehemently insisted upon, it may justly raise great Suspicions, that it is not a publick or immediate Necessity that makes it so prest but some other Reason. In the utmost Neces∣sity, Can that be a fit Tax to be given, which must cost near a fourth part in Collecting? And that for a present Occasion which is wholly uncertain, and neither to be model∣led, or guess'd at in some few Years? But what gives just Jealousies to thinking Men, is, That they are sure the Government cannot be so wrongfully inform'd as not to know, that a General-Excise is little other than a Tax upon Land accompanied with most dangerous Circumstances to the Consti∣tution, and uneafie to the People. If an Excise be laid upon every Thing, which a Man of Necessity must buy, Is not that in Proportion to that Excise, so much out of his Money, which comes out of his Land? If a Man can conceive it as easie to pay, by so many two Pences and Groats in a Day in Excise, what otherwise he must pay by so many Crowns a Month out of his Estate, I have nothing to say. But were it as some conceive, that all People paying a kind of Proportion, the Lan∣ded Men are eased: If this were true it were most unadvisable in our present Circumstan∣ces, should we bring a Tax upon the common People, who never felt the weight of one be∣fore, especially when we depend upon their inclinations and steadiness to our Interest. But, alas! the common Man of England must have his Proportion of Meat, of Ale, and his time to loiter; God forbid we should alter the Heart and Constitution of them, and starve them into French Men; if they must pay more for what they have, they will have ways in Proportion to that Expence, so that besides what is tax'd in every Excise, and ex∣pressed in the Law, the Landed Man must pay three Pence or a Groat extraordinary to every Labourer they employ by the Day, and two or three Pounds a Year more to those they give Wages to by the Year. Would not any Man rather justly compute, and give knowingly and chearfully what is necessary for the publick Support, than have his Pockets thus pick'd by his own Consent, not being (as was said by one of our Kings) able to part with a Summ, when he either saw, or knew what it was? This alone has some colour of Reason in it, that Merchants and Money'd Men, who are not touched in Land Taxes, would con∣tribute something this way; but sure for this there might be found more effectual Means. I shall only Answer that the Contribution of such Men in Excise, would be very inconsi∣derable, and in no Proportion; they that get most Money spend least: And I would have it but enquired into, if a certain Knight, well known in Westminster, would pay in Excises for Meat, Drink, and Equipage, proportion∣ably to 200000l. Estate. But as for the Necessity pretended (which, give me leave, by the bye to observe) some∣times is made so great, you would suppose we were almost doom'd to certain Destructi∣on, and then nothing but a General Excise can support us; when at another time to doubt of the success of any Thing humanely impossible, is a capital Offence. What then are the present Difficulties we labour under? A War with France, and a Title to which there are other Pretenders: The Disputes betweem the House of York and Lan∣caster are not yet forgotten, and Wars abroad we had during those Disputes; no doubt those Parliaments which met under those dif∣ferent Titles, had as much mind to secure themselves against the opposite Party, as we can have against King James, and as great a desire to support the Honour of the Nation, as we can have; yet never was there such Difficulties pretended, or such Dangers as could give them the Confidence to offer at, or propose a General Excise. The same Providence that has supported us thus long without this Expedient, I doubt not will continue to do so; but I think no∣thing less than a Miracle can preserve this Constitution, if that be once granted. For Heavens sake, What were they less than Mad in King Charles's Time, who were always pressing that Prince to a War with France, and giving declared Supplies for that purpose? Were they not perfectly Distracted, that were so impatient to draw such an un∣reasonable Power upon themselves, since now at a time, when the Emperour, so many Ger∣man Princes, Spain, Holland, and part of Italy, are in Wars with France, they are yet so for∣midable, that nothing but a General-Excise
can save us, or support us in this War against that Enemy, which we have so lately con∣ded against at Sea with the Dutch on our . What can so extreamly alter the Case? It must be a mismanagement of our Strength d Wealth. I shall not say how much France might have been annoyed with less Expence, d Force rightly employ'd; nor how little eason we have to boast of a part of our own Dominion, reduced by the hand of God, and a series of Miracles, which we owe to our n Negligence, that we ever disputed for. I shall not speak of our Disgraces at Sea, our Interest in that Point has been so betray'd in e last Reigns, that it ought doubly to be ok'd after in this. But my great fear is, e War is forc'd into a wrong Channel, by me that are Strangers to the true Interest d proper Glory of the Nation. However I shall wave these retrospects, and ke the Matter of Fact, as it is, for our pre∣nt Consideration. Ireland reduc'd, Scotland sufficiently secu∣d by the late Treaties, a Peace as good as cluded between the Emperour and the urk, the French drove out of Italy and dmont, and brought upon the Defensive in Dauphine and Flanders. Are we not in evi∣dent Dangers? And can any Thing less than  General Excise save us? Yes, I apprehend we are; and the more  all these Successes, if we look not to the main Chance. The Sea, 'tis there we ought to make great Efforts, extraordinary ones in∣eed for our own sakes, and for the general interest, if rightly understood. What shall England be the better for all the Successes shall attend the Confederate Armies? Shall we make War wholly for our Allies, spend all our Wealth in Land Forces, and forget that we have the Dominion of the Sea to maintain? Shall we send all the pre∣sent Stock out of the Nation, and over∣look our Trade, the only means of getting more? What becomes of England? What Ad∣vantages can benefit them, if the French be ot humbled at Sea? Nay, I will maintain it more dangerous for the whole, if the Wealth f France be employ'd after a Peace made or Four of Five Years in the Marine only, he ay then begin again, and be fairer then ever r the Empire of the World, or be sure to  Master of the Trade of it. If we must go this way to work, let us know it is an Article agreed with all our Al∣lies, that a Peace be never concluded till the French are forc'd by Land to destroy their own Harbours, to burn their own Ships. For our Sixty five thousand Men when Ire∣land is reduc'd, and One hundred and fifty Ships kept at Sea, I hope we have some pros∣pect we are to have some share in the Spoil; all I desire, is, we may have the same proba∣lity, that Brest and Dunkirk should be made useless, as the Emperour may have of Stras∣burgh and Luxemburgh, the Spainard of Mons, the Savoyard of Cassal and Pignerol. But nothing surpriseth me more than the Discourses of some amongst us, That give out as if the whole Confederacy was engaged in War upon our Account, and therefore we are obliged in Honour to support it at any rate. Was not the War begun between the Emper∣our and France, before the Prince of Orange came over into England? What made the States of Holland, but their own Interest, sup∣ply the necessary Charge of the Expedition? Did they not however expect it? And were they not well paid for it? In what we do for them, on the like Score, (though for our own Security.) Ought we not to demand and expect the like? But to be told of separate Peaces, and be∣ing left in the Lurch; What are we taken for? Must we suppose the Emperour, Ger∣many, Spain, and Holland, will submit to France, unless we ruine our selves for the Ex∣pence of the War? Ought they not in a fair Computation be satisfied, if a Royal Navy be set out by the English, and their Common Enemy be diverted by descents, and annoyed by those they used to have, if not assistant to France, yet neuter in their Wars. But when they press these Bugbear Dan∣gers of being left alone; an English Man may reasonably give this Answer, That if we had the Moneys already expended, our Fleets in the Condition they might have been in, the Militia settled to the best Advantage, and a small number of our own Troops a foot, we might reasonably expect an Issue of the War, more to the Honour and Advantage of the Nation, depending upon our own Strength, than by this manner of consuming our Wealth in the payment of Foreign Troops, within the Kingdom, that spend no∣thing, and English Troops without, that spend all.
But however, when our Condition is most Dangerous, and that a General-Excise is pro∣posed; I hope most English Men will Answer like that Generous Spainard, who had a Statue erected for what he said and did: It was in a Town in Castile hard press'd by the Moors, and the whole Countrey menac'd with utter Ruine, where a Proposal was made that the King might raise Money in an unreasonable manner; considering the great exigency of Affairs, to which he reply'd in the publick Counsel; If the Town be lost, many brave Ca∣stilians will lose their Lives; if all Castile be over-run, more will perish: But I doubt not some will remain to revenge us, and to gain their Countrey; but if this be consented to, that is now proposed, there is no Castilian left. I have Moneys in my House, I will give it all; my Sword is by my Side, I will lose the last drop of my Blood in defence of my Countrey;  every Man take the same Resolution, and th we need not fear but we shall preserve  Town, our Countrey, our Laws, our Honou▪ and our Liberty. But, Sir, I have given you too great  trouble; I shall end without any Form, an shall only say, That if a General-Excise b consented to, by the Members in Parliame▪ I shall conclude it is upon this dependence that they leave the Administration in the hands of Ministers of so known Ability an Integrity, that they think it safer than i their own; that they are secure of a Succes∣sion of Jure Divino States men for ever more. And, lastly, That they are convinc'd this Go∣vernment wants all their Money, but none of their Care. FINIS.
