H1128 19538381 109065
SIR Arthur Haselrigg HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING The Bill Passed against Plurality of Livings, That no Clergie man shall have a∣bove one Living, except hee be servant to the KING. February 21. An. Dom. 1641. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Hammond. 1641.
SIR Arthur Haselrig, HIS Speech in Parliament: CONCERNING The Bill passed against Plurallity of Livings; That no Clergie man shall have above one Living, except hee be Servant to the King. February the 21 An. Dom. 1641. Mr. SPEAKER, THIS Bill, which hath been laid aside till now, by reason of the great affaires of State which hath required more speed in the setling thereof, delay and pro∣traction of time therein, might have proved very dangerous and preiudiciall to the whole
State: for wee have had too much experience of what hath followed the practices and plots of the adversaries and enemies of the same; by which meanes we have not been permitted any time to take into consideration the abuses in the worship of God in our Religion, and the manifold grievances of the Subiect, by the op∣pressions and iniuries of persons as well spiri∣tuall as temporall in places of authority in Church and Stare; but now many impedi∣ments, by the blessing of God, and the wise∣dome of the King and his high Court of Par∣liament, are removed and avoided, that did much hinder our proceedings therein, by which we have now againe some time to reco∣lect what businesse wee had in hand before these distractions and distempers of the State were raised, and to proceed in the same. Mr. SPEAKER, This Bill against plurality of Benefices, will bee a meanes to purge the Clergy from much vice and impuritie, ease, plenty and saciety bred in many idlenesse and luxury; men gave themselves over wholly to the world, to minde earthly things, and that which ought to be agreeable to their function, they altogether neglected, nay contemned and despised, as a thing not worthy of their study and paines, the sound and pure preaching of
the word of word of God, without mixture or composure of their owne or other mens inventions, they held, I say, this as vile and base, but could permit to themselves time suf∣ficient to study to obtaine the mystery of the change of the times, to be time-servers; Every day changing if occasion served for their ad∣vantage. If they could attaine to understand the fashions of the Court, to bow and com∣plement, to bee Parasites and Flatterers, ob∣serving the dispositions and inclinations of great personages and great men in places of authority, in the Church and State, but espe∣cially could learne to dance after the Bishops Musicke, then had they learning enough, and were accounted able Divines, fit to be Masters of two, three, or foure Benefices. But as farre unfit to execute his office as a Teacher over those committed to his charge, as almost Plow-men to bee Bishops: This increased vice, impaired vertue; by these was it no hard matter for the superiours to introduce into Church superstitious Ceremonies; these ea∣sie to be drawne to preach liberty and vices, rather then teach piety and godlinesse; no hard matter at least to bring them to that passe they may be at any time ready to chuse what religion to be of, according as the times alter.
Mr. SPEAKER, This Bill will (I hope) prove a great means to restrain their licentious and ambi∣tious spirits, if likewise there might bee ano∣ther Bill for the explanation of this, enacting thereby no person of what degree or dignity soever, may present any Incumbent to any Benifice, till his life and conversation, his learning and ability bee well knowne to him∣selfe: That no Popish Lords, or disaffected Prelates may have no longer the presentation to Benefices; but all presentations may bee committed to the disposall of such as the Parliament in their wisedome shall thinke fit to be intrusted with the same: That all such as have Benefices of great value, may allow out of the same to his neighboring Ministers whose places will not yeeld them a competent Maintenance for themselves and Families, That such as are in great Benefices, and not a∣ble to discharge his duty in his place, may be inioyned to allow a sufficient competency to his hireling or under Curate, whereby the Cure may be faithfully and diligently served, That all men of the Ministery may be prefer∣red to place according to their worth in their Learning and piety, that men of most vertue may bee planted in the best Benefices, That by this meanes, they may strive (as before by vice) so now by vertue, to raise their fortunes by the Ministery.
And thus much (Mr. Speaker) concerning this Bill, which I humbly leave to the further consideration of this Honorable House, And humbly desire the same may be presented to his Maiestie for his royall assent, and passing thereof. FINIS.
