H411 09542644 43558
Bishop HALLs Sayings CONCERNING TRAVELLERS, To prevent Popish and Debauch'd PRINCIPLES. Coyne and Good Counsell are The Trav'lers Eys Hee does but Stray abroad wants those Supplies. I. SOlomon would never have sent his Navy for Apes and Peacocks, but yet held Gold and Timber for the building of God's House, and his own, worthy of a whole three years Voyage. II. the Travel of Curiosity is that I quar∣rel at, and those inconveniences which the Parents of young Gentry run themselves in∣to by the affectation of too early ripeness, that makes them prodigal of their Childrens safety and hopes; for, that they may be wise betimes, they send them forth into the World in their Minority both of Age and Judge∣ment, like as fond Mothers use to send forth their Daughters on frosting, early in cold Mornings (though into the midst of a vapou∣rous and foggy Air) and whilst they strive for a Colour lose their Health. III. Whereas experience gives us, that a weak limb'd Child if he be suffered to use his legs too soon, too much, lames himself for ever; not considering that young Twigs are bowed any way, or that any thing may be written upon a blank. IV. Thus like careless Ostriches, leave their Eggs in the open Sand for the Sun to hatch, without the fear of any Hoof that may crush them in pieces. V. Know therefore that nothing is more prejudicial than speed. VI. Perfection is the Child of Time. VII. These Lap-wings that go from un∣der the wing of their Dam with their shell on their heads, run wild. VIII. Those Blossoms which over-run the Spring, and will be looking forth upon a Fe∣bruary Sun, are nipped soon after with an A∣pril Frost, when they should come to the Knitting. IX. The Concourse of a populous City affords many Brokers of Villany, which live upon the spoyl of young hopes, whose very Acquaintance is destruction. X. For so far hath Satan's policy prevail∣ed that those parts which are only thought worth our viewing, are most contagious with the most corrupted Air of Popery, not considering the danger of trusting young eyes with the view and censure of Truth or Fals∣hood in Religion. XI. That Curtizan of Rome, according to her profession setting out her self to sale in the most tempting fashion; here wants no Colours, no Perfumes, no wanton Dresses, rich Shrines, garish Altars, &c. XII. In a word, it hath been the old praise of early rising, that it makes a man Healthful, Holy, and Rich; whereof the first respects the Body, the second the Soul, the third the Estate; all these fall out con∣trary in an early Travel. XIII. Set an empty Pitcher to the fire, it cracks presently, whereas the full will abide boyling. XIV. It was the younger Son in the Gos∣pel, who therefore turns unthrift, because he had got his portion too soon into his hands. XV. What is young Age fit to look after but Butter-flies, or Birds-nests? XVI. We may as justly complain of the Inconvenience of haste in Marriages and Pro∣fessions, the one fills the World with begge∣ry, and the other with Ignorance and Imper∣fection. XVII. But let us give our Traveller ma∣turity of Age, and let him be as ripe as time can make him; what is the best advantage his absence can promise? Lay the benefits of Travel in one Scale, the inconveniences in the other, whether soever outweighs, shall sway down the beam of our Judgment. XVIII. He that yields to run after his appetite and his eye, he shall never know where to rest, he may lay down weary, but never satisfied; for give me the man that hath seen Judas's Lanthorn, the Ephesian Diana in the Loure, the Great Vessel at Heydelberg, the Amphitheatre at Nismes, the ruins and half-lettered of the seven Hills, &c. XIX. And what if Fancy call him to the Stables of the Great Mogol, or to the Libra∣ry of the Mountain of the Moon? XX. And why should not the Child thrive as well with the Mothers Milk as with a strangers? XXI. I have known some that have travelled no farther than their one Closet, which could both teach and correct the greatest Traveller. XXII. A good Book is at once the best Companion, and Guide, and way, and end of our Journey. XXIII. Necessity drove our Fore-fatherrs out of Doors, and now we may with the more ease and no less profit sit still and enjoy the Labours of them and our Elder Bre∣thren. XXIV. We have heard a Bird in the Cage sing more change of Notes than others have done in the wild liberty of the Wods. XXV. Our Complete Traveller must stake down for his goodly Furniture of his Gentry, a double danger; of Corruption of Religion, and depravation of manners, both capital. XXVI. And will any man (not desperate) run into an infected house, to rifle for a Rich Suit? XXVII. Through many insensible Declinations do we fall from Vertue; XXVIII. And by degrees Popery accounted no ill Religion. XXIX. How many like unto the Brook Cedron, run from Hierusalem through the Vale of Jehosaphat, and end their Course in the dead Sea? XXX. How many have we known struck with these Asps, which have dyed sleeping? XXXI. Never any Pharisee was so eager to make a Proselyte, as our late Factors of Rome. XXXII. No man setteth foot upon their Coast, which may not presently sing with the Psalmist, They come about me like Bees. XXXIII. Oh that our GOD would enkindle our hearts with the fire of Holy Zeal, but so much as Satan hath inflam'd theirs with the fire of Fury and Faction. XXXIV. We see the proof of their Importunity at Home: No Bulwarks of Laws, nor Bars of Justice (though made of three Trees) can keep our rebanished Fugitives from returning. XXXV. How have their Actions said in the Hearing of the World, that since Heaven will not hear them, they will try what He can do? What State is not haunted with these ill spirits? Not a Ladies Chamber can be free from their shameless Insinuations. XXXVI. What Gentleman of any note can cross our Seas, whose name is not landed in their Books before-hand. In prevention of his Person, whom now arrived, they labour first to temper with the plausible conversation of some smooth Catholick of his own Nation. XXXVII. But do you think this Do∣ctour will begin first with the infallibi∣lity of his Great Master, or tell him he may as easily buy off his sins as he may buy Wares in the Market? XXXVIII. Or teach him that a man may and must both make and eate his God to his Breakfast? This hard meat is for stronger maws. XXXIX. He knows how first to be∣gin with the spoon, and to offer no∣thing to a weak stomach, but discourse of easie digestion, &c. XL. And that now we are but a ragg torn from their Coat, &c. XLI. It is impossible that any wise stranger should be in love with the face of their Church, if he might see her in her own likeness; and therefore they have cunningly maskt one part of it, and painted another; so as those fea∣tures of hers which are ugly and offen∣sive, shall not appear to any but her own eyes. XLII. Some Countries yield more venomous Vipers than others; ours the worst. XLIII. It is observable, that as our English Papists are commonly more Je∣suitish; so our English Jesuits are more furious than their fellows. XLIV. Even those of the hottest Cli∣mats cannot match them in fiery dispo∣sitions. XLV. And if this Great Curtizan of the World had not so cunning Pan∣dours, I should wonder how she should get any but foolish Customers. XLVI. Look into their Churches; there their poor ignorant Laity hope to present their best services to God; And yet alas they say they know not what, they hear they know not what, they do they know not what. XLVII. Returning empty of all hearty edification, and only full of con∣fused intentions, and are taught to think this sacrifice of fools meritorious. XLVIII. What do they in all they do but lull piety asleep? XLIX. In all that belongs to God the work done sufficeth, yea meriteth. L. If they hear the Beads knack up∣on each other, that's enough. LI. In their Melancholick Cells there you may perhaps find an Hair-Cloth, or an Hurdle, but no true morti∣fication. LII. What Papist was ever heard to pray dayly in his Family, or to sing but a Psalm at home? LIII. Who ever saw God's day duly kept in any City, Village, or Houshold under the Jurisdiction of Rome? LIV. Every obscure Holy-day takes the wall of it, and thrusts it into the Channel. LV. Thus Satan like the Raven first seizes upon the eye of Understanding, and then preys freely upon the other carcase. LVI. We may be bad enough at home; certainly we are the worse for such Neighbours. FINIS. London, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in S. Paul's Church-Yard, near the little North Door. 1674. At which Place you may be furnished with most sorts of bound or stitched Books, as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations, Letters, Orders, Commissions, Articles; as also Books of Divinity, Church Government, Sermons, and most sorts of Histories, Poetry, Plays, and such like, &c.
