J383 99828187 32614
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT HIS MAJESTIES ROYAL LETTER TO HIS PRIVY COUNCIL of SCOTLAND, Concerning HIS INDULGENCE. JAMES R. RIGHT Trusty and Right Well beloved Cousin and Counsellor, Right Trusty and Right Well beloved Counsellors, Right Trusty and entirely beloved Cousins and Counsellors, Right Trusty and Right well beloved Cousins and Counsellors, Right Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counsellors, Right Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counsellors, Right Trusty and Well beloved Counsellors, And Trusty and Well beloved Counsellors, We greet you well. Whereas by our Letters of the First Day of this Instant, amonst other things, we did Rcommend unto you, To take Care, That any of the Presbyterians should not be allowed to Preach, but such only as should have your Allow∣ance for the same; And that they, at the receiving the Indulgence therein mention'd, should take the Oath contained in our Proclamation, Bearing date the Twelfth day of February last past: These are therefore to let you know, that thereby We meant such of them as did not formerly take the Test, or any other Oath; But if nevertheless, the Pres∣byterian Preachers does scruple to take the said Oath, or any other Oath whatsoever∣and that you shall find it Reasonable or Fit to grant them Our Indulgence, so as they desire it upon these Terms: It is now Our Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby Autho∣rize and Require you, to grant them. or any of them, Our said Indulgence, without being obliged to take or swear the Oath in Our said Proclamation mention'd, or any other Oath whatsoever, with power unto them, or any of them, respectively to enjoy the Benefit of the said Indulgence (during Our Pleasure only,) or so long as you shall find that they behave themselves regularly and peaceably, without giving any cause of Offence to Us, or any in Authority and Trust under Us in our Government: For doing whereof, these Presents shall be to you and them, and all others respectively, who may be therein respectively any way concern'd, a sufficient Warrant. And so We bid you heartily Farewel. Given at Our Court at White-hall the Thirty One day of March 1687. And of Our Reign the Third Tear. By His Majesties Command. MELFORT. Printed at Holy-Rood House, by James Watson, Printer to His Most Sacred Majesties Royal Family and Houshould, Reprinted by G. Croom, at the Blue Ball in Thames-street, near Baynards Castle, 1687.
